{\rtf1\adeflang1025\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\adeff0\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang2057\deflangfe2057{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}{\f38\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f39\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f41\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f42\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f43\fbidi \froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}
{\f44\fbidi \froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f45\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f46\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f48\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}
{\f49\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f51\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f52\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f53\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f54\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}
{\f55\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f56\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden 
Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs20 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}}
{\*\latentstyles\lsdstimax156\lsdlockeddef0}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid2427406\rsid3034638\rsid5125818\rsid5978047\rsid8202071\rsid8731373\rsid9441754\rsid9518286\rsid13055639\rsid16477639}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 11.0.0000;}{\info{\title <pagez1>}
{\author PRASAD3}{\operator lhorto}{\creatim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min8}{\revtim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min8}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords15115}{\nofchars86158}{\nofcharsws101071}{\vern24613}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 http:/
/schemas.microsoft.com/office/word/2003/wordml}}\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1800\margr1800\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0\ltrsect 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\donotembedsysfont1\donotembedlingdata0\grfdocevents0\validatexml1\showplaceholdtext0\ignoremixedcontent0\saveinvalidxml0\showxmlerrors1\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace180
\dgvspace180\dghorigin1800\dgvorigin1440\dghshow1\dgvshow1\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\splytwnine\ftnlytwnine\htmautsp\nolnhtadjtbl\useltbaln\alntblind\lytcalctblwd\lyttblrtgr\lnbrkrule\nojkernpunct\rsidroot16477639 \fet0
{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}\ilfomacatclnup0\ltrpar \sectd \ltrsect\linex0\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ltrpar
\ql \fi-461\li461\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid8731373 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\ul\insrsid8731373\charrsid16072257 Information about interviewee}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid8731373 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid8731373\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\ql \fi-461\li461\ri0\widctlpar\tx2057\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid8731373 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8731373\charrsid16072257 Date of birth}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid8731373    \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8731373\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8731373  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8202071 1888}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid8731373\charrsid16072257 
\par Gender}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8731373           \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8731373\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8731373  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8202071 M}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8731373 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8731373\charrsid16072257 Marital status}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8731373 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8731373\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8731373  
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8202071 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8731373\charrsid16544153 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8731373\charrsid16072257 Occupation}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8731373 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8731373\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8731373  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8202071 Crofter & lobster fisheman}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8731373\charrsid16072257 
\par Geographic region}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8731373 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8731373\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8731373  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8202071 Isle of Burra}
{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8731373\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\qj \fi-461\li461\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid8731373 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Would you like to say your name?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 My name? Donald Campbell. I went to 
- from Castlebay at sixteen years of age - to - to Leith. But before we got to - get to Leith - by sixteen years of age and the schoolmaster that was there at the time, Mr Smith - I was after leaving school then you see, he called me one afternoon and he 
a
sked me if I would take such and such a job, as a national steward in one of the fishery cruisers, called the Brenda, that was the name. So I took the job. And I was to go away at - such and such a date, from Castlebay and at that time you get to Castleba
y
 - every day from Oban, leaving Oban at six o'clock in the morning. Monday morning coming straight to Tobermory and from Tobermory to Castlebay and Lochboisdale and way up - we used to way as far as Lockmaddy and then - across to Dunvegan and back to Oban
.
 Now - we'll leaving Castlebay at three o'clock in the morning, going straight over, see. And I went away anyway, I went to - a rousing crowd going off, all my own colleagues at school seeing me off. They weren't feeble. And - I arrived in - no, first of 
a
ll - when I went aboard the - the - the steamer, that was - the - the Cygnet, that was her name, the Cygnet, and there was no steerage in that - boat at all only a cabin. And you had to pay extra fare for that. So - I decided to stop - right in the bow of
 
her, in - among coils of ropes. Right through the voyage. Right on to Oban. I got to Oban anyway and I stepped on the railway pier in Oban and - I noticed a policeman further ahead of me. And I say to myself, I know that man. And I went straight to him an
d asked him if he was so and so. Yes, he said, I am. He was a - a - a policeman that joined the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid16477639\charrsid5125818 policeforce}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818  - the Argyll policeforce - and from - Borve, you know, the west side of Barra, from Borve. Archie McMillan was his name. So - he says, are you hungry
? Says I, I'll take a cup of tea if I could get it. So he took me for - a restaurant and he gave me a cup of tea, a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid16477639\charrsid5125818 sandwich}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818  and he's seen me on the train - to Edinburgh - the Waverley station, and that was one of the biggest stations in the United Kingdom
 at that time, the Waverley in Edinburgh, you may know that yourself. Yes. Well - I got to the Waverley station, and me peeping out then - then - then I would see any signs of Waverley station, the name Waverley station, no, I couldn't see this place. But
 
at last we got there. And now the puzzle to get to Leith because the fishery cruiser was lying in Granton harbour. At the time. And - I got to - I - was on the station and I couldn't see any - there was nothing there but cabs. And I seen a cabby here and 
I
 says to him, could you drive me down to Leith? And I had the address that - for the - licensed grocer man, he was to - to have sent somebody up to meet me, but there was nobody there. So I seen the sign when the cabby says, yes, he says, I'll drive you d
o
wn. So we was peeping out - see if I could see, William McInness, licensed grocer. Shore, Leith, you know. At least - at last we came to them. And I stepped out and I said to the cabby, now he says - now I says, what's the fare? Well he says, it'll be hal
f
 a crown. And I had one half crown in my pocket. One half crown. There you are. And - here you are. I save that's the last. What, he says. Is that the last? Yes, I said, that's the last. All right dear boy, he says, you take that half crown. Whether I may
 see you some other time - when you've got more than that. So - he left. I goes in there and the - a big fellow at the back of the counter, Mr McInness, stares at me and - heavens, he says, I forgot all about sending anybody up to meet you.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 How did you get that job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
That's from - schoolmaster over there. Seemingly the commander of the - of the Brenda, she used to visit this place you see every - fishery protection - at the time. Which was in full swing at that time in - in Castlebay. And - it was
 through the commander - going and - and asking - if - Mr Smith had any suitable clients for to - for a job. So - he pointed - picked me - for the job. So I went. And - however from - and - where were we - at - at Leith? Aye. That's right, got to the shop
.
 Now - he had a chargehand there belonging to - Fort William. I can't remember his name at the present time, but he belonged to Fort William anyway. He was related to Mr - Mr McInness himself someway or another. And Mr McInness' wife was a Barra woman, se
e
. You see, the - the old Craigar over there. Well she was born and brought up up there, Mrs McInness. And - he sent his chargehand with me down to where this - this chargehand was lodging. And I was to stop there 'til such time as I was to join the - the 
B
renda and - I was there for a fortnight, in and out, on Ferry Road in Leith. And - when the Brenda came in anyway - I was going down to Granton harbour every day but she wasn't there, she wasn't coming in, but she came in at last. And she used to - to moo
r
 and - to moor stern on to the - to the breakwater. That's a long breakwater down there about a mile long. And she was stern on. So I went down, with my bed and baggage and everything. That wasn't much at the time I can assure you. And sent a boat to the 
s
ide of the slip and I went abroad. And I was made very welcome - by the commander, chief officer and the chief steward. They met me and - took charge of me. Showed me my berth where I was to stop. And - I got through all right. We went to sea - and - oh -
 
I was all right 'til - 'til we were - we got to Aberdeen - on the way to Shetland, we were supposed to go up to Shetland on fishery duty. And - oh it was a terrible - it was in the wintertime. It was a terrible - ordeal for me. When we left Aberdeen, you 
k
now - were you ever in Aberdeen? Well you - well there's a terrible bar there going out in - when you're entering the - the harbour, it's a terrible bar, and it was easterly wind, a gale, and we left at four o'clock in the morning. Of course I wasn't up a
t
 that time. I wasn't getting up 'til half past five or six o'clock. And - by the time we - she - got outside, oh boy, she was heel and toe motion there - terrible. Standing up on end. And I got sick. I had to lie down to it. Which never bothered me before
 and I was at sea around these islands umpteen times, but a different motion altogether, you know, to the fishing boats. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 You were in the fishing boats before?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Oh previous, yes. Oh yes. I should have given you that first. But it'll come on -
 it'll come on later. It'll do just the same doesn't it? Yes. Yes. Aye. So - we went out - in the afternoon I was - pretty fair on my feet then. I got on work. When we got to Shetland anyway, to Baltasound first. And we came from Baltasound to Lerwick. We
l
l there was orders there for the commander - what - a fleet of trawlers were poaching in St Magnus Bay. You know St - St Magnus Bay, that's St Magnus Bay on the west side before you get to Papa Stour. Yes. So - we had to put to sea right away, out of Lerw
i
ck and away up, and we got up there about dusk - dark and - the Brenda had two boards - four boards in fact, they put one on each bow - outside - and one on each quarter. F.B.9. Fishers Board 9, see. And she had a mizzen the same as the trawlers, see. And
 it was her bow. And the poor souls, they never - never tumbled - she was among the whole lot before they - any of them knew what - what she was, see. There was twenty-four of them - that he charged that day, for illegal }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid2427406\charrsid5125818 perverting}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 . And took the whole dashed lot into L}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid16477639\charrsid5125818 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
rwick harbour. And me in my uniform - I was the last aboard, he had to put a man aboard every one of them, see. And - I - I had to get on my uniform and a cap and - the shoulder badge in - in - in the front of it, because there was no badge in
 my cap, see, my uniform cap. And - I was aboard, up in the bridge along with the captain of the trawler, got into Lerwick anyway.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 What was your job on the boat then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5978047\charrsid5125818 Mess}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 room steward. A boy. Well sixteen and a half when I left - Catlebay, that was my - my job, a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid2427406\charrsid5125818 
mess room}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
 steward, looking after the officers, see. So I had nothing to do with the commander. And - when - when we went to Lerwick anyway. I got aboard back to my own ship, and there was - once they took their gear ashore, their trawl 
- what they were - the - the gear that they were using for fishing, all that gear was - confiscated and taken ashore. And they were allowed to go away now 'til such time as the court was coming off. See, they were charged and - their court was to be settl
e
d in three weeks or - less than that perhaps. And - court came off anyway. And each one of them was - fined a hundred and fifty pounds. And they were all Aberdeen trawlers, one Hull trawler among them, they were all Aberdeen trawlers and - they - their ge
a
r was taken up to the coastguard and cared for by the coastguards and afterwards sold. See, they would get a chance of buying it - buying their own gear again if they wanted to, see, but they none of them came for their own gear. None of them. It was sold
 to other - firms. And - after that - the day that the - the coast was over. When - when they were going off. Used to - used - you should hear the curses - and the language that was among these }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid2427406\charrsid5125818 trawler men}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 . Good heavens. I'm not going to mention that. And - and - bue a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid16477639\charrsid5125818 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
r - oh - cursing the commander oh right and left, I don't know how the devil he - did he manage to scrape through, that he wasn't killed on the spot. And - they went away anyway. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Were they fishing at the wrong time of the year?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 No, they were inside the limit, inside the three mile limit.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 I thought you said they were from Aberdeen?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Of course they were but that - that's where they were fishing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Were Aberdeen trawlers not allowed there then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 They weren't, no
t - not inside three miles. Not inside three mile limit. They could fish anywhere outside the three mile limit right round the coast. Right round these islands. They could fish right up to the three mile limit. Right - right round the coast of Britain. No
w
 - they've got six mile limit, and twelve mile limit, at the present day. If you're going - following the common market. The Common Market they want - they don't - they - they don't want to agree with a twelve mile limit at all. They want to keep it at th
e six mile limit. And - the Scottish fishermen don't want that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 How long were you on that boat then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Now - I was on that boat from 1905. 1905 to - 1911. 1911.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 As a messroom steward all the time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Yes. No, no. Oh no. Oh no. I was - I was
 in the galley for a year. And then I got chief steward myself. See? And - 1911 - 1912. The winter of 1911, the winter fishing was a complete failure - round Barra. And - my father and a few more in the wintertime some of them would be going to work to th
e
 gas works in Glasgow, see. Because they couldn't afford to stop the home and do without getting some money and - my father went away, he had a boat, a fishing boat of his own. And - he went away to Glasgow and he joined a puffer, one of these puffers tha
t go around. Not - not today -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 What's a puffer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
A puffer's one of these small boats you see carrying cargo - coal, cement, sand, God knows what not, any cargo they get. Say hundred ton, two hundred ton. Tonnage see? And he joined one of them, and
 there was only three men - on deck and the skipper. And they had a bogey in the foc's'l, and it was terrible cold and they were in the Rossie dock. And - this night they came aboard after - finishing the discharging, they went ashore for a pint of beer o
r
 two pints of beer as the case may be, and they came back - and as you know there was no port holes in these puffers that you could open. There was only a skylight, a place to - a hatch, that you were going down to the foc's'l - what they call the foc's'l
, forecastle, and the three of them were sleeping there. They filled up the bogey - coal - and - closed the sk}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid3034638\charrsid5125818 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 ttle on the top, went to bed. In the morning there was no signs of anybody getting up. So the skipper went up and tried the - the hatch. Well ther
e was nobody - no - he shouted down, anybody alive there now? No response. So he went down. And there were the three of them in bed - lying dead. There was my father - made signs that he was alive. But the other two were dead, were suffocated see? And - m
y
 father was taken to hospital. And in 1912 - 19 - no, 1911 it was, 1911 - he was taken to hospital and - about - December 1911, he was sent home and he was paralysed in one side - and his arm, one arm, I think it was the left - yes, the left, and the righ
t
 leg - paralysed. Then he got home in the December. And I remember going down to meet him with a pony that my grandfather had, to take him home. He was carried out - for the mailboat and he was put on the back - bareback on the pony, and ride. Went home w
ith him. Well was - he was there for six months and years - two years anyway before he could - manage to hop about.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 The family must have had a struggle to make ends meet at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Oh Lord Almighty, we had - oh only bare bare living. Bare liv
ing. And hard times for us. In fact - for all the fisherman at that winter - with that winter, it was terrible. Terrible hardship. And there was no such a thing as - what you call the - what you got today. National Assistance. No such a thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 No help at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 No, no, no, none whatever. None whatever.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Not even the church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
No. No. None - none at all. So - when he got a little bit that he could do a little bit with his hands there was one paymaster over there, Mr George MacDonald, and he 
went and got thread for making salmon fishing nets. See? And my father was making and getting enumeration for that, you see? Which helped him quite a lot. And the family. Eventually through time he got away and he would be going about with a stick. And wh
en he got floating around he started land leaguing, in 19 - 1906. No, 19 - no, no, 19 - 1906, 1907, 1908, 1907. No, not 1907, start land leaguing - 1906.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 So that was before he was ill then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Oh no, when he was ill - after his illness, when he got 
- when he got past his - I - I made a mistake there as regards the dates. It was in 19 - 1906 I think he got suffocated. And - start land leaguing anyway. Eventually he got to a solicitor that was in Lochmaddy, called Mr Wilson. And he got in touch with h
im. And he used to go to visit him, this Mr Wilson was paying for all his fares and - back and forth, and he started land leaguing for the island of Lewis.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 What do you mean by land leaguing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Land leaguing is to take possession. See? Land leaguers
, take possession, they took possession of this island against the - the landlord and against the - Lady Gordon Cathcart, she was the proprietor, see?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Your father was one of the first people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 The leaguer - the leader. The leader. Before we get any further here you are.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Can you tell me about how they took the island then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Yes, that's just what it was coming too. And - they - they - they were taken to - to the Gorton goal and they were sentenced for six months. They got six months. And 
they were sent to Gorton goal. And they had the grumofoit, prison grub, they were proper criminals. See, because I visited them. And - the day that I was going in - the first - the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid3034638\charrsid5125818 solicitor}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818  went with me, well I asked him, I knew perfectly well that there 
would be - missing their tobacco, their smoke, and I asked the - Sir Donald Shore, is it - is it convenient for me to take in a few ounces of tobacco? Well, he says, I don't know. But, he says, we'll get it and we'll get it and we'll see, he says, what I 
c
an do with the governor, see? Will he allow it. So - we got the tobacco anyway, at the mound in Edinburgh, a shop there, a small shop there, we got it and took it to the Corton goal. My father was the first that came out. He was pleased to see us. I was l
o
oking at him, but he was - he was pretty sturdy at this all the same. He - he seemed to take the whole thing - quite cool. And - each one of them came out and when we were leaving I told my father, said, I'll be back some other time. If we could go, becau
s
e they had to get six months. So I was back and forward into Leith occasionally anyway, I would pay them a visit every time I would come in. But - he says, well, he says, I don't think, he says, that we're going to be here six months. So it was all right.
 
I wasn't - interested in - in press at the time, but seemingly - there was quite a lot of agitation from America and Canada about their sentence, in the press. And I found that out afterwards. And - at the end of six weeks - they had to release them. Or e
l
se the place would be - stormed up. Taken down. And the day they were released - there was two stations at Edinburgh then. The Waverley Station on the east side of Princes Street, east end of Princes Street, and Princes Street station on the west end. And
 
they were to be going by - from the - Waverley and such and such a time - for Oban. But - and the crowd that was there, and I was there myself, the crowd that was there was enormous - enormous. And it - there was no signs of no prisoners coming. They was 
carted some way unknown down to - to Princes Street station - and sent down to }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid3034638\charrsid5125818 Oban}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 . I knew nothing at all about that. At the end of six week there. So Donald Shaw, he didn't see me that day at all, he knew about it you see, but he didn't see me and I wasn'
t up in time anyway to see him, and he didn't see me at all to tell me - but - they went and I didn't see them at all. They came to Oban anyway and there was a tremendous welcome there waiting them. Pipers and all the rest of it. And still more when they 
arrived in Castlebay.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Pipers again?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Pipers again. Yes. Flags. The - the kind that - that was there at the time I don't know. Some - some pieces of blanket supposedly, something like that. Or old bags, white bags - flour bags. All - were - oh trem
endous number. So they got to their own homes then. How - when they - when they - when they were sitting at the court, the Judge told them, now are you going back to where you came from now? My father said, yes. We're going there and we're going to take p
ossession of the island. Previous to that you see they had some - some of them put some - cattle over here, before they went away. A cow or two or three, see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did they bring them over at night time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Well - well I don't know about that now, but t
hey were put over anyway. It's quite - it's quite possible it was done at night in - in the dark. But it was done anyway, see. And - in fact they was tilling potatoes - too in broad daylight, they didn't see, took possession of the land, and the wheat - a
nd - planted for - for the season, potatoes. Well - after that -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 So they brought the cattle over and tilled the potatoes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Yes. And - that was in 1908. 1909 they were in full possession. We had - the house that we had over in Castlebay, it was a w
ooden shed, same as a - a squatter, as a cot - cotters, they called them squatters. Then that had no land at all, no - no croft. And my father was one of them, and all these that's there. No crofts at all. Just - that house was only about ten yards from h
i
gh water mark than that. Probably about five. There was two other next to our house - just about five yards from high water mark. So - in 1909 they were in full swing over here. And it was - our house was over here at 19 - 1909. Up here in the square. Whe
re - up near the Post Office.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did they build the houses themselves?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Yes. It's only a wooden house that we had, every one of them had only - only wooden houses. They had - just disconnect them over the other side and - carry them over. Set them up again. What do you call that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did you have any animals over in Barra before you came?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 No. No, no, no. No. Nothing at all, not even a hen. Not even a hen, no.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Then you came to near the Post Office, how many animals did you have afterwards?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
We had no animals at all when we came here. Of course I wasn't at home at all you know. I was away.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 When did you come back then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
I didn't come back 'til 1912. 1912, my father was on his deathbed then. But - 1912 - previous to that - I left
 the - the Minnerhouse, in the Minner after the Brenda, I was there chief steward, and - I don't know what came - came round at all. She was going out anyway, she was going out to the Mediterranean and I didn't go with her at all. I left her. I was - I ca
me home in 19 - no, I went to - to Glasgow. And I got a job in Singers' in Clydebank.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 What did you do there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 I was a foundry clerk there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 A clerk?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Yes. Foundry clerk in Singers' in 1911. I was stopping out in Addisland. Where - lodgin
g with a woman which was my own cousin's wife at the time. And - my father got badly then. And he was badly for - for - going on for a year. But my mother told me she is not - because were - poor circumstances you know and they're only depending on the li
ttle that I was doing. Every penny that I was earning I was sending home. Never even kept a - a ha'penny for myself sometimes. Yes. Sending it home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 So you were the chief breadwinner?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 I was the chief breadwinner, I was the oldest of the family. A
nd - when - at last - they sent for me. When I told Mr Govern, he was the head clerk - and Singers' was at that time - I told them that I couldn't stay on. Well, he says - I'll keep your job open, he says, for a month. At the end of the month, he says, wr
i
te me if you can't come. So - at the end of the month I wrote to him and I told him we couldn't manage - manage. And in July 1912 my father - on the fourth of July he died up here. See. Well after that - I couldn't leave now, seeing that they were going t
o
 take possession of some crofts, the crofts was where - where - were located out to each - each tenant, see, and I had mine, my father's at number six, see and I had to stop at home and start cultivating it. See? And try - fishing as a sideline. So - I st
arted at that and I kept going and I got this house built.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 You built this house yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Yes, by - well I got a mason. I - I didn't do the mason work at all. No. But I - I - I - no, I got a mason for to do it. And when it was - finished I got a 
joiner, a close friend of my own and - he - fixed it up. When the - 1912 - 1913 - I kept going, '14 I kept going. But - '14 came, I had to get out. Either go to sea or go to the Army. One of the two. In first world war. So I decided, I'll go to sea. And I
 
went as a merchant seaman then. Yes. As an able seaman then. And I kept on right through the - throughout the war - the war, 'til 1919 I got released. Demolised, 1919. And in 19 - November 1917 I was torpedoed - five hundred miles west of Gibraltar. And b
y
 God, I can assure you, that it wasn't a - a - a - a pleasant thing, at eight o'clock in the morning we got torpedoed. And three of our - three of our - our - firemen, they was - well of course you were stuck just above the poop, you know, at the - do you
 
know anything about the ships yourselves? Four hatches, well the - the after hatch, number four hatch, the torpedo struck her just at the - after end of - of number four hatch. And the coolies - Arabs they were, Arabay, Arab firemen - they were on the sta
rboard side, just where the - where the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid3034638\charrsid5125818 torpedo}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
 struck her. And do you know that - they were thrown - three of them were thrown right through the - the roof of the - of the - the deckhouse. Yes, they were in bed at the time. See? They were scattered all ove
r. However, we got into the boats, and picked up the - after eight hours in the - in the lifeboat, by an American cruiser, at the time. And - taken to }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid3034638\charrsid5125818 Gibraltar}
{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 .
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Did you settle here again after the war then, you settled down on the croft again?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Oh yes. Yes. I came home after the - 1919, I came home and - started the croft, kept the croft going. Got cattle, sheep over in Sandray, sheep over there and - lobster fishing. And herring fishing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 You've done that too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Yes. I was at that and all. Now - in 1931 - 1931 - I got - no, I got married.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 You got married in 1931?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Is your wife from Barra too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Aye. From Mingulay previous. Yes. Mingulay. Her father came from Mingulay. And her mother came from - Tangusdale, down th
e west side. And - I settled down then. And I started lobster fishing again with my father-in-law. We got a small boat - I had a small boat of my own anyway since 19 - 1908 I bought it in Castlebay, I got my father to buy it. Yes, at the time, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did you work on it at that time though?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
No, I didn't but my father was using it, yes. Anybody that wanted to. At that time there was no such a thing as ferries or nothing of that - that - at that time. We used to do all the ferrying, the lobster fisher
men. Yes, didn't matter who came to the boat you were getting - passengers, doesn't matter who he was. And no asking - no asking for - for fares or nothing else. No, no. No such a thing. But not today. I have to pay dear today for to go across to Castleba
y myself. By heavens, you're telling me. Whoever - however - now where were we now -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 You were saying how you came back here and got the sheep and cattle.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Oh yes, yes. Oh - now, were two seasons, two years working with an Oban small boat. Sixteen 
- sixteen and a half feet and keel, and we used to go in the winter time in the months of October when the weather was getting boisterous round these islands. We used to go to Barra Head. Five of us. And take the small boat with us. Haul her up in - at ni
ght time on the slip in Bereray in Barra Head, and putting it out in morning again. Keep it clean - working cleaners there for a month. And the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid3034638\charrsid5125818 lighthouse man}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818  Norman Castle that was attending to Barra Head at that time, it was a loch station. But he used to
 go out with this - the - mails, McAuley, he's over there and he's got his son over there yet. The old man is dead. He used to take up the - the lobsters to Catlebay that we were catching in the month of October and were making a good thing of it, at the 
t
ime. More so than in summertime. Because - in the summertime when we were - was trading with Billingsgate, that's the only market; that we could get for lobsters at that time. See, by the time they would get to Billingsgate we were getting what they call 
a blue form, that they was - not fit for human consumption, see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
You were telling me about starting the croft, can you tell me what you grew on the croft?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Oh - potatoes. Barley, oats, that was all. That was growing on the croft - on the crofts.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 You didn't have any other vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
No. No, no. No but that. No, no. No such a thing round here as vegetables. Not with the - not with the crofters. Not with the crofters. We - we weren't so far advanced at that - at that time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 You had sheep and cattle?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 So you had milk?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Milk, plenty of it. Plenty of milk. Plenty of milk.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 How did you manage for meat, did you eat your own mutton?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Well - always - at the Whitsuntide, right on from there we used to keep our
 own - what they call wethers. Wethers. They were two year old or three year old that was grazing on - on Dandray. We used to kill one every - now and then. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did you have any meat in the winter?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Oh very seldom, very seldom. Very seldom. Very seldom.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Fish?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Plenty of fish. Oh plenty of fish. And in my time in Castlebay - fish was the - staple diet. Yes, in Castlebay. Oh yes. Yes, yes. Because you would - you could pick up any kind of fish in - at Catlebay. Any kind at all, that was
 left - on the beach there for anybody to take - to take it home. It was that plentiful round here at that time. And there was - fish that you can't get - that you can't buy today, was strewn on the shore in Castlebay there - not - nobody go near it. And 
that was turbot. Turbot.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 People wouldn't pick it up and use it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
They wouldn't bother with it, they had plenty of other - plenty of other fish. Today - you can't buy it in the shop. Yes, that's - that's - well that's fact. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Was there a township here that organised the grazing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 You mean - a committee. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Were you on the committee?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Yes, I was few years in that and all. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 What kind of things did you decide?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Well - you had to decide as regards rams - from 
the Department of Agriculture, bulls, whatever bull you wanted - all you to do was in - fill in a form, send it in to the department and if - if they sanction it, well there you are, you are given the bull free. You had to keep it yourself during the time
 you had it. See? The same thing with the lamb - with the rams. You were getting it from the Department.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Was there common grazing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Common? Oh yes. Oh yes. In fact you can see the - the arable ground, it's fenced in. Its fenced on you see on both 
sides. What they call the first - the first name that they latterly got was Lowerton, that's in that section. And Upperton, this is this section, so that's my section, Upperton. That's the way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 And you were each allowed so many sheep on the common ground?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 There was no sheep allowed in the \{BLANK\}
 at all, none at all on the - of course on the cool side there. See? There's a boundary fence there as you come through the gate, well - on - from this side there was no - no sheep allowed at all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Why was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
I don't - I don't know, that was department - it was - what you call that now?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Because of the sand?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
No, no. No, no. It was on account of - och, I can't remember now the name of the - it was - the sheep club. It was a club. Tha
t the Vatersay and Aristow, there's twenty - twenty tenants - tenants in Vatersay and eight in Aristow, that's away down at the back of the brae there. See? But there's nobody there now, not a soul. And - sheep club it was. And you had a share of - about 
fifteen to twenty sheep, each tenant. And that was grazing on - on - Sandray. And there was no sheep allowed here at all. And there was no dogs allowed here. Only one dog - by the shepherd, that was looking after Sandray.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did he live on Sandray?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
No. Only when - lambing time. Lambing time. I was one - one season there and all. At lambing. Aye. Aye. There was the four of us there. Yes, the lambing season.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 A lonely time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Oh lonely, oh yes, yes. But I enjoyed it all the same. Yes. You had t
o be there over for six weeks. Yes, lambing time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did you plough the land or did you make lazy beds?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Lazy beds. When this was ploughed. Yes. Vatersay was. But - over - in - in Aristow it was lazy beds, that they - that they - had. Of course we h
ad - four horses, club horses. Everything was club as regards - the agricultural - it was a club stock - see - and - we had four horses, four carts, two ploughs and - what do you call them - that you go after your ploughing is finished - harrows - harrows
, that's right, that's right, that's right. That's right. Yes. Well, there you are.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Could you tell me where your father came from?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Yes. Yes. My father was born in Nairn. In Nairn.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 How did he come here then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Oh well he came here when my
 grandfather came here to the - he was the first - the first fisherman that took a herring net to Barra - to Castlebay, my grandfather. Anthony Campbell.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 So your father came here when he was young?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 When he was - when he was sixteen - he was - be
fore he left Nairn he was going in for coopering trade. Yes. Before he left Nairn.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 He gave that up and went on the fishing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
That's right. That's right, when he came over here when his - when his father came here. The family came over - came to - to Barra.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did the family have a croft?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 No, no. No, no. Just to themself, the grandfather.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 You told me about the squatters hut he had?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 The only jobs he had, you mentioned the fishing and the gas works?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Were there any other jobs that he did?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
No, nothing - while he was at the - at the - coopering trade, that was all that I know. And fishing. He kept on the fishing all the time, when he came to Barra.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Where did your mother come from?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 From Mingul
ay. Yes. And she was a Campbell and all. Yes. Two Campbells. My father and mother. And I'm double Campbell.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Your wife was a Campbell too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 No, she's a Moneil. She was a McNeil from Kismul Castle.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did your mother ever do any paid work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
No. Oh yes, oh yes. Gutting. Gutting herring. Oh yes, she - they used to go to the east coast. Oh yes. Quite a lot of the Barra - Barra women used to go to the east coast and to the English fishing. Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 You were born in 1888?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 That's right. That's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Do you know when they were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Oh no, I don't know
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 You were the oldest?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
I was the oldest. Oh no. No, there's a girl. There was a girl previous, three years older than me. Mary Campbell. She died in 19 with terrible -
 measles that came round here, from Mingulay. Yes. She was a sturdy heavy girl. And - I heard them saying that if she had been at - at hospital or near a doctor at the time that she would have - her life would have been saved.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 There were no doctors then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
No, there was what you call quack doctors, there was - three in this - in these places, up 'til lately. Yes. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Would they be travelling doctors?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
No, they were getting - they were getting the job somewhere or not, I don't know. Th
ere was the one - the one that was here when I left - when I left Barra, Doctor McAuley, he was a Lewis man and knew as much about - medical as what that stool did. It did not matter and - at the time of the measles there that's what I - when I took notic
e of it, I took the measles myself.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 So you realized he was a quack at the time of the measles?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Yes. Yes. Because - everybody that - that he would visit - he would ask somebody in the house to go - up with him and get a bottle, and that bottle was
 - everybody that was going was getting the same thing and I heard them saying several times - although I was taking no notice of it at the time telling the honest truth - it was only treacle and water mixed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 People said that at the time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Yes. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 But they still went on using him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Well there you are. There was no other - there wasn't remedy for it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did your mother not make medicines herself then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Oh no, no, no, no I never seen anything like that. I never seen any - nob
ody making any medicine. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 So there was one sister older than you and then you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Yes. Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 How many after that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Well - Mary, Thompson, Neil who lives up there - by the Post Office. Yes. Neil. Rlec. Micheal. Now Michael - and Alec, t
hey were in the States, because Alec was torpedoed in the Scottish Monarch in 1915. And when he got ashore - and joined another ship and he landed in New York. And he cleared out of New York. Cleared out in New York. And he went through to Ohio. And when 
h
e - when he - the - the Yanks joined the war he joined and all. And he came to France. And he was in France for a year - eighteen months. He got leave before how would go back, and he came home here. And nobody knew him. In fact I wasn't at home at the ti
me. I was at the war the same as themselves. And nobody knew him. He was in }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid3034638\charrsid5125818 Yankee}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818  uniform you see. Well he went back again to the States and - he was - he never came back to - to France. And he married - in New Jersey. New Jersey - Trent - Trenton, New Jer
sey. And - his wife - he died and Michael died - Michael died in New York as well and his wife still is in - what they called Chester, Philadelphia.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 What work did he have over there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 He was in the - rubber works, I don't know what as, I don't know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Before that did he do fishing round here?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
That's all, that's all, before - before he - before the war started. And he never - he never - bothered no more with the - merchant ship - British - British merchant ship.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 And there's also another one in the States you said?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Michael. Michael. Michael. Michael and Alec.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 What did Alec do there then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
That's Alec I'm telling - Alec and - Michael, he was in the - he was in some hotel, I don't know. The later end - the last - last time anyway, before he died he was in some hotel in New York. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 What was his job in the hotel, do you know?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 No, I don't know. I don't know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 There were no more sisters?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 No. Oh yes, yes, yes, yes, yes. Oh yes, yes, I had another sister, 
she was married to - to the clerk, that - the man that was act - act - acting the clerk - clerk for my father at the time of the land leaguing see. Named McFee. Well - I've got two nieces now. One of them in Glasgow and one of them in Barra town. One of t
hem a schoolteacher in Glasgow. The other is only a - domestic - domestic cook she was before she got married up there. In Barra town.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Can you tell me about this little house, how many rooms were there in the little house back in Barra?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Two room
s, that's all. The kitchen and one - two rooms as I say. Yes. Two bedrooms.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 There was a kitchen and two bedrooms?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 So all the children had one bedroom?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Yes. Aye. There were three - three of us. Now - see I wasn't - stopping in my father's house at all. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Where were you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
In my grandfather's - I was brought up in my grandfather's. Yes. And Neil was the same in Mingulay, in his grandfather's. He was brought up there and all. Well they had ample rooms in the other rooms at home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 So you were sent to your grandfather when you were quite young?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Yes, yes. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did your mother make clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Well they used to - they used to make some - sort of - of - for blankets. For blankets. They used to make that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Would you see your parents most days as a child? Would you go over to your mother and father most days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Oh no, no, just when we were out, because they were only across the road.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Where would you have your meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 In the kitchen. In the kitchen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 With your grandparents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Oh yes, yes, always - I had everything their house. I had nothing at all to do with as regards meals or anything at home. No, no. No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did they have any land with their house, your grandparents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Oh they
 - they had a - a big house. The grandfather. Oh yes. Oh Lord yes. He had three rooms.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did they have land with it though, did they have sheep?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Yes. Yes. And horses. And cattle. And cattle. That's the grandfather but not - not the uncles, no. Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Could you tell me about the meals at that time, can you tell me about a typical days meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Well, porridge and milk in the morning. Scones. Tea. Or scones and milk. Before I got to - go to school. Yes. Dinner, potatoes and fish. And plenty of milk. Supper again, potatoes sometimes or - porridge. There was no such a thing as meat. Only an }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid3034638\charrsid5125818 occasional}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818  - once in a blue moon.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Not even rabbits?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 No, not - not in Barra. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did you eat the seabirds at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Yes, if we could g
et them, certainly. I could ear - eat them today if I could get them as well.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 How did you get them at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Well shooting them that's all. That's all. But Neil, up there, he used to get - cormorants, young cormorants up there. And they're -
 they're a lovely dish. When they're - when they're fried, cooked first and then - put them on the frying pan. Oh they're lovely dishes, lovely. I like them myself. I get one occasionally from - from man that's down there, he used to go up to Mingulay at 
t
he time when they were coming down from their nests. Aye. And - and the stable food at that time - it was - it was - it was - the best you could get here - get today, if I could get the food that I had in my young days I would - I would live for another h
undred years. You know that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 You were never hungry then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Never hungry, never, never. Never hungry. Just the food that was there, it was - it was pure. It was the natural food. Compared for - to what we are getting today. You're not getting - we'r
e not getting it anyway. You agree with that? Yes. It's not now - it's not natural food at all.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did you have tinned foods at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
No, no, I never seen a tin in my life. No, no. No, the only tin that you'd see there was an occasional - condensed milk. Tin of condensed milk. Yes. That's the only tin. And an occasional corned - corned }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid3034638\charrsid5125818 beef}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 , what was - Libbys. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Can you tell me about how the meal was served at that time, did you have a big dish in the centre of the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Oh aye, certainly.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 And you helped yourself from that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Exactly. Exactly. Had your own share of fish too.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did you use knives and forks.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Sometimes. Sometimes. Or sometimes not. You'd only your fingers.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Were you allowed to talk at meals as a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Oh yes, you could - oh yes, yes. Not - not to abuse the table, not at all. You could - ask your father, do you like that? Is that good? So on and so on, see. No nonsense. Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Could you choose what you wanted to eat or were you told y
ou must have a bit of that? Sometimes children are told they must eat what is on their plate?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Oh yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Was that so with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Oh no, no. No - no such a thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 What would they say if you left something?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Oh well - if you left s
omething they'd say you had to - they wouldn't interfere with you as regards that. No, no, no. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did they mind how you sat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 No, no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Could you leave when you'd finished or did you have to sit until everyone had finished?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Oh no, no, no, through - 'til the whole lot was finished.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did they say grace?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Oh yes, every - every meal.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Beginning and the end?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Yes. Oh yes. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Could you ask for a second helping?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 You could if you wanted. But I never - I
 never seemed - no. Never - never wanted that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did your grandmother bake her own bread?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Of course. Of course.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 What other things would she make, would she make jam?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 No. No, no. No such a thing as jam.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Pickles?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 No. I didn't k
now what pickles was 'til I went - 'til I went to the mainland. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 What about wines?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 No. No, no. No, no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 What did she cook on, was there a range like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 No, no, no. An open fire. What do you call that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 The hook?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Just with the - the chain coming down, put on the kettle or the pot, whatever - happened to be on top of the peat fire. Peat fire. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Where did the peat come from?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Well they came from what they called Garryval, over there and from Ben Tangaval. Ben Tangaval.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 When you moved here you still got the peat from back there did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 We didn't get no peats at all we didn't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 How did you light a fire then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Well there was a - when the coal strike was on in 19 - 1926 - from Muldoanic
h one year that I cut peats over there, one year. Getting the - getting coal then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 You had coal before the first world war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Yes. Yes, we did. Oh yes, yes. Yes, yes, yes. Yes, yes. The first - the first ton of coal that came here - the first - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid3034638\charrsid5125818 coal boat}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818  that came here - sixteen shillings a ton. Guess what it is today? Fourteen shillings a ton. Down there. There you are now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did you buy new clothes from a shop or were they made in the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Oh it was bought - some - most of it. Oh yes.
 Yes, because - the first suit that I had was a sailor suit, which was taken from the - the east coast, bought at the east coast anyway, at the time they were going for the fishing, they would have - they had a suit - first suit that I ever had - a sailor
 suit, with a whistle attached to it. Yes. That was - be around about - nine or ten years old then. Yes. And after that - they was buying the made - ready made suits you see in - in the shops. Yes. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Who would mend them, would your mother or your father mend the clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Oh my mother repaired, my mother. Not me. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 What about shoes, did you wear shoes most of the year?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Yes. Yes. Yes. I can remember - I think when I went to school - I remember one winter being - barefooted, frost on the ground, ice. Yes, I can remember that. I don't know what age I would be. Going on to eight or ten - at the time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 They would be mended by your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Oh they - no, no, by a shoemaker. There was a steady shoemaker over there. Ges.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Can
 you tell me how you managed with bathing at that time, did you use the burn or did you have a bath tub in the room?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Bathing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did you wash in the burn or did you wash in the house?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Oh you would wash in the house, yes. Perhaps - perhaps in
 - at this time of the year go outside and wash. See? But in wintertime you were washing inside - before we would go to school. Before you go to bed. You had to wash. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Would you have a weekly bath?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 No. No. 'Cos generally in the summer sea
son here - from May to - to Sept - end of September - we were never out of the salt water. Bathing all the time, when we were out of school. Even in - even in school - school hours, school - school meal, after we ate - run home and run back down to the sh
ore below the school, strip off, away in. In and out like that. 'Til you would hear the fog horn of the school going. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did you have to go to bed at a fixed time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Ah - we had to be in bed - half past nine, not later than that. No. Or else we'd hear about it. And feel it too.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
If you did something naughty would it be your mother or father or your grandparents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Oh - my father - father he was - he was a - he - if he was at home. And if he wasn't at home mother wouldn't go near us - 'til 
he came home, and she would tell him. And whatever he's done, get a hold of you then. Manys and manys the time I was thrashed across his knees and - oh - buttocks. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 What sort of thing would make them angry?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Well - for instance now if I wasn'
t - if my mother shouted for me and says - go and do so and so, if I wouldn't do it - I would hear about it. If I wasn't going to - you tried to do out of church, if I was hanging behind, or getting ready to go to school, I would get it then and all. See?
 Each - each - each one of us. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
What sort of things do you think they emphasised as being most important in life as you grew up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Oh - oh you'd have to - you would have to - doesn't matter any strangers, you would have to - keep - if any stran
ger was coming to - to - coming to you and asking you anything well you'd answer 'em. Properly. Don't give any cheek. And above all, if a clergyman, it doesn't matter which side, the protestant minister or the priest, you be obeying. Yes, we get that.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
You have the two ways of speaking in the gaelic to show respect, the two ways of saying you in gaelic?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Yes. You. Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Who would you show respect to in that way? You say the minister?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Both. Both.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Were there other people you would use that to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Oh yes. Yes. Your schoolmaster, or anything that was superior to our - yourself.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Do you mean older?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Older as well. Yes, old people especially.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 What other people would you think of as superior?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 The schoolmaster or - any
body - well - shopkeeper, he was one of them. A with - with any business. That's what we thought - was - above ourselves
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
What sort of - do you think your parents had hopes about the kind of person grow up to be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Oh well now that's a - that's a question}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid16477639\charrsid5125818  I - I don't know. No, I - they}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
 they weren't taking what you call - they weren't taking any interest in - take for instance, in school. Now you learn to be a - a teacher. I never never see - heard anything like that during my schooldays, no. But - i
f your exams - was over in school, if they heard that you were - if they hear you were - advance - getting advanced or passing your exams, now - they would round and say, who - I heard - that so and so got an - this exam. What If you were lagging behind. 
Now what about you, why not you trying? See Something like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did they go up to the school and meet the schoolmaster?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Who the - oh no, no, no, no. No, no. Nothing like that. I never seen No. No.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did you like it at the school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 I did 
not at the time. Telling you the honest truth. No, no I did not and many's the day I - skedaddled. Yes. Yes. And many's and many's a got for it and all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Can you tell me whether your father used to help in the house with the house?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Well - at my t
ime my father hadn't much time. Very seldom you would get house - on account of fishing, see. He would go in the morning, early }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid3034638\charrsid5125818 hour}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818  morning, shoot his lines on the banks in the Minch there and be all hours before he would get home. And therefore he couldn
't do nothing in the house. Housework. And - perhaps not coming home at all that night, if there was no wind. Because there was no - no motors at that time. See? It was sail.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 But if your mother was ill?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Oh - that's a different thing. He would h
ave to remain at home. He couldn't get anybody else to do it. No. 'Cos everybody had to do - he'd have to do his own.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 You couldn't get a relation in to help?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Well granny - granny used to come in. She used to do part of it, if - if necessary. See?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 But he could cook if he had to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Oh, he - certainly he could cook. Yes. And do the washing as well. Oh yes. Oh yes. I've seen him washing pretty often. Making the beds, sweeping up the floor. All this - odds and ends you know. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Making the fires?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 As well. As well.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Would he help with the children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Oh yes. Oh everyone was like that. Yes. Because they had - every household would grow very - grown up family you know. Five and six and some - eight - one had - one house I reme
mber was nine - nine of a family. Yes. Oh yes. There they had their hands full of worry. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did you have to help in the house yourself as a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Oh Lord, when I was able to do it. There was only - the partitions in these in the houses we jus
t the bare - bare wood, no paint nor nothing else. I've seen me scrubbing them. On a Saturday morning starting to scrub them with sand. And a scrubbing brush. Yes. Yes, that's a fact.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 You had to do that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Well - I was - I was doing it for - for t
he sake of keeping the place clean. Yes. Working shine up on a Sunday. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Were there other tasks you had to carry out yourself?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Oh well, there was quite a lot of - when I was with my grandfather he had - he had five milking cows. He had two h
orses. And - two horses and - two foals. Two mares it was, two foals. Well these - these calves again, they weren't what you calved foot at all. Of course the cow - you need some of the milk - most of the milk yourself, you see, for the household. I would
 be looking and - keeping the boiler clean as well. Odds and ends like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Would your sisters help inside the house then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Yes, they were helping my mother when she would be carding. Do you know anything about carding? Carding and - spinning. Ye
s. Yes. There was various other things, I can't - I don't know the names of them. They would be twisting the yarn in one ball, yes. Quite a lot of these things. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 So she would have knitted some of the clothes you wore?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Oh yes, yes, oh yes.
 Underclothing. Oh yes. But - outside, as regards blankets and - and - heavy trousers, they would have to send to the - to the - to the - what do you call that woman - that spins - do the spinning, the hand looms, the hand looms, yes. Would have to send t
hem the - the yarn for to - make cloth of it. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 And then she would make it up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Afterwards. Afterwards, yes, yes. They had their own patterns for - making pants and - and - sleeve vests. It would be down to here you see. Sleeves on, vests with 
sleeves on. Quite - serviceable in the wintertime. Yes. As for socks, the same as what I was wearing even to this day. And my missus do. Yes. Never bought a pair of socks in my life. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did your grandfather mainly do outside work when you were a chil
d, was he looking after his own croft then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Oh yes, when I was a child, oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Would he help in the home at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 If he was at home. Yes. Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Do you feel that there were set tasks that men could do and that women could d
o, or were they flexible?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Oh no, I don't - I - I won't say a set - no, I would say that they were - communal - communal - together. If my father - seen my mother doing anything that it would help himself when he was at home, he would immediately give
 her a hand, the same thing applied to my grandfather. And all the neighbours around were the same. At my time.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 I have been told that a man wouldn't milk a cow.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Oh that's a lot of nonsense. No, no. I used to milk the cows around my granny myself. Tell you the truth. I could do that today. Yes. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Some people say that the women were supposed to do the planting.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Oh - they were doing it certainly, but the - the - the husband - the father was there along with her. If my mother - moth
er was planting, my father would take the bag of - bag of - potatoes that they were going to plant, he would take it on his back right up to the lazy beds and - they would have the two dib - what do you call them, dumbles, or dumble. Yes. Yes. Aye. And - 
dimble - dibbles, yes, that's right. One side - one - yes, I can't explain - I can't explain the dibble. Yes, seen him often. Yes, yes. Oh yes. And all the neighbours the same.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 You were sleeping at your grandparents, were any of the other children in y
our grandparents house or was it just you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 No, no, no. I was brought up at my grandfather's. Practically.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 And you were the only one of the family there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Yes, that's right. That's right. That's right. I was brought up there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Would you 
say that your grandparents were more influential in bringing you up than your parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Well no, I won't say that. Most - I think - it's to relieve - to relieve the - the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid3034638\charrsid5125818 congestion}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818  that was in my father's house that I was taken there. See? Understand
? Yes. I think it was on account of that that I was taken there. And I was quite happy there. Quite happy. Of course if I wanted to go - go home I would run across the road. It's only a three minutes walk. Across the road.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 When you think about who tau
ght you how to behave and what was important in life, would that be more your grandparents or your parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Oh my parents, oh yes, my parents, they would be - I was given more - more scope in my grandfathers than I would get at home. Oh yes. If I don
e anything wrong at home - or if they heard that I was in - in any mischief I was in for it at home. But I would have some relief - in me grandfather's. They wouldn't be so harsh at all. No. NO. Naturally - naturally enough - I would like to be in gran. S
o there you are.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 If you had any worries as a child who would you go to?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Well tell you the honest truth I don't think I ever had any worries. Not that I - not that I know - that I can remember, that's telling you the honest truth. NO, not that I can remember at all. I was quite happy, day and night. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did you find your parents easy to talk to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Oh yes - oh yes, oh Lord yes, oh - oh yes. And if they give me an advice, if they want me to do anything for them I would do it, right away, n
o hesitation at all. And - when my days - my days tasks was over - my hobby was - they had two foals and I would be jumping on one of them bareback and away for a ride and back again. Yes. Quite happy then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Do you think that parents then showed affection, were they demonstrative?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
To me like? Yes, all the same. The same as the rest. I could never say that I could - that I could - separate me from the rest. I could never see it. I never did see it. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Some people say at that time that parents
 were more distant from their children than now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 I - I couldn't say that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 You didn't feel that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
No, no, I didn't feel that at all, I couldn't - no, I don't think so. Not in the community that was around us. Nor in my own home, no. No - I couldn't say that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Were they concerned about the way you behaved towards your brothers and sisters?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. If there's anything - if I done anything towards my brother or - brothers or sisters I would get it. Or any - any other children. A severe slapping. I can assure you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
If another child from outside the family hit you, did they say you should hit back or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
No. They would say then, well, you should have come home and told your mum, mummy or your daddy, and they'll - tr
eat it. See? But it wasn't a case - if anybody hit at me - I'm just speaking for myself personally - if anybody hit age me at school or outside school or school time, I would hit 'em back. And fight it out. Yes, that was the - the idea that I had anyway. 
And most of my colleagues at school was the same. Yes. Well - if - if I won - if I lose I knuckle down to it. I wouldn't interfere with that man - with that boy no more. See? Yes, and we're quite friendly. See?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Was there quite a lot of that at the sch
ool then, were there groups of boys who would fight with each other at the school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Yes. Townships. Townships. Do you know Glen - the other side of Castlebay - and Kentangaval on the west side, that's where I was brought up, well - there's a little - 
little village down in Horve, past where the Swedish houses are at the present time, there was a little colony there. Well - Kentangaval and Horve used to go together. Stick shoulder - shoulder to shoulder and in - in the wintertime when the snow was on t
h
e ground the battle would start when they went - when the school was - coming out. Between the Glen, Horve and Kentangaval. And many and many's the night - that we would reach up - half up the Glen, pelting snowballs and do - doing a lot of damage too. I'
v
e seen - I've seen us one night - was a poor old man, he wasn't what you'd call - he wasn't an old man, he was an old man but he was up in years, well up in years, and he had a great big stack of peats on a hillock just near the house and when you got the
r
e's a - as a - signpost - or a sentry post, we got to this stack of peats, and instead of - firing - snowballs, we couldn't get enough snow, started with the peats. And we hit this - this old man was at the door, peeping out you see, and he darena come ou
t
, and he got one of the peats in the eye. Oh yes, we run for it. Oh boy, boy. And they went for - for the - for the doctor. His eye - oh his eye was like that. By gosh no more. Yes, I've seen battles, battle royal - many and mays the time. But not between
 the community, our own community. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Can you remember birthdays, was there anything special about a birthday?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Oh no, not - not - not in my days. No such a thing as - happy birthday or anything else like that today, in my time. No. No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Were there any special days of the year like Christmas?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Oh well, Christmas, we would always - always - what do you call these - what do you call this - they've got it in Argyllshire up to this present day. Yes, at Inverness. What's that game? You've got a - same as a golf club.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid3034638\charrsid5125818 Croquet}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 ?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 No, no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Hockey?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
No. No, there's a ball, either - either - either - a ball - even one of these herring nets, you know, the - the bolts that's on the herring nets. Cork. Cork balls. I - I - that
 seems funny in my time but I can't - can't get - can't get a hold of it. It's - it's - it's in - in Oban there very - every season. Competing with both - one township and another.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 You did that at Christmas?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Christmas - oh Christmas Day was the day for that. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Were there any other special things at Christmas then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Aye. There was another game. You put a little hole in the - in the ground like that. And you'd have - spill of wood about that - you put it there, down in the hole and t
his side coming up. And - you put a - a ball on - on the top here, in - in the hole - top of this.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Were there Bank Holidays at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
No. Bank Holidays were unheard of at the time. Not even knew what a bank was. At that time. Never mind - never mind the - the holiday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 You would never go away for a holiday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
No, where - where could you go? The only holidays we would have at the time was going right round the island barefooted. Hopping it out. Right round. I've seen me doing that in six hours. Right round the island. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 A race you mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Well, we tried tried to - as - who could - who could - come first, going from Kentagaval back to Kentagaval again right round the island. Seen doing it in six hours. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did you have any musical instruments in your home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 What did you have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 I had a fiddle, melo}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid3034638\charrsid5125818 d}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 ian and the pipes and the changer. Yes. I could play the melodian myself, the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid3034638\charrsid5125818 accordion}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 , and the the pipes I could play a little, the chanter of cou
rse. And - another thing, another one, was - what do you call them - Jews Harp. Is it? News Harp you call it? Yes, that's right. I could play that, bring it off great.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Could your brothers or sisters play instruments?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 No, no, that was - that was 
in my grandfather. See in my grandfather's house. My uncles - they could play. Yes. But the - one of them especially.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Would you have musical evenings then as a family?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Well we used to have the school - in the school - at Christmas, they would h
ave what; they called a soiree. Or soiree. Yes. We would be all in there. Some acting would be there too, may - some amateur actress see that was - coming out of the place Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 But in the family there wouldn't be an evening where you sat and played mu
sic and sang?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
No, no. No, no. Be either - either a - a raffle or a wedding. Or a soiree. That's all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did anyone in the family sing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Oh me sister used to. Yes. She's not alive. She's dead some years ago. She was a good singer. But never wha
t you'd call - professional, because they hadn't the chance. See, if - what's - what was going - what's going on just now as regards - you know the Mod - going to Inverness and Oban, they had it in different years, they've got Mod - Mod in Oban, Aviemore,
 Inverness, Glasgow, Dundee, Perth. Quite a lot - just now, but there was nothing like that at that time you see. See they hadn't the chance. Well my own daughter, she is - she's a good singer. Yes, one of them. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Were there books in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Books? Aye, schoolbooks only. That's all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did you take a newspaper?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
The only newspaper that was coming to Barra at that time was the - Highland News. Printed in Inverness.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Would you take that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Oh yes. Oh - I would, I would, I don't 
know about the rest of the family, I don't know, but I was - on it every time I would get a hold of it. Yes. And I was great on fairly tales. Yes. Reading fairy tales. If I could get hold of a book at school, I would be - in my glory. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did your parents read?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
My father did. My mother - no. I don't think she could write even. I don't think so, but my father could.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Would he read aloud to the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Oh no, I never heard him. I never heard him. No. No. All that was left to the schoolmaster.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
When your father died could you tell me something about the funeral, who went to funerals at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Every - every - every soul that was on this island went to the funeral. And - while he was laying - while - the time he was lying in s
tate - at home - there wasn't a soul round here that what visited once, the two days he was lying in state, and visited the - where he was lying you see. Say their prayer and away again. From Barra of course that was all my - our own relatives practically
 over there. They were coming over. Now they had the funeral - left here to go to }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid16477639\charrsid5125818 B}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 orve, you know Borve on the west side, that - that's where he's buried down there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Your father is buried in Borve?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 In Borve, yes. Yes. In the old cemetery.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Would they have a Mass in the church at Borve?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Exactly. Exactly. Exactly.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 And everybody shares in carrying the body?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
That's right. That's right. Three on each side. Three - what do you call that - underneath the coffin? The bier, that's right, that's right. That's right, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 They changed round?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Change round, yes. So many yards to go you know. Because - of course they had a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid3034638\charrsid5125818 marshal}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818  there - shouting to - stand by - for the turn, see? And at that time - I don't know, I never
 seen no whisky on - in - in a graveyard in Barra, but they had tobacco. There was pounds and pounds and pounds of tobacco in our house. And you'd get about - about that length - about that length of tobacco - as you're coming up to the graveyard. A man o
n
 each side of the gate - tobacco in his - and he'd - special ones coming out. But that's done all away now. There's nothing like that today. Well at one time I heard - on the north of Barra that they used to have - whisky. And I don't know if that's - if 
- if that's going on just now. But that was on - only the Protestants. Yes. Yes. That was using the whisky. And I don't know now if it's used just now in Barra.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Were there many differences between the way the Catholics and Protestants behaved at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
No, no, no, no. No. No. I think - the finest man that I - that I ever spoke to when I - when I came to - to age was the Reverend - Revered Mr McDonald. Yes. Oh he was - he was - and charitable. Oh I've seen him - I've seen him coming }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid3034638\charrsid5125818 up teen}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818  tim
es to see my father in Kentangaval. Yes, yes, yes, yes. I could never forget his - his two sons, I - I used to meet them in Glasgow when I went out, they would never pass them. No, no. One of the finest gentlemen that I ever seen. And I heard one of our o
w
n clergymen, there's none of them alive today, I heard them saying one day in the street of Castlebay - the Reverend Mr Mc Donald was a few paces away at the head of street in Castlebay, and I heard the Reverend Mr Mc - the Father Mc Millan turns round an
d
 says to me, now, he says, Donald, he says, look at that man up there. That, he says, I'm not going to believe from nobody, he says, that that; man, he says, won't go to heaven. See, and that's the God's honest truth. Yes. And nor - neither he would do th
i
s - if it's - if it's - if it's the thing that there is a heaven and hell - definitely - Mr McDonald would never go to hell. I don't now what your religion is or not but - I'm not - I'm not - inquiring about it - and of course you know our religion alread
y
. You're on a Catholic island. See? - So there's no difference whatever that I ever seen. And there was no Protestants in Barra then, in my time, but there is today. Yes. Yes. Yes. And then that - that I know, they're my friends, I can assure you of that.
 There are two or three of them over there.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Are they just crofters and so on like the rest?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Yes, that's right. That's right. That's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did you have to wear mourning for a long time after your father's funeral?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Well - we did keep i
t for a while but - not for long, about six months I think. Of course it wasn't what you call the custom of the place. No, at the time, no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Your father's christian name was Donald too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 No. Duncan. Duncan Campbell.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Would your father ever take you out by yourself as a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Well he used to take me fishing. Yes. Yes. Yes, he used to take me fishing. When I was - even before I left school, before I was fourteen, he was taking me out to fish. Yes. When I would get my holidays. In the s
ummertime, I was away over night, with my father and father's boat, of course he had his own boat. Yes. And - and three uncles. I had four uncles.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 You saw a lot of your relations?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Would you go round to visit them in their homes?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Of course. Of course.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Just drop in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Yes. And - back out. That's all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Not very formal then, you wouldn't be taken round by your parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Oh no, no. No, no, no. No. Not necessarily.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Sometimes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Could you tell me abo
ut a Sunday at that time, what did you do on a typical Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Oh - now you're - now that's a difficult question - because - now Sunday after Mass, we had a Mass at nine o'clock in the morning, we had to go there. See? Nine o'clock, well the adults M
ass was at eleven. See? There's only the two Masses for the Sunday, and Benediction at six o'clock. Well you had to be in Benediction as well. Sunday morning, after you get your - your - porridge and milk, bit of breakfast - go to Mass, nine o'clock. Come
 
out - well - we would wander God knows where to. Perhaps there would be at the - the side of the hill that's facing you over there. We would be - bathing in the Sound. Then we'd go back about dinner time. And get a bite of dinner. Out again and you know t
h
e little bay that's in Kentangaval there, there's a little bay there, go over to the other side, out of sight. And to a creek that was - half way across to the side of the hill. Creek there. Strip off, away out. And there's an - there's a rock - in the mi
ddle of that for the bathers, you know, you wouldn't know it was a rock. But there's a rock there, covered with seaweed. We would - racing to who would be the first to - on the rock. Then Sunday finished by that - Benediction time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 So you didn't go to the Sunday school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Oh yes, three o'clock, I forgot about Sunday school. Yes, three o'clock. Oh yes. Sunday school. That's right. That's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Were there any other sort of church activities like a youth club or something?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 No, no, nothing like that. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Temperance club?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
No. No. They - there - the only one - club now that was there - my memory is away and I can't - there is - there was one club now with the church.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 But not your church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Yes. Me - our own church. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did you belong to it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Yes. Sacred - Sacred Heart of Jesus, that's right. And there was a temperance - there was a temperance - attached to it and all. Because I remember now - I remember now that - when - on Sunday afternoon before we went to Ba
ptism, that we had to take the - this pledge. For seven years.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 You took the pledge yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Yes. Yes. You had to repeat the - the words after the - the - the Reverend Father. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Were many people temperance then at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 O
h now, now, all our classes in school was temperance at that time, they took - yes, they had to take the - the temperance when they - when they were going to baptism, when they were going to baptism. Aye, aye. Well I was twenty-two years of age before I t
asted whisky. Yes. Twenty-two years of age. I was a full blown - man on - on the - the mainland there at that - that time. Never - never tasted it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did your father never drink then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Oh yes, he used to take a drink, oh yes. But not - not out of th
e ordinary, I never seen him out of the ordinary.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Would he go out to the bar in Castlebay ever?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Some - yes, especially on a Saturday night. But I never seen him under the influence of drink. No. Very - it was only - you'd see an odd one. But not - not many. Not compared what it is today. No, no, no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Could a man take his wife to the bar?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
No, there was no such a thing. No such a thing. On - at - at any time. Not even I never seen them - the - the women lip - lipping it, even at a wed
ding. No. They would never taste - never lipped. No. They might take a - sup of wine, but that was all. No more. Not whisky. No, no. Today - today they go - arm in arm. Man and wife. Oh - I don't like that. Well - I don't mind, I don't mind a bit, providi
ng - that you're financially to look after - to look after the family and everything when you can afford to go to a pub. I want the family to be provided for first.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Have you seen people in the past who would spend their money on drink and leave their family poor?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Today. Of course they are today. But not at - not at - no, no, no, no. No, no, no. No, no, no. No, no, I know them - today, on the mainland and in Barra. Yes. Oh no. I wasn't travelling with my eyes open at all. My eyes closed rather. They were wide open.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did your father take an interest in politics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
No, the only politics I ever seen was - when he went started land leaguing. Ravishing other peoples' land. That's the only politics that I ever seen. But - he was a great Liberal. 
Yes. Yes. And it was a Liberal government that was in at that time too. When they }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13055639\charrsid5125818 raided}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818  the land. I know that. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Do you remember him voting at an election then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Yes. Oh yes. Oh yes. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did he belong to the party?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 He did, he d
id as a Liberal. Oh he was a Liberal. Oh he was a Liberal all right. Oh no mistake about that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did your mother take any interest in politics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 No. No, none whatever. None whatever.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 What about yourself when you got a bit older, before 1918 di
d you take any interest?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Well - unfortunately, yes, I took - to - to be - to be a Tory. I'll tell you the honest truth. Yes. And I still - kept it going, Tory party, see? Although it was the Liberal party that - sanctioned this lot as regards the isl
and of Vatersay. I - was a Tory, voting a Tory. Right to this year. Yes, this last election. But - I'm dead against it now. Yes. Since this man went in - I don't like it. No. He - he's letting Scotland down. Scotland's a disgrace to Britain, as regards un
e
mployment, everything else. It's a dmaned shame. I don't care if you're an Englishman but - it's - I don't care for - see? See? Because - everything that's in the country, look at the - look at the - the C.S. - U.C.S. Upper Clyde - Shipbuilding, look at -
 
look at the mess that they made of that. It's a damned shame Why - if that firm wasn't paying, why in the name of heavens were no management attached to it that would - could see - after they got their twenty million, that they could see and manage to - t
o
 carry the thing through in a proper manner. That would pay itself. I don't - I don't agree with that at all. I do not. And another thing - the day that Scotland - that England, Great - U.K. goes into the Common Market, Scotland's her own - island. Yes. I
'll tell you that straight. And you'll live more - longer than me. And you'll see it. Oh no.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did your mother have any interests outside the home then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 What do you mean, interests outside the home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Like she might have gone to some womens club?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 No - no such a thing. No such a thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 She would never go out by herself then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
She would go what she called tailing - visiting, that was all. But as - as regards a club, there were no such a thing. None.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Your father would go out ca}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid16477639\charrsid5125818 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 ling too would he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Well - my father would - there would be - when they were getting ready their lines. The great lines. There would be a whole community down at the beach there at a certain place - regard - clearing up their lines ready for tomorrow
. Shooting in the - in the Minch. See? And all the community would be there 'til ten and eleven o'clock at night, so long as there's daylight. See? Then they would come home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 So his friends were really through the work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Yes. Yes. They were aroun
d. Yes - dozens of them. Yes. Six men to each boat. Five to some of them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did share the boat with five other men then, or was he the skipper?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Well my father, he was - he was - his own boat. My father had his own boat. And - he had - he had three
 brothers with him. Three - four, and he had other two - and what they call a coiler - cook and coiler. That's a boy you see, after leaving school. Cook and coiler. That's coiling the - the - the warp that the nets are attached to while their shot - fishi
ng for herring, see. And once they start hauling you see, this rope is coming in a part of its own and has got to be }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13055639\charrsid5125818 coiled}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818  - see, ready for shooting again. That was the coiler. And he had to do the cooking as well. See?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Would you say that your father 
shared his friends with your mother or did they both have their own friends? Different friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Different friends?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Would you say your mother had a group of friends and your father had a group of friends or were they both together, the same?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Oh no, they would - they were - amalgamated the whole community. The fishing community was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13055639\charrsid5125818 amalgamated}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818  all together. See? Men and women. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Were there any sort of sports at that time like football?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 No. No. No such a thing then. The only thi
ng I told - told you about was - that one I can't remember but I - the name of that game - that's the only game that was there. Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
As a child would you play with other boys or would you play in a mixed group of boys and girls?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Boys and girls -
 mostly. Mostly. Well of course when we were - playing this special game, there was no women then - no girls there at all. Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 With your own brothers and sisters as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Yes, the same. The same. The same. -The same.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 What sort of games did you play?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 I - I can't remember the - I know - I don't the names of them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did you play marbles?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Not - oh - pitch and toss. Pitch and toss. Now see that came to my mind.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 That's what you were talking about before?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 No, no. That's
 not a game - that's not. Come on - I can't - I can't remember the damn thing - I'm almost sure -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did your parents mind if you got dirty when you were playing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Oh - oh - we - if - I darena go home, me nor all my colleagues - if we had a spot on,
 or didn't of any kind, which we had pretty often. Plenty of mud. See? And - getting - oh hammered - hammered - and went to the burn out - outside, wash yourself. See? Cry - after getting the hammering. But we got wise to that. See? Instead of playing rou
nd - in our own fields with the mud we used to go down to Tangusdale, you know the west side, down on the sand. Be quite clean then. Oh we - we got wise to that. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did you ever have a bicycle?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 No, the only bicycle that I had was one I took ho
me - the first year I was away, the second year that I came home, I took a bike - bicycle over here. I took it with me. I had one. I used to go roaming through the east coast - or }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13055639\charrsid5125818 any port}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818  I would go in. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did you collect anything as a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 No. No. No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Were there any children that your parents didn't want you to play with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 No. No. I never heard such a thing. No, never did. Never did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 When did you first go to a cinema?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 A cinema? Oh my God. That was - well now what do you call a cinema?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 A bioscope for instance?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Well I was in a theatre. First theatre that I was in was the - the Kings Theatre in Edinburgh. And who was appearing there but Harry Lauder. And that wasn't yesterday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 When was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Harry Lauder - that would be -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Before the first war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Oh yes, before the first world war. I was - I was twice there, he was twice in Edinburgh. And I was there - both times. Marry Lauder, I can't remember the years. That's the first that I was eve
r in. If you can call it a cinema or a theatre or anything else.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did you get any pocket money?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Where, at home? No. Shells.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
At that time if you'd been asked to divide up society into different classes, what would you have called them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Society in different classes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Nowadays people talk about the working class or the middle classes, at that time how did you talk about that?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Ah - oh yes, there - there was - there was because - poorest one - the poorest ones children, the pierma
ster's children, the doctor's children, the minister's children, see - we - we wouldn't go near them at all, because - they were - they were - ahead of us, sort of way - in classes. They were more - more comfortable - comfortably off than what our class w
ere. We were looking on ourselves lower in the world than what they were, see, sort of style. Yes, that was going on then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 What class would you have called yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Oh well, we were second class. Yes. They were first class. But we were second. N
ot that I ever heard - any of them saying that they were first class. Only what we were thinking - our own community. See, we were saying - we were - we had the feeling that we weren't so well off as what they were. See? And therefore we were shying off.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did the teachers favour those children at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Not to my knowledge. No. No. Not to my knowledge. No, no, I won't say that. They were classes the same as us. With the teachers.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did you ever hear the phrase a real gentleman or a real lady o
f somebody at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 No. No. No, not when I was at school. Oh no. Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Were you brought up to feel that you could move from one class to another or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Well - no, we couldn't - we couldn't go among them. Unless we were asked to. See? By the upper class. See? Then we would go. Not on our own. Never approach them, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Nowadays it's not so difficult for somebody to move during their own lifetime from being say working class to being middle class, when you were a child did you feel that you were bound to remain in the same sort of life?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 That I had in school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did you feel that there was an opportunity to move up in the world?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Ah - oh yes, oh yes. I was looking forward - but it was sailing. To get away to sea. That was
 my ambition, always. See? Which - was my downfall. If I - that's telling you the honest truth, if I had kept in Singers - you see I would be - I would have been well up. Yes. Earning a good salary. Years and years and years ago, yes. Instead of keeping o
n going to sea.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
In England there is often a distinction made between families which are rough and families which are respectable, was there that kind of distinction in Castlebay?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 No. For the simple reason there was no - there was no - what you w
ould call - a bad character in our school. No, not - not - not that I - I could - I can't say there was, there was no - nothing like that. No, no. But - in - years before - a year or two before I left school - there is - there was a family - whatever happ
e
ned - now I can't remember now what was the trouble - but the father and mother - they must have got - whether they got on the booze or not I don't know, and children were neglected. See they weren't looked after the way - nor fed the way they should be. 
Well, the rest of the community of the - of our - they were in our class - the rest of our community in the class - they looked down them. They looked down on them, see. 'Cos they were down and out. Sort of style. That's the way we - we've held, see?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Would they show their feelings in any other way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 No. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
In England we have something called rough music when there's somebody disapproved of, they go and bang pans }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13055639\charrsid5125818 outside}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818  their house.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Oh no. No, no, no, there was nothing like that. No, no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did you ever see Lady Gordon Cathcart?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did I ever see her? Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 She came to the island did she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 She was once - in - in the - in Barra during her reign. I seen her once.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 What did the people feel about her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Oh they 
had no use - no use for that - proprietor. She was a bitch. She done a lot of a - of emigrating. Yes, and - oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 You mean she cleared people off the land?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Yes. Sent them away to - to Canada.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did she not help at all then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 No, no, no
, no. She - she wanted the whole place to be evacuated altogether. Lady Gordon Cathcart. And General Gordon himself. He was - he was just as bad. That - that's after the McNeils of Barra left here you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Where did they live then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Who?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Lady Gordon.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Oh - in the hotel of course.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Where did she live on the mainland?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Oh - I - no. I can't remember now the name, the proper name.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Is it near Fort William?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Near Port - near Inverness. Yes. Near Inverness.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did any of these people that went to Canada come back to Vatersay?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Well at - them that went voluntary in 1923 - they came back, some of them, for a visit. But the most of them - at the present are in Vancouver. See they didn't settle on the land at all. No. The
re was only two or three - that settled on the land, and they're well off now. Yes, yes. 'Cos their families, they've been over - one of the - the family of one of the - that went over there in 1923 was here last - last - last month. Yes, he and the wife.
 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
What did you think of the teachers at the school, did you admire the teachers at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
I thought a lot of the teachers. By gosh yes. They were ladies. And gentlemen too. Although they were my own countrymen. Yes. Aye. I appreciated them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did they emphasise manners and tidiness?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Oh yes, manners and everything and - civility, oh yes, yes. That's - providing that we would - listen to them. Yes. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did you go on and do any evening classes later?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 No, the only evening cla
sses that I ever seen in school was cookery classes. Cookery class, that's for - for - for girls. Yes. Yes, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 They must have taught you well for you to have that job later as a clerk?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 That's right. That's right. That's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Do you have any regrets about your education?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 No no. No, no, no. No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
While you were at school did you ever have a part time job which earned you some money?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Some money?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did you ever earn any money?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 No, no, no, there was no su
ch a thing as earning money. The only money that we could earn when we were in school was when - one of these German boats or Dutch boats came to Castlebay with a - a load of empty barrels for curing. Well when that boat would come along one of this - one
 of the piers - station piers - would get sixpence for - for working there 'til - 'til she was unloaded. You had sixpence at the end of the - trip. That's the only money that we would get. See?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 You couldn't earn any money running errands?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 No. No, no, no. No, no such a thing then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
After school what was the first job you got before you left the island? You left school at fourteen did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 I left - no, I did not - oh yes, left school at fourteen, yes that's right.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 So you had two years here before you left?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 What work did you do in those two years?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 The fishing. At the fishing. Yes. On my father's boat.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Were you the boy at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 That's right, yes, that's right, I was the cook and coiler as I told you.
 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 That's how you learned the cooking then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Oh I learn - learned my cooking when I went to the mainland. Dash - dash little I knew about cooking before I went. Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Can you tell me when you started work at sixteen what sort of pay did you get?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Thirty shillings a month. As a messroom steward. Thirty shillings a month. Of course I was getting a uniform, and - two white jackets and two white aprons. Two white pants.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did you feel that was a fair wage at the time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Well at - 
at the time - I was quite happy with it. But - in a year's time I wasn't
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 But you did better?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Oh I did better, yes, yes. I went up to three pound ten. The second year. Well - the third year - the beginning of the fourth year I went up on the - o
n five pound five. That's as chief steward there. Yes. We would - we were - the fishery board - the Fishery and Agriculture, they are poorly paid. The same as the lighter service. They were poorly paid compared to the other - other merchant men.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 You were much better paid when you were a clerk then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Of course. Of course, of course.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Were the officers you worked for pleasant to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Oh yes, oh yes. All - gentlemen. I only met one - and he was an Edinburgh man, and him and I were at loggerheads. Oh - in fact I got him shifted. He was - he was a - second engineer. I got him shifted out of it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 How did you manage to do that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Yes, I - well I - first of all I approached the superintendant - superintendent, he was Captain McEwan, he us
ed to come - come aboard. And I was getting no - he was nagging, nagging, it didn't matter a damn about this and about that and - food especially. See? And I approached Captain McEwan about it. I never said anything 'til - 'til he spoke to Captain McEwan 
h
imself. I never mentioned anything to Captain McEwan. And - he approached Captain McEwan about it and Captain McEwan, naturally enough, approached me. 'Course I was running the ship - as regards - food. See, and I told him all about it. Oh well, he says, 
if that's the case - I believe you, he said, but I don't Mr Teazles - was his name. I believe you, he says, but I don't believe him. Well, says I, the sooner I get back - the sooner he's out of here, says I, the better. And }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13055639\charrsid5125818 we'll}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818  have a lovely community - s
ays I. The day I see him going over that gangway I'll - I - I'll drink your health. I told Captain McEwan. All right, he says, I'll see to it. Well in two months time he was - shifted. And the rest of the officers - the rest of the officers was glad. To -
 to - to see him - going. Oh yes, by God yes. Yes. Oh that's the only man that I - had anything to do - to do with.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Would you have an interesting time ashore when you came into a port, how would you spend the evenings in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Well - the - 
second engineer and I, an Edinburgh man, we were like two brothers. Go ashore and - we'd have - couple of drink and then would - go to a theatre. That's the way I'm telling you about Harry Lauder, when I've seen him there. First it was him that took me th
e
re. I knew nothing at all about - Harry Lauder or anything else, or theatres, or cinema, and it was Mr Finlay - that - that - the - the second engineer, him and I was always - I don't know how we were attached to one another in any case, the first day tha
t I'm aboard that ship he was there, he - I - I took to him and he took to me someway or another. That's a fact. I never was ashore with any of the - other officers. Not one night. Mr Finlay and I was away together. Yes. Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did you carry on going to church after you'd left home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Oh yes, yes, oh every time I was in port. Every time I was in port I was in church.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Did your mother and father - did your mother manage to get to church, because so often the mother has to stay behind to do cooking or something?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Well - the - the mother - the mother - which happened pretty often - mother would go to church with the children at nine o'clock, see. She - she done that pretty often with me and the rest of the family. See, therefore - father would b
e - at eleven o'clock. See? And - quite a lot of the community around was the same. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
In the church did the men and women sit separately or did you sit as families together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Well - the family would be together. But was very - very seldom you'
d see a man and wife sitting together in church. Very seldom. See. Because - when they were going to - to church - there would be gangs - going to church, see. And the women would - flock together as they were walking to church, they would gradually come 
t
ogether in one - in one - row and - they kept like that going to church and the men was - the same. See. 'Course you know what women are as regards their tongue. It's yab, yab, yab, yab all the time, and - they would - get together, unknown to themselves 
someway or another. See. Therefore - when they would get up to the church naturally enough they were walking in one after the other, and sitting beside one another. See?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did you ever belong to a trade union?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Trade union, well, do you call - Merchant Seamans union - a trade union.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 There's the National Union of Seamen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Seamen, well that - I was belonging to that. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Just as a member or were you active in it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Oh no. No, no. No, no. Just as a member. Just as a member. Paying - 
paying my contributions.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Were you obliged to join?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 No, no, I joined - I wanted, yes, yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Did you feel at that time that there was a big difference between workers who'd served an apprenticeship and those who hadn't? Skilled men and the rest, was there a big division among workmen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
No, not to my knowledge. No, not - not - not the seafaring class. No, no, no. No. No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Did you feel there was of a division of interest then between the worker and the employer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Well I ca
n't say anything at all about that. No. No. No, I'm not going to say - I know nothing at all about that. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 I was wondering what you felt yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Oh well, what I felt myself, sometimes there were - there was, I would feel that way. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
You obviously felt very strongly against Lady Cathcart, did you feel equally strongly about the men that owned the ships or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 The man that owned the ship?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 The ship owners, the people who employed the seamen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 That they were as bad as Lad
y Gordon Cathcart? Not at all. No, no, no. The - the seaman - the seamen had nothing - nor the ship owners - had nothing at all to do with that. She was the whole culprit. See? Because they were only - running their ships, see. And she was a - she was - e
m
ploying quite a lot of - of people. The firm was - the seamen. The ship owners rather. But - Lady Gordon Cathcart was different. She was evicting the - the - the - the people she had on - on her - on her land. To make room for sheep - and goats, and red d
eer perhaps. For all you know. Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Thinking back to those years how would teenage boys and girls meet each other, we there dances or things like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Oh no - well in my teenage time, at night time - in my - in my time then in school - they wo
uld - the winter round here, it would be cold, but there were no - hardly any wind. And on a full moon it was lovely to be outside, not a breath of wind. And - naturally enough - when we would get together, and the music that we had - the music, was a com
b - and a bit of paper with it. And - same as a mouth organ. Yes. Dances to beat the band on the road. Yes. Dozens and dozens. Each township was the same. Each township was the same. Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Would they walk up and down at first, the boys together and the
 girls together? And then start mixing, do you know what I mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
No, well the girls - the boys were all out in any case, it doesn't - doesn't - didn't matter, they'd be out. But the girls would come out - later out. They weren't coming out when we we
re going out. No, no. They had some work to do before they'd get out. And once they would get out they would make to - to the dance where we're going to dance. See? Dancing'd start then. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 So it was all together in a group?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Oh yes. Some while
 - the only dance that we knew at the time Scots reel, see, that's the only one. See?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Even at that age would you still be expected to be in by a certain time?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Oh by ten o'clock. Oh Lord yes. Oh by ten o'clock or else you'll hear it, and your - y
our ears would get it and all. Aye. Oh yes. If the girls weren't at - at home before ten o'clock, the father or the mother was out. And if they're nearby - shout her name, there you are, and away she goes. Same thing applied to the boys. If it came half p
ast ten - there was ructions. Father was going out with a stick in his hand. Drove you home. Then everybody would scatter then once they would see - one father come, the rest would scatter.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 As a boy was a boy allowed to take a girl home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 No, not at that age. No, no, no, no such a thing. No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 How old would you have to be before you were allowed to do that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Well I'm not - I'm not talking about - about - anybody else but myself. I was - I was sixteen and a half when I went - I was eight
een years of age - I was two years away from - from here before I ever walked with a girl. Yes. Before I ever walked with a girl. And it wasn't Francis that I walked with, the first girl - and it was - she was a very far relation of my own that happened t
o
 - to be there at the time. Yes. And I knew - I heard that she was there, and I visited. And we came out at night. It was all. That's the first. I was eighteen years of age then. When I was twenty-two before, I told you before, before I took nip of - a gl
ass of whisky or drop of whisky. There you are.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Can you tell me, you described that first day when you arrived in Edinburgh at the station, what did you think about the city when you saw it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Oh - I didn't see - I wasn't seeing the city at all 'ti
l I came - 'til I went to the cab. You couldn't see the city from - inside - railway station.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
But when you got in the cab, what did you think of it when you got in the cab then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 God knows, I don't know what I - I thought that I - the - the thin
g that - that was bothering me was to try and get a hold of this man that I knew - myself. Nothing on my mind but that. And - only half a crown in my pocket. See? Would that be enough for the cabby when - when I would get down. That's the only thing that 
w
as bothering me. As regards - that - that I took - you know, that - I took strange to the - to the city itself. No, it didn't bother me. No. Just the same when I was walking - away over in Barra there. Well that's the way I took. Nothing strange to me, so
meway or another.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 You didn't see anything which would strike you as surprising?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 No. No. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 But it was a very different kind of place wasn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Oh }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13055639\charrsid5125818 heavens}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 , you're telling me. Still - I got over it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Were you homesick for Barra at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
I was homesick aboard - not - not when I was ashore. When I went aboard. Do you know that the first week I would be crying. Do you know that. And a fortnight in fact. Yes. When I was alone. See. Oh nobody else seen me crying. Oh no. Bu
t when I would be alone - start crying. Yes. But that weared off, bit by bit.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
When you were in Glasgow working as a clerk were there several people you were working with, a group in an office?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Yes. Was eight of us. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Can you describe the office to me, what was it like?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Oh well, the office was quite a different - quite a different atmosphere altogether compared from - my - my atmosphere at sea, and among my own - own - officers and - and men of the ship. It was quite different. Mee. 
Because - at sea - a seafaring man, he's got a - he's got an open mind. Know that? When a - when a crowd of seamen gets together - in an atmosphere of - cordiality, see? The - they - they seem to - take to one another, and whatever is their troubles - the
y
 - they - let it out. But not the case - with me when I went to Singers' office. No. They were - they were looking at me as a stranger. See, someway or another that - they weren't - they didn't - they didn't want to - sort - that's the way I felt, that th
ey didn't want to have any - confirmation with me at all. See?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 You were more at home with the landlady then?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
Oh Lord yes, I was more at home, yes. But they - they had - they had - they had clerk there, Mr Govern, oh he was - he was a - he was a 
gentleman. He would ask me - sometimes - how - how are you getting on now with the crowd. Well I'd tell him straight, I would tell him, well sir, they - they don't want to - seeming they don't want to have me here at all. That's the way that I felt. See? 
That I shouldn't be among them at all. They were a clique all together, all - for quite a long time you see. And me going as a stranger among them I think - that's the way that I felt. That I was in - in their way sort of way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Did you make any friends in Glasgow?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Oh yes, afterwards. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Would they be Barra men?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 
All sorts. All sorts. Even in the north of Scotland. Yes. Thurser. Thurso and - Dornach. Caithness. Oh - Inverness. No nationality in the world but what I was - acquaint with in Glasgow. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Do you wish you'd stayed in Glasgow?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Oh no, no, no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Why did you not want to stay there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 I did not want to get married in Glasgow at all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8731373 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 Because of the noise and all that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8202071 DC  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9518286\charrsid5125818 No. No, it wasn't that at all
. I - I always - always put it in my - in front of my mind - that my days, once I would get married, was going to be in this island or over in Barra. I would never live in a city. That was my ambition before I ever got married. Years before I ever got mar
r
ied. See? That this was going to be my - headquarters. See? Either in Barra or in Vatersay. See? But - now - since I brought up my family here - they're away. They're married now in Glasgow. Two of them. One of them in Oban. Now - today, six years ago, th
e wife and I - or seven years ago - when when I - when the - the - the youngest one got married. The first winter after she got married we got to go out.
\par }}