{\rtf1\adeflang1025\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\adeff0\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang2057\deflangfe2057{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}{\f38\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f39\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f41\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f42\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f43\fbidi \froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}
{\f44\fbidi \froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f45\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f46\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f48\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}
{\f49\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f51\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f52\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f53\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f54\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}
{\f55\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f56\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden 
Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs20 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}}
{\*\latentstyles\lsdstimax156\lsdlockeddef0}{\*\revtbl {Unknown;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid1866372\rsid2039055\rsid2644963\rsid2967080\rsid5838476\rsid6835572\rsid7146469\rsid7869821\rsid8941568\rsid12330192\rsid13595527\rsid16673035}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 11.0.0000;}{\info
{\title Information about interviewee}{\author SEENU}{\operator lhorto}{\creatim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min10}{\revtim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min10}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords45549}{\nofchars259630}{\nofcharsws304570}
{\vern24613}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 http://schemas.microsoft.com/office/word/2003/wordml}}\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1800\margr1800\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0\ltrsect 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\donotembedsysfont0\donotembedlingdata0\grfdocevents0\validatexml1\showplaceholdtext0\ignoremixedcontent0\saveinvalidxml0\showxmlerrors1\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace180
\dgvspace180\dghorigin1800\dgvorigin1440\dghshow1\dgvshow1\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale90\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\splytwnine\ftnlytwnine\htmautsp\nolnhtadjtbl\useltbaln\alntblind\lytcalctblwd\lyttblrtgr\lnbrkrule\nojkernpunct\rsidroot1866372 \fet0
{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}\ilfomacatclnup0\ltrpar \sectd \ltrsect\linex0\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ltrpar
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid16673035 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\ul\insrsid16673035\charrsid16072257 Information about interviewee}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid16673035 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid16673035\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tx2057\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid16673035 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16673035\charrsid16072257 Date of birth}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16673035 
   \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16673035\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16673035  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6835572 1894}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16673035\charrsid16072257 

\par Gender}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16673035           \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16673035\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16673035  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6835572 M}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16673035 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16673035\charrsid16072257 Marital status}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16673035 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16673035\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid16673035  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid13595527 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16673035\charrsid16544153 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16673035\charrsid16072257 Occupation}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16673035 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16673035\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16673035  
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6835572 Housework}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16673035\charrsid16072257 
\par Geographic region}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16673035 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16673035\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16673035  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6835572 
Annan, Dumfries}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16673035\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\qj \fi-490\li518\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin518\itap0\pararsid16673035 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Can you tell me when you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 In - June 14th 1894.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Whereabouts?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 In - Kirkblane, Caerlaverock.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 How many years did you live in that house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh, well, we came from there - now I was nine months old, not that I can remember anything, but we came - from there to Templand, where - my mother's people lived at that time
. Houses were - easily bought in these days, and - they got a house and father had worked in a farm previous to this, but - Corncockle quarry was in full production at that time, and - my father got a job right away in the quarry, looking after a steam pu
m
p, which was in the bottom - of the quarry, and it was there for the purpose of keeping the rocks clear for the men coming in to work every morning. It was shift work. He had two weeks - on day shift, two weeks on night work and a neighbouring man named T
hompson relieved him. So that in the evenings as a family for two - weeks we had no father at night. And - he was there for the long period of forty years, he never worked anywhere else.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Where was he working when he was at Caerlaverock?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What was he -?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What sort of job did he do there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Well, he worked a pair of horse at a farm. Ploughman I suppose he would be, but - mother was cook at Kirkblane, Caerlaverock and of course they met at dances and - he used to have wee - does as they talked
 about at different farms and they would be meeting each other, and - they got married. And - as I told you came to live at }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1866372\charrsid2967080 Te}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
mpland. Now, we had - as a child I remember I used to - call my mother at home mammy up the raw, and grandma - was mammy down the 
raw. This raw was a row of houses, and I can remember there was about seven or eight steps - up to grandma's house and I can remember crawling up these steps as a child, there was nothing to hinder us to get about because - motors and things werenae much 
i
n vogue in these days. So that I had two homes really because as often as not I was down at her house, as in my own home. And then - my sister was born about two years after me, and my brother about three years after that, and another brother maybe three 
years and then there was a long pause, I was about - nearly leaving school when my youngest sister was born. Five of us all together.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Have you any idea how old your mother and father would be when you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 How what? Oh they would be quite 
young. Quite young, mother was married I think at twenty-one. So my father was just about two years older, they were quite young, they were just a young family.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What about your mother, did she do any work after she was married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh she did plenty
 of work. She - used to go I remember - to the farm, Corncockle, this was not far off the quarry, always at Christmas and New Year time, and used to help them to pluck turkeys and geese all by hand. I can remember that. And - she helped grandma a lot you 
know, because - grandma had a big family, she'd a family of - of eight. Three girls, my mother was the eldest of the family, then there was Uncle Toby, and - there was five boys and then - other two girls.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Probably there wouldn't be very much difference between your grandmother's youngest and you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
When I went to school - which I did when I was four, my aunt - was still at that school, and that's why I went to school - to get broken in as they called it before she left. She helped me to school - at
 four. Templand school. I was never anywhere else, but - at - and it was a three teacher - school. A small room was where the infants were taught, and the bigger room - was - like there was two parts of the room, there was a young - man, Ray, Mr Ray, just
 a young fellow he was, taught the ones that come in from the wee - room, and Mr Patterson had the bigger one.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 He would be the headmaster?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 He - when I went first there was a Mr Ray there the schoolmaster but he was just leaving so that I never - 
then - no one else but Mr Patterson, a teacher like in the big room, and - we always used to think he was terribly hard man. One day at the club I was - talking to them on my young days and - and she'd been at - Templand school and of course - Were you at
 
Templand school with you man? You know, and folks looked. And I said, why, what was wrong? This was Mrs Vincent. Oh she was a hard taskmaster, I said, he was, but I've many time blessed him since, because - of the he kept - had to give you good grounding 
i
n every subject, and that's why - I can - write and - do things I do today. And - in holiday time, there was another girl and I used to get - there was little carts in these days, just like a pack of playing cards with - fifty-two in a pack and he used to
 have them and give her one half and me the other and we did this all over this because we were trying to better it you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 These cards with work on them that you had to do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 With work, sums, these terrible - problems, I used to one a day, all my
 holiday time. And - my friends this very pal that used to sit together, she used to do the other half. Then at - at the end of the holidays she used to go to Lockerbie for a test, see, to Lockerbie academy, and in the finish when we were really trying fo
r a bursary, she beat me by five marks, and went on as a teacher, she was through Glasgow - university, but I wasn't a bit sorry because - it seemed to take a lot out of you, you know, working so hard all the holidays. And -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Was there only one person chosen for the bursary?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Well, at these days to begin with yes, there was the two of us chosen, and we'd no way of getting - she was a farmer's daughter - Lockerbie - you know, buses and - transport wasn't so great then as what it's now, but the fathe
r - the farmer came in his gig and ran us in to Lockerbie and of course there was children from other parishes there at the same - and just came in and laid the papers down and gave you so long to do. So - it was exciting and you had a day out, it was ver
y nice, and got - taken home I think at night.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You say your mother plucked turkeys and so at Christmas, did she do any other work at the farm throughout the year?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh no, oh no, it's just - anybody - mother was a person like this - like what my gr
andmother was, if anyone was ill in the village and needed help they used to send for her. Any babies being born, go for Mrs Hardy, or go for Mrs Mitchell, I remember grandma always with her clean white apron on, she used to go and see to the mothers and 
b
abies, 'til such time as their own - people could come, there was no national health and things in these days. And - that's what she used to do, she used to help anyone that needed help, she'd no - steady work to go to, she'd plenty to do at home, because
 
- first of all, when this quarry started up, the men came from - England, Scotland, Ireland and Wales, there was every - nationality working in that quarry, and everybody in the village had one or more men billeted on them, I mean they came to us. We had 
t
wo at one time, we had a Welshman - and - an Irishmen. Oh they were at loggerheads, and unfortunately they had to occupy the same room, and mother used to sometimes be - you know, hard put to it to put up with the, especial when my father was at nights yo
u
 know, if they started, both of them. And - then we had a highland man, I remember - he was a very religious man, a man with a beard and he had the kilt - kilt in those days for church, and on the Sunday nights he used to say - sing me the Old Hundred. Th
a
t was his favourite - psalm. And - we used to sing to him and sing hymns, and - then he went away - in the holiday time to Edinburgh. And in those days there was no Post Office in the village, but there was a place they called the old Post Office House I 
d
on't know how it got that name, it must have had something to do - and - a postman used to walk six miles from Lockerbie - with our letters, come round the village, and he got there about eleven o'clock in the morning, he stayed there 'til two in this old
 
house, it was a decent enough house and - someone - Mrs Arbon it was, put a fire on for him, and had it nice for him and he brought something with him to eat and he could make a cup of tea. Then you had to have your letters - he didn't take parcels but yo
u
 had to have your letters down - by two o'clock, and he walked back to Lockerbie, six miles. Then that was changed. Mill House Bridge got a Post Office, that was a village about two miles off from us, and the postman had a bicycle, so - he used to come on
 
his bicycle and parcels and everything, on the carrier, big carrier he had, so - Bryce they called the first postman, I remember his name, and he was a nice old man, we used to go down as children you know if there was letters, and talk to him and he'd ta
l
k to us and then he would say, go on now, I'm going to be busy, he would be stamping - the letters. So - then we had a Sunday school. We had a Sunday school at Templand, it was held in the school, and the man who ran the Sunday school was a church Elder, 
a
 roadman, he was a roadman by trade, and he used to come on Sundays and we had - a Mr Littler come, a son, and - Miss Ewart, a dressmaker in Templand, and these were our teachers. And first of all we got a little text to learn, 'cos it was very small I us
ed to learn that as soon as I went home. That was one thing I always did, it was just to - get it - over and done with, used to learn it. And then when we got bigger we got verses from the scriptures, in the finish we got whole chapters.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you go to Sunday school and then go to church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Not so much to church because we were too far off the church, not until we were really bigger, into the bigger classes. We didn't go to church at all until we were big enough to walk for there was no other way to
 go. The church was three miles, but my father and mother - grandma and grandpa were regular attenders. In fact - the - on a Sunday morning the road was black with people, walking down to church in their Sunday best, there was three churches in all then. 
T
here was the parish church to which - we still belong, I joined it and I've been - a member of it all my life. Mr Neil Ray was the minister, in these far off days. Then at the parish church which - now - is going to be made into a house - it was Mr Lane, 
the Reverend Andrew Lane. And the Victoria UF church was - Mr Fleming. These were the three churches and they were all well attended. And - the parish church used to have c}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1866372\charrsid2967080 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 ntatas, that was - evenings for the children you know, with cups of tea, and - some 
of my school friends were - members, and they used to invite us to go with them and we used to be coming home - about ten or half past ten, walking up the road, and mother'll be down the road - waiting in case - yes, anything had happened to us but - noth
ing happened in these days, everything was - you know, quiet and peaceful. Not like it is nowadays.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 How old would you be when you went to church then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Well - when we got into the bigger classes, about ten. About ten we started going to church. Yo
u see - on the Saturdays when our parents were going to church - most of the mothers made soup, broth probably, that's what we had anyway, and it was only to heat up on a Sunday. Well - it was left at the side on the hob, and it was - we'd to see that the
 
fire wasane too big you know and - stir it now and again, I was getting older then of course, and put on the potatoes, the meat - was put into the broth just to heat through for maybe half an hour before it was time for them coming home, and then - after 
t
hat, after we'd had our dinner - we were sent for the walk. Werena allowed to play on Sundays these days, we could read - could read our story books or Bible stories but not allowed to play. And mother used to say - now, away for a walk up the road and re
m
ember what day it is. This was her rebuke now - you see. Yes. Aye. That's right. Then in - in an evening in the house then we used to - sing hymns. When father was at home he used to listen to us, and - on the other evenings - he used to play his fiddle, 
h
e was a great fiddler my father, a lovely fiddler, and he had friends, a gamekeeper not far off in Jardine Hall Lodge, and there was two of them there that used to have command concerts. But when we where our own in the house we used to - we just wooden c
h
airs in the kitchen those days, you know, my father had a nice chair and mother, the rest was wooden, and you used to stand up there and sing or recite, we did that, mother was a nice singer, and she used to sing to us, and tell us stories, you know, or r
ead stories to us, that was what we did in the evening when my father was out.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Not just the Sunday nights, this would be any night?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 This was any night, we had that, not the summertime of course, we were allowed to play but these are the winter n
ights I'm talking about. And - grandpa was a great one for stories, my grandfather, and he used to tell us stories, used to get us in the - even at the summertime - he used to get us out on to a seat that my father made at the door, by this time - our hou
s
es were close together, closer together. Grandpa used to come up and he would sit there and he had us children, not only us - but his own grandchildren but other children about listening to the tales he used to tell - about old Dumfries, and one of the ta
l
es he told us I remember was - I used to say to him, what was Dumfries like grandpa, in the old days? Oh, he said, it wasna the nice clean place it is now. He says, you know, when you used to go in to the markets, there were great market - he said, I said
, was there lavatories and that? And he said, no, there was no lavatories. And I said, how did you do? Well, he says, there was a man used to go round the stree}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1866372\charrsid2967080 t with a pail, and a black cloa}
{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 k round him, and if you needed to do something on the street - he'd put this }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1866372\charrsid2967080 cloa}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 k round you, black }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1866372\charrsid2967080 cloak}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
 round you, and stood there. Now - this is true. That's true. That's many a long year ago you see. Grandpa was eighty-four when he died and grandma was sixty-nine. My mother was eighty-four and my father eighty-eight.
 So they're long lived. And another thing he told us, he went to what would be probably - I don't know if it was the last but it was very near the last hanging in }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1866372\charrsid2967080 D}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 umfries. When they were hanged in public. And that was Mary Timmony. I don't know if you'd e
ver heard of her. Yes. And mother told me - as - when I come in to mother, I said, fancy grandpa going to a hanging. She says, yes, he did, was he telling you that? I said, yes, he was. Well she said, I'll tell - I was older you see, I'll you the story of
 
that. She said, this Mary Timmony - had a baby. And her husband was supposed to be going - with an - Ann Hannay. And whether that was true or not mother said she didn't know, but this Mary Timmony was jealous of her husband, you see. And one day she took 
her baby, and - the beetle that she - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1866372\charrsid2967080 posed}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080  the clothes with -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 For the washing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
The washing, hid it in her shawl, and when she came to this laundry where this - woman was, she hit her over the head with the beetle and killed her, and went away ho
me as if nothing had happened. And of course when they found her - she was - somebody had seen it, not doing it but going towards the laundry. She would have got free owing to her child being seen, but she blamed it on her mother. She blamed the - hitting
,
 and it wasna her mother at all, and she was hanged. And she was so light that they had to put weights to her feet, to - you know, for the - that's right, that's quite true, mother told me, oh, she said, did he tell you that, he used to tell me things tha
t he maybe wouldna tell - the smaller ones. I was the oldest grandchild and called me after his wife you see so - so -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 So he was a good story teller?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh he was, and so was grandma. Grandma - I used to go down each day on my way to school. We had
 - going from the house that we first lived in - to Corncockle cottage, these were houses - in connection with the quarry, and they were built of the red sandstone that Locharbriggs that my father used to maintain, there's a seam through from Corncockle t
o
 Locharbriggs, it's the same stone. And - we lived in one of these houses, well it was a wee bit further off from grandma but not much, and I used to go down every morning - on my way to school, this was just before I left school, to see if she wanted any
 messages, because all her family had left her then you see, and - I used to go down to see if she wanted messages, probably she }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1866372\charrsid2967080 wanted corn or meal for the hen}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 s, she kept hens. And - when I went in - there was a wee - window that you could look into - befo
re you came to the back door and she was always sitting reading the paper. She was very religious, and - and she would tell me if she wanted anything and I went up - to the shop and got it you see. And - in their houses - round the village at that time, e
verybody had texts hanging on the wall, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 A framed on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Yes. Framed text, I can remember grandma's text. It was - casting all your care upon Him, for he cared for you. And she was - good in her daily - good living woman. And - then -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 As you say it would be just like having another mother there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
It was certainly, yes, yes. And then - the uncles used to come home, now I had three uncles policemen. Two - were in Paisley. One was in Newcastle. They started at Lochleven being young po
licemen there then they shift. And then I had my mother's - sister next to her, Aunt Ann, she}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1866372\charrsid2967080  married a policeman - an Aberdee}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
nian, and they went to live in Newcastle too. And the earliest of my memories is - I wasn't at school, but I could remember this a
s if it was yesterday. Uncle Tom came through - for holidays, through from Newcastle to Templand. And he was in my mother's, and he says, come on now, take your walk up the road. And he put me on his shoulder, I wouldn't be very big, and we walked up the 
r
oad. Oh they were big fellows, one of them was six feet four. Tallest man in the force he was in - Newcastle. So - in the distance I saw something coming towards me, and I wondered - this is what brings it to my memory, it was a soldier, a red coat with a
 
red coat and clear buttons, and tartan trousers, and I can remember saying, what's this? And he told me it was a soldier. A soldier who must have been - just coming home from the Boer War, a native must have been of Templand. Isn't that funny, now that's 
m
y earliest recollection, you know, it - any - anything that stands out in my memory. I could remember the first day I went to school - I was just four as I told you, and I can remember lying on this - wooden chair, you know, looking at my feet, and I woul
d
nae smile - I was waiting on man coming to take me. And - mother told me before I went that I was to do everything the teacher told me, just as you had to do at home. So - there was a - nice big fire in the grate, and a big - thing to keep us, the childre
n
 off it, you see. Yes, a big fire guard, and - the teacher's name was Miss Boyle, and I used to say since I'm grown up, Boyle by name and Boyle by nature, because she was very short tempered. The first day she'd to check me for talking, I just forgot wher
e
 I was, and started to talk to the girl beside me. The next day - I forgot again, so I never knew anything 'til I was rapped sharply over the knuckles with that cane, and brought the tears to my eyes, she never said anything, and - I could have cried you 
k
now, but I thought, well - I was told to do what the teacher told me so I said nothing. But - at playtime she said to my aunt she was sorry - she had - come down rather sharper than what she meant, she'd stinged my finger, so when I went home I just said 
t
o my mother, teacher put nice cream on my finger but my aunt had to tell my mother what had happened. What I - what I had said was - we were looking at picture books, and I recognized the picture, it was the story of Snow White and Rose Red and - I just s
a
id, oh there's Snow White and Rose Red, of course all the children looked. Naturally, and I got - well - but was all I said anyway. And - he says to me, often now, you've talked ever since. Aye. Oh dear. Then - when the quarry didn't get so busier, mother
 took a teacher to live with us and we had Miss Anderson, from - good few years, she was the infant teacher then when I was older.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 This was when there wasn't so many men working about the quarry?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Aye. And - Miss Anderson married the manager of the Cooper's, I remember that. Manager of the Cooper's in Dumfries, she was a nice soul.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Was she a local girl?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 No, she's not living now, no, Mrs Rose was her name, I can even remember that, I've a good memory for long ago things. And - I remember
 mother - when my sister next to me went to school - she was very }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1866372\charrsid2967080 h}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
omesick and she cried and cried, and this Monday mother washing, and she looked out this wee window in the - we were living in the house grandma used to live in - in, and she saw Miss Ander
son bringing - my sister down in the play hours, she couldn't do anything with her, being homesick. And she says, I don't think you try very much, she said, you should have given her - you know - let her stop and made her do. So Miss Anderson was vexed an
d
 I think mother was - apologized, she was vexed too, but she'd a lot to do you know, she'd big washings, because these quarry clothes were dirty clothes, and there was nothing - no fine - things to take dirt out like we have now. It was soap and water, ye
s
. That's right. Then we had - we had hens, we had ducks, and we had two pigs, so that we never - were always kept one for ourselves because - in this house there was a big - what had been a milk house with big stone slabs, and that was a grand place for c
uring meat in you see, so mother had plenty to do.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Your mother cured the bacon herself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Aye, she did it herself, grandma and her - they knew all about how to do it, and they were always baking you see, we'd always eggs, we didn't have so many du
ck eggs, because there was a big - what had been a quarry once not far off and it was about sixty feet deep and the ducks used to get onto that and swim about and they would lay their eggs there, so we got round about to see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you have a big garden?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh we had a big garden. We had - grand lot of potatoes and then small potatoes - where - and - and we'd turnip and - greens, everything - you know that wasnae used for own used did for the pigs and that used to be boiled - once, sometimes twice a w
eek when we had two pigs, we didn't always have two, sometimes we'd just one. But we were sent away from home the days the pigs were killed, we went up to Grandma's because the pigs were - \{BLANK\}
 you know, pets, and - then - grandma used to come down and help to make the black puddings and white puddings and - oh, we had - we'd a grand - lot you know from the pigs.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 How about keeping things like that though?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Well -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did they all have to be used up right away? Or was there any way of keeping things like black puddings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh well - what the village people did, lots of them had pigs you know, and we used to share and share out, you know, if anybody was killing a pig, you may depend they were all round about to get bits of it, you know, just -
 we just gave them it, because - we got a share of theirs when theirs was killed you see. Aye. They were very friendly people in the village, very friendly, the whole lot of us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You say you lived in three different houses in Templand?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Wait 'til 
I think how many houses we were in. Five years we were at School Terrace, that was near the school, and were still at School Terrace, my father and mother eventually bought the house, not the time - that we lived in then but the next to us. And when they 
died my eldest brother - now lives there. He lives there. And that was the house grandmother lived in too. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Can you tell me what sort of house it was?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Well -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 How big was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 It's not modern. It has - a living room. A small bedroo
m - off the living room. It has a back kitchen, and coal house inside, and then - it has - well it was a bedroom - to begin with - when we were small. Front room mother always called it but it was a room - where we had our parties in, and - a room upstair
s. Attic room upstairs, it was quite a - decent sized house.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Is that where the lodgers stayed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
That's where we - when we were bigger, that's where were, after we - came from Corncockle cottage when my father had to retire, he wouldn't have retire
d but he had to owing - at sixty-five. But he didn't retire from work then. He worked on 'til he was eighty, and I don't think he would have been retired then if mother hadn't taken ill, but - as - girls of the family were all married, homes of our own. M
y
 youngest sister - lives in Templand still. She took two days nursing - mother, then my sister in Lockerbie went for two days, and I went for two days. And it got that she needed someone constantly there, and by this time my husband - my sister's husband 
h
ad taken ill, and she couldn't be there, so it meant - that we had alternately to us, my father then gave up his work. And - stayed home and that was a terrible punishment for him, you know, to stop working. He used to go away on his bicycle up to this fa
r
m. He'd been pally with this farmer all his life, and he used to go up and catch rabbits for him, clean out the hen houses, just do anything - any little jobs at all, so when - aye, when I used to go for Templand - we went - up with the eight o'clock bus 
i
n the morning, and I used to say, now - have a cup of tea and off to your pal's for the day. Because he knew I would be there all that night, and that pleased him more than anything, to get up to work. And - the same - next day, well, he had to come home 
e
arly because I would be going away home, and I've seen us being so tired at night, three miles we had to walk to get a bus for home, I seemed to be more in the roadside than out of it, you know, I was nearly falling asleep in the road. That was before I g
o
t a bicycle, but I had a bicycle in the finish. And - an old farmer, on the road, Mr Mollins, he used to be waiting for me - he knew about my time, - that I would be - coming home from Templand, he used to be walking about the road, watching for me to ask
 
for mother. He had known them when they were young. And when I told mother that Mr Mollins was out asking for them, she said, was he really? She was pleased you know. She says, do you know, that man never needed a dog when he was - looking after his sheep
,
 he could run faster than any dog. And I once told him that, he said, that's true, he said, I never had a dog when I kept sheep, he was on a farm too. But by this time he had a farm of his own, and one day - he - there was a ploughing match, and - my youn
g
est brother must be very like what my father was although he didn't appear to be to us but I mean - what my father was like in the olden days because he went to him and he says, is your name Halliday? He was pulling - he said, I kenned it. He was that lik
e my father, he told me about it. It's funny wasn't it?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You say your mother had big washings to do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Can you tell me where she did them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes, she had this same boiler - you see - I was just thinking about that - boiling the pigs -
 potatoes and things cleans boiler. That's right, you know, anything earthy cleans a boiler. Well she used to boil the clothes in this boiler, there was a fire it underneath, in the back kitchen. It was inside, and she used to boil and she'd a lovely wash
,
 and I used to think what nice clean washing she had. And then at times think about it now, because nowadays we've such grand things for washing with - you know, such as Daz and all these things, in these days I remember there was what you called - A1 soa
p
 powders. And this uncle - that was policeman - in - Paisley, Uncle John, he said to me - my beat's near Esdaile and McCallum's works. I says, Esdaile and McCallum, I had to think for a minute. I says, that's where the soap powder came from that mother us
ed to wash with, wasn't that funny. And the motto on it was - \{BLANK\} on the Sco}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1866372\charrsid2967080 tch }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
isle. That was the - oh I can remember all these things. And we used to go for the milk, they're talking about tuberculosis now, we used to go for the milk, it was about a h
alf a mile from home, I used to walk, I was the eldest and - we had a can to carry it in, and - when it was the farmer's wife she just used to give us - two pints, that was just a penny you mind, but if it was the - the maid she used to give us a wee drop
 more, used to like when it was the maid, she used to put a wee drop more.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 She gave you a good bargain?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Yes, but I what I remember was - I used to clean that can every Saturday, that was my job, and I had it shining and always I liked clean and - and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What did you use to clean it then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Well, it wasn't Brasso but it was stuff like brass and it had a nice smell, and oh that's a thing I can't remember the name of that. Those things have gone but I can't remember but I used to get it out o
nto this seat and clean it, I'd put it on, but not inside mind you. And then mother scalded it out with boiling water. That's what we used to get grand cans of milk.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you have other wee jobs to do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh, we had jobs. Saturday especially. Well I had - it was a long lobby, I had this - this to wash out you know, big lobby.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Was it lino on the floor?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Lino. And - wash the steps, scrub the steps, they were white cement steps, didn't put - put anything on them, just scrubbed them clean, and 
sweep the flagstones. Mother used to do it just with a - coarse brush, we hadnae to do anything to that, she did that herself. My sister used to clean the spoons, but - the butcher used to come at the Saturday, and it's the same Brown that's in Lochmaden 
y
et, Brown in Lockerbie - but - an older generation, he used to come with a little - what could you call it now - a - just a sort of wee cart affair, but it was all closed in, and he used to bring the papers with him, and the Weekly News - always came with
 
the Peoples Friend. And - when we saw the Weekly News, Jean McFarland that was my husband was talking about, this was what you used to read to grandpa, and it was down - alerted quick to see what Jean McFarland was doing today, and mother - she'd say, com
e on. No - no reading 'til your work's finished, used to take the papers from us and put them right up onto a big cupboard we had and we got no reading until the work was done. And I can re -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did the boys get jobs to do as well or was it just the girls?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh the boys - they had rabbits, and they had to clean out the rabbits, clean the hen houses, and sometimes my father - made jobs for them, but - he liked doing his garden himself, but I don't suppose he kept them at the gardening like what - your 
- husband's father did, but - mother had a wee garden, she did the flower garden, she was always working in that flower garden, showing flowers. And - my brother Tom used to dig that over for her, the oldest brother, he used to dig that over. Of course th
e
 younger ones didn't get so much to do, because, by the time they - younger ones were born there was more labour saving devices coming onto the market, and they got off with lots of things that us elder ones - had to do, but we all got jobs. Even if it wa
s just going for messages down to the shop, the shop was a wee bit off you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you ever have to look after your younger brothers and sisters, was that one of your jobs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did we?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Have to help to look after your younger brothers and sisters?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh yes. I can remember - you see when - when my youngest sister was born I was in the bigger classes school and had a lot of lessons to do and at night mother used to say, you might take the baby up the road in her pram, oh I used to - if she woul
dn't sleep I've told her since I used to give her many a smack. Because - it was because I had such a lot of lessons to do, got a lot of homework. I don't know whether it was the custom or not but we'd - I had to do a lot of homework, my sister next to me
 
never seemed to brother and she got on just as well, but - I seemed to like to - to do my lessons. I used to go into the bedroom away from the noise you know of the kitchen, and learn my lessons. My father used to sometimes be in when it was his time, lik
e
 when he was on night shift he would be at home through the day, and perhaps he would be putting in his time sheet, he'd a week desk that he wrote at, he was a good writer my father and - he used to be doing this and I remember one - day when we were doin
g
 I, my eldest brother come down to start making a noise and - my father's checked him for you know, making noise and - I don't know - he rose quickly to - to - go out of the room and he - he just come in contact with my ankle and gave my ankle a cut. And 
f
or weeks and weeks the schoolmaster used to let - the bandage to see all the different colours she used to change, the children. Aye. It's funny how you remember all these things. Then we used to have a - a singing master come to our school, a Mr Mickle, 
he used to come and he came for about three months. And - oh and we paid tuppence a night for two nights a week, that was four}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1866372\charrsid2967080  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
pence. My sister -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You went after school hours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 After school hours. And then at the end of the three months they had t
wo nights of a concert that the school children gave and it was real splendid. I was a flower girl, they picked you see from the - you' - they'd inspect you, and when we had the concert it wasn't a very good time of the year for flowers, it was about Febr
u
ary, but I remember mother and my aunt, the aunt next like to me in age - made me a basket, did it all with ivy, and - arranged the flowers, it was real great armful, and I had to sing this song. And - then there was other ones - three fairies, these were
 
the first ones, then the flower girl, fruit girl, Cheery Tom an archer and hob goblins and - skipping games. My sister lost at her skipping game because she was too near the piano, and - there was her and another girl doing the skipping while we sang the 
song, and they tripped every now and again. And you could have heard her laughing. She was always a one for laughing. So -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Were there many things in the village for youngsters?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Well - we - usually - had evangelists come to the village, they must 
have known a good place to come to I think because the people were really good living people, don't suppose they were any better than anything else - anywhere else but I noticed it more - noticing all these texts in the houses. And - these - two men came 
o
nce, there was women came too, but I remember these men they stayed for a fortnight, and they bad a tent on the village green, and we used to go at night to listen to them and then they had us children going round the village, they learn - learned us chor
u
ses, and - through the day they used to go out and in the houses, grandpa used to have them in and have a grand talks with them, he was on his own then, grandma had passed away. And gran - grandpa used to have them in. And - then we had Punch and Judy sho
w
s in the village green, and - we had - people used to come - selling dishes you know, that used to put up a big tent and - they would stay for a week or a fortnight, we had lots of people came from outlying districts to the school, so that they came to th
e
se things too. There was a village Cumrue, maybe about a mile off, and then there was - Archwood Farm, Burns Farm, these were all places near at hand, and Millhouse Bridge, and all these outlying districts all come in with Templand, Kennel Bridge and all 
t
hese places so that we were a big community really, as a whole. And - the men used to bowl in the hall, we hadn't a hall to begin with, it was the school. But one of the men - that came to stay with us in the finish and who worked in the quarry was a mini
s
ter's son, unfortunately down in the world through drink, Mr Brown his name was, a very learned man. And he wrote to Carnegie, you've heard of Carnegie where we go for these things, well he wrote to Carnegie what a beautiful rector he was, and implored hi
m
 to help to get up - a - hall and it was through Mr Brown that we got the Templand Hall up. It's a different hall now, but - that was the first hall we had, lighted by oil lamps but it was a great thing for us you know when this hall was opened, so the bo
wling boards went down from the school to the hall.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What sort of bowling was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Carpet. Carpet bowling, my father never entertained to that, but my two brothers and my sister, she next to me, was keen bowlers. Of course time's getting on - th
is was when they were grown up a bit, young men, when - and we had the dances - first of all in the school, we had dances every now and again, a bowlers dance and - we had concerts from - people coming from Lockerbie or Lochmaben, a co}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1866372\charrsid2967080 m}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 pany, and we had con
certs, we were well entertained. And - aye, we had - we had all the weddings. Not - not our wedding, we had our wedding just at home, it was war time then, but my sister's wedding - both my sisters wedding - my brother's wedding, no, my brother's wedding 
was at her home, but all our family affairs were in there as well as that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 There would be lots of weddings and that sort of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes, lots of weddings there and they were all held there. Every - entertainment of any kind, you know, they used to
 have a day - what they call the sports day for the children, they used to just get it up amongst themselves, the village people, and then -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you have that sort of thing when you were a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes, yes, when I was at the school too they had i
t. They just used to get up a day and they would bake - they were great bakers you know, and they used to bake and - somebody would give tea and sugar and little prizes, the prizes werenae very much but they were - meant a lot to us children you know. And
 - and a dance at night to finish up which helped for the next time you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 How old would you be before you were allowed to go to a dance?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Well - oh, we had dances at home. Mother - in the house. Mother - every year from I can remember - went fr
om - we were - maybe no, I don't remember when the first went to school, but I can remember when my sister went, she - started making a New Year party. And grandpa and grandma would be there, and my aunt, she was a young woman dressmaking, she was learnin
g
 dressmaking in Lockerbie, and - maybe some - of the village people, not them all, she couldn't of course have put them up, but I can remember one year, there was thirteen of us sat down at the big table and we didn't know. I never knew either. And when m
o
ther went - oh and we had two small tables. You see, we took everything out of the room, we'd plenty of room. And - when mother mother went through and I came with her to go through, she says, there's thirteen sitting at our table. I said, oh never. I mea
n
, I'm superstitious. Well it was, it spoiled the night for us. Mother says, don't - but - I don't think anybody's noticed. So - after this the party was passed, Mr Erslin, next door neighbour got up to thank them for their hospitality, and right enough he
 
was dead within the year. It might only be superstitious, but - you know, couldnae help but think about it. We didn't tell anybody you know, but mother and I knew. And - that's what they say you know, that's an old superstitious custom. Well he got up to 
t
hank them and that's what happened. So then after that tea was passed, because everybody baked and helped you know, there was - plenty of everything, we used to go to it - after we were married too from - you know, 'cos she wasnae able - she'd a party eve
ry Christ - not Christmas, New Year. New Year. And some would sing and - so on, and - and there was a dance. Then - we used to walk home after that, but there was no other way of getting.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What about music for the dancing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh my father and I had two brothers melod}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1866372\charrsid2967080 eo}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
n players. Aye. They - they didn't - my father hope - hoped they would play the fiddle but they never learnt it, my husband can play, but my father was a great fiddler all his life, and a grand fiddler. And then a time when - I hear the
m now, that come to the club you know, the tunes that he used to play. He went - he went once to Dum - to - Lockerbie when - Scott Skinner was playing, and he piped in to Lockerbie, we were living in Lockerbie then, to hear this fiddler. And after he list
ened to him, it was the Cradle Song, and he says, Robert, I'm going home to burn my fiddle. And he really was a good fiddler wasn't he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Scott Skinner was exceptional wasn't he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 And - skirls and reels and used to dance and - we'd grand nights, we really had, happy.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you have parties at birthdays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh no, we always remembered each others birthday, and if we were at home, you know, say on a Sunday or a Saturday, if we're all at home together, mother would make something special for the tea but it wasnae really a custom that she did it. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you get presents at birthday time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh got presents, yes, even if it wasnae very much. And Christmas time, oh - we used to go away to bed early, even when we were big and knew who Santa Claus, we never let on to father and mother that we didn't - that we knew.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Was this for the wee ones?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Aye. But we hung up our stockings too, and we had a - a range and it had a big brass - rail, mother used to keep it a lovely shine, we used to pu
t things through our stockings, and hang them up there, even when we were big, like before I went to work. But when we come out in the morning she'd say, hurry up now and get your clothes on, Santa's been. No sign of our stockings, they werena there. They
'
d be hanging on pictures or - on hooks outside the door. This was the things they used to do. And - there'd be an apple, or an orange, maybe a sixpenny piece, that was riches in these days. In the very toe and - cinders, oh she says, they've been hot cind
ers, he's put them in your stocking when they're cold to let you see it was too hot for him, that's what mother used to say, she used to make up stories, you know. And -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 She must have been quite a character.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 She was, and you know I must have tak
en it off her I think because - my own girl, and - I've lots of - my sisters two boys used to say, come on Auntie Mary, and tell us a story. And I used to make them up you know, make up stories and tell them, and the wee ones \{BLANK\}
 from anywhere and Miss
 Stewart'll say, come on, tell us a story, it's a wee boy and he's just six, and I have to make them up it's no good with the books. So - she used to - say - oh look where he's hung them, and I says, did he not leave anything for you? Oh no, we're too big
 
now, she used to say. My father used to go down to the shop you know, for - things - the shop sold everything, the - the - there was two shops but especially Miss Brydon's shop, it sold everything. And he used to get wee - sweetie mice and all these thing
s
, you know, be a wee toy you know, they would have got it when they were in Dumfries maybe because they occasionally used to go into Dumfries, and - Luke Scott's was a great place for the shop, now that was a shop - where the - Oaten's restaurant is now, 
Luke Scott's, and Plainstones where Binns is was McGowans, and grandma - used to go there, you could get dolls and all sorts of things, so I expect they would have bought these and hid them - before - the night for hanging up your stockings.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What sort of shop was Luke Scott's?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Well - Luke Scott's, it sold everything - in the way of school bags, drapery, haberdashery, pails, spoons, knives, forks, it sold everything, John Luke Scott's. I've been in - with my mother and grandma and one thing I'll ne
ver forget, grandma - in Plainstones, the at was McGowans, they were going in for Christmas present, now I remember that, and - everything was very cheap those days because wages were small, and when we went in there was a phonograph playing music, and sh
e
 says, whatever's that? And the assistant said, oh it's something new. And - she was always counting her change you know, and getting out her money. So when we went upstairs, I can't remember what they went upstairs for, but this thing was baring - very v
e
ry loud, there was another one upstairs, and she says, I think they just do that to get the money off you. She was an awful downright person, she never kept anything - inwardly, she let it - you know, she said it out you know. The girl laughed, you know, 
she said, oh we're not so bad as that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What about clothes, did you buy clothes in Dumfries?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Yes, and mother was a great one for making things, at school we wore pinafores in these days, to keep our - frocks clean, and she used to make us pinafor
es, and - then my - my aunt had learned the dressmaking you see, and - she could make things for us. And - mother bought a sewing machine. A Singer sewing machine, that was a great event.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Was that a turn the handle one?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 No, it was a treadle one.
 Yes. And we daren't for the life that was in us touch it she - she'd would hardly let us dust it when we were dusting on that Saturday, and my sister, my youngest sister came in - got that in the finish, I don't know if she has it yet or not, but mother 
made many a thing. And - she made rugs. Mother made rugs.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Your father worked on shift?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes, he worked on shift, day shift and night shift.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 When he was at home through the day did he help your mother in the house, was he good at doing odd jobs in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh, well, my father wasna one that bothered much about the house, because - I mean - on his shifts he had - he was out at seven - on - on - morning shift like, on day shift, and - he took his dinner with him, a piece like, just and hi
s flask, and extra tea if he wanted a cup of tea, and - it was home again - by about five. Five at night time. And then the other man who came from Lochmabin cycled - Thompson, I remember his name, John Thompson, he was on like from then - 'til the mornin
g again, my father took over. Now it was fortnightly shifts, and he did that all the time we were small, that was his job.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 That was a long shift.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 It was long - you know, it wasnae really a hard job. What they had to do was - they had a great big 
- what would you call it, sort of furnace, and they had to keep this stocked with coals, well the coals was just beside the, big - big coals, and they had to keep the pressure up, you know, it hadnae go beyond a certain pressure, and that was pumping the 
water from the bottom of the quarry right up great big pipes, it must have been a good pressure to do that, and it ran past our house where we lived, latterly, not to begin with, but we used to call it the burn, sometimes it was fair in spate you know.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 It would depend how much rain there had been?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Aye. Aye, that's right, and that went on night and day. And that was to keep the - the face - as they called it, of the quarry - clear of water for the men coming in to work. This was the men on the - on
 the bottom, where they were cutting - the stone you see, they were cutting the free stone. They had saws down there for - for cutting and - for \{BLANK\}
 and that sort of things. And - and - they had a railway - ran from there to Nethercleugh, that's the ot
her side of Lockerbie. They had a wee - puggie they called it running there, and - two wagons - or three wagons, whatever much they had, and that stone went all over the country. It was grand stone, the same as what's at Locharbriggs.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 When you were wee did you ever go up to the quarry with your father when he was working?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh yes. No, not - not when he was working. But on a Saturday, that was the day - when mother made the dinner through the day because we were all at home, the children, it was j
ust three of us then, and - my sister and I used to go up - and - take my father's dinner - he didnae take his dinner with him on a Saturday, we always took it up, sometimes it was stovies, you know, potatoes and - everything - together, vegetables, and -
 
when we got up there we used to - for all we'd had our own we used to get up there to his, and we thought it was far better, and we stayed there, we could stay there, we used to play just round about, he had a wee - a wee hut with a - a - wooden - you kno
w
, just made with slat, that's like railway slabs, and - he had - lots of things in there we used to play with, things we took up like for the children to play with, and we used to play there. And - and he - he took us I remember once to see wee foxes, the
y
 had a hole in the quarry face, up at the top this was. He could - put his engine right you see and leave it a wee while, wasnae far away, and showed us these wee - foxes at play, mother wasnae there of course, she was out likely hunting for these, oh the
y were lovely, can always remember that. Then there was any amount of rabbi}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1866372\charrsid2967080 ts in these days, could always }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
catch rabbits and - we'd plenty
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Would your father ever catch rabbits?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh he catched rabbits, he - he used to go when he had his off days, th
ey used to get a day off now and again, no very often mind you, just depended, holiday time when the men were away maybe for a wee holiday, they had to keep the water down just the same for you've no idea how it built up, I don't know where that water cam
e
 from. Of course, it - it's - springs, you see it's a terrible depth, it's derelict now, and I - I've been up several times looking over you know and it's a terrible place to see now, because the water's just about - that off the top of the quarry. It's g
o
t a fence round about, no supposed to be there but - I've been just to look over. And - the - latterly - they had an electric engine I think I told you that, aye, that got all electric when the electricity come in and - it dindnae need much attention at a
l
l you know. And it - it had guard rails round it and I tell you about my father taking the brush off and giving - he was always liked to keep the things clean, anything that would clean he was always cleaning it. Now old man Thompson, he was a nice old so
u
l too, he used to cycle - back and forward to Lochmaben, and - was there for a long long time, and then he died, but - but this time - the electricity was there you see. And they new - new people took over the quarry. He was forty years there altogether. 
S
o that was - that was his job. Ad - and - and - he - he wouldnae retire but he had to retire when he was - age you see, to go, and - after that he went to - Templand House they call it now, Colonel Carr's in it now, but it was a Mr - what was his name cal
l
ed - Mr - Something. Aye. And he went there and - dd the garden. They had a gentleman farmer, he was a gentleman farmer when he was there, he maybe had been an insurance - and the time he was there, father and mother had their golden wedding. They had a -
 
a nice do in the hall for the Templand people, and of our own - relatives, and - Mr - it's funny, I can't remember his name, Mc something was his name, he had a man from Edinburgh staying with him, he was something to do - newspaper, Tom Kerr they called 
him. I've seen his name in the papers since. Well - he drew a portrait of father and mother as they were that night, in their - and that was - aye.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did your father take much to do with you children when you were small?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 With what?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did he take much to do with you, would he put you to bed at night if he was at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh no, it was mostly mother that did that, mostly mother. And - mother took to do with this when we needed punishing, my father - never did anything like that. I - I remember 
once I - he was - he was awful cross this morning, he'd slept in, and - I was getting big then, mind, I was at school like, and - he blamed mother of course for not waking him, they had an alarm but I think they'd forgot to wind it up, and he didna like b
e
ing late, he was always like myself, he liked to be there before hand rather than late, and it was raging away this morning, I said to him, I'll tell grandma, and he - and he - he took his slipper off and chased me away down the road for all I was worth, 
but by the time he got me he never touched me. He was just angry at me speaking back to him, speaking, aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Was he good at telling stories to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 No so much as my mother. He was a fiddler. He was a great fiddler, and that's how he entertained us
 at night. You know, always at night - when he was at home, he got down his fiddle and we used to have grand nights. Mother was a nice singer, she used to sing, although - he was too, my father sung all the Irish songs, I don't know where he had learned t
hem but I know lots of them -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What part of the country did he come from originally?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Lochfoot. Lochfoot was where - was where he lived - his - his mother lived there, she was a widow. And the -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 I wondered if he had come from Ireland originally?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
No, it was just that he was fond of Irish songs I think he learned a lot of them, and - granny, that's my father's mother - they had lived - you know where the long wood is - in Dumfries, that's up the road, well - she lived in a little cottage, g
randpa, and he - he was not alive when - we were wee, he had leant on the railway, you know, a railway man, and - he had what they called silent pneumonia, he was dead in three days with it and she was left with eight of her family to bring up. Eight of t
hem. Three girls and the rest were boys. I think Uncle Joe was the eldest then my father. We got to know them all, they used to come you know and visit us and that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You did go visiting?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes. And then - when I grew up and went out to work I used 
to often cycle, and he was a great cycler my father, I used to often cycle to Lockfoot to see granny, she was living there then. She was an old body then you see, and - she was left with one son, Uncle Jack and he went away out to Canada, this was before 
t
he war like, and - he was working on a fruit farm, he was doing well and keeping her comfortably off here you understand. And - he came over with the Canadians, and - he came to see me twice when I was with Mrs Thompson, and the last time he came, whether
 
he had a premonition or not I don't know, but when he was going away he says, remember and always go and see your granny. And I said I would, which I did, I went with my father. He never came back again. He was killed. They never found him, just have been
 blown up they thought, so that was a terrible grief for her. And she was left - well - she would get a pension from him you see, and - and - oh she was terribly cut up about that, I think that was -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 She must have had a very hard life?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 She had. Y
es. She had, she was a hard worker. Mother used to go and see her too. I remember mother - taking my youngest sister, this is now we lived at Templand, used to go weekends. And - we were getting bigger you see and could - look after the house. And - she u
s
ed to go for a weekend away to see gran. And - she had a wee granddaughter staying with her, one of the girls - a wee girl, Maggie they called her, and - my mother used to take clothes that were getting too small - for my youngest sister to her, and - I r
e
member mother telling us about her - she was fair delighted this wee thing with the clothes, she was always saying - mother slept in the - in the one bedroom they had, and they had a bed in the kitchen, and it was just - back to back, you could hear, and 
a
ll night my mother said she couldnae sleep for this wee kiddie saying, granny, when will I get on that nice white frock, she kept on about this the whole day, and mother had a sense of humour you know and she was telling us how delighted she was and she t
o
ld us about this, and my sister was sleeping beside her but she was listening to the conversation. Aye. So - she died - she was - funny thing - I canna just remember the year I was in hospital in Dumfries, I canna just remember that. But - to my surprise 
g
ranny came walking down the - the ward, and she noticed me just at once and she said, what are you doing in here? And she was in - she'd been chipping sticks and a splinter had gone into her eye, and it - she lost that one eye through that, they couldna s
a
ve it, but - that was the last time I saw her. I was just young - like young married, just in my twenties that happened, and - she died soon after so - and all - most of the family are die - are dead now. I think my father would be - except for Aunt Maggi
e and I've heard she's died since, I think he was the last of the family to die.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What were the sleeping arrangements in your own house at Templand?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1866372\charrsid2967080 Oh - when we were wel}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
l. Well, we had - to begin with we had just the two apartments you see, and 
- that was when we were very wee. Well - my sister - she's no - she's about two years younger than me, she was in a wee cot, and I had a bed - in the room. There was a bed in the kitchen, in a racess, and - and a wee cot, but we werenae there long after w
e got - bigger, when there was more of us, we got down to this what you call Shaw Cottage, and that had - two bedrooms, and a kitchen, back kitchen, and two attic rooms upstairs, there was - they were sloped - c}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5838476\charrsid2967080 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 ilings but there were attic rooms. So we had plenty of - plenty of room there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you have to go to bed at a certain time when you were school age?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh well - no. We were usually put away to bed - summertime we didna go to bed, in fact they couldna get us in from our play. I always did my 
lessons though first when I come home from school before I went out to play. Mother used to tell me - she' used to say, I felt sorry for you sitting at your lessons, but I'm no sorry today because I can - you know. I know the advantage now. And Jean, my s
ister, she never bothered with lessons, and yet she got through just the same you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did your mother put you to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Well, not when we were bigger, we were told to go and wash our faces and hands and faces, and then she come in to see that we w
ere really into bed, had we said our prayers and - that sort of thing. But - not when we were bigger, you know, she let - made us be independent and go to bed ourselves.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You say you had to wash your face and hands before you went to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What about a bath?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Well - bath was Saturday night, I remember that, I tell you - for - first - the girls were bathed, and - put into bed, but not to stay mind, you got up again after the boys were bathed. There was the two boys then. Then we were 
all sat round the fire, dressing jackets on, and - we got - glass of milk, home backed scone with blackcurrant jam, that was the - nicest thing we ever tasted, we looked forward to that. Mother was a grand baker of girdle scones. Girdle scones they were. 
And that was what we got for our supper after the bath and then off to bed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What kind of bath did you have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 It - it - big - well - latterly we had a tub, when we got too big for the - but a big tin bath, but the tub that mother washed in, we had 
that latterly when we were bigger. I think so. And we were just as clean as what they are now.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you get a change of clothes or underclothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh yes, every week. Our clothes were changed every week. Then Monday was washing day.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You say your mother was a great baker of scones, did she ever make her own bread?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Not her own bread, no - no, she didn't make her own bread, we had the shops quite near us and - the bread was only }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7869821\charrsid2967080 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080  five}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7869821\charrsid2967080  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
pence ha'penny for two loaves. Isn't that terrible when you think of it now. And - aye, custom. Aye. But she made bannocks and these sort of things you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 With oatmeal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 No, just with - like you would make a scone, an oven scone, I make them myself sometime, just with - flour and - fat - margarine
 and lard, some sugar, and sometimes she made them just plain, and you could keep the sour milk if she'd any sour milk we'd any amount of buttermilk in these days, we used to go for buttermilk, and - if she wanted to make an extra special one she put an e
gg in it, we had hens you see, but they werena - yes, that was just like - you know, what a bannock's like, it just cuts like bread. But not all the bother that bread is.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 I was thinking of more like an oatcake kind of bannock.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh yes. Yes. Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 And she made her own jam?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh, always had lovely jam she made, yes. With plenty of rhubarb, that was - a thing we were very fond of too when we was little, rhubarb jam, not so keen on it now, and my father liked brambles, there was any amount of b
rambles, he used to go and - that was a thing he did, he used to go and fish a lot, when he had spare time, and if he didn't bring fish at mushroom time he brought his basket full of mushrooms and mother used to make ketchup, mushroom ketchup, aye, but we
 
liked the fried mushrooms best, I've got him into that. And - brambles, he used to go if he'd time at all on a summer night you know, when it wasnae his turn on, used to go and help us to pull brambles, the roadsides were full of them, and washed them so 
- she occasionally made bramble jam, we'd always plenty of raspberry jam and - all these sort of things.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Would you mother use some of the brambles maybe for making puddings and things as well or did she just use them all for jam and jelly?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Well -
 mother never bothered with the wine, but I - I know - people that did make it. Wine, all sorts. And jam. Oh aye, jelly, oh yes, it was bramble jelly not jam, there are too many seeds in. Aye, bramble and apple. But - even to this day - that Kate Arnold's
 mother that's having her golden wedding next month, her mother used to make all sorts of wines. Parsley wine, everything you could mention out of the garden, and it was good too.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 It would be strong stuff.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Aye. And - I canna - rhubarb wine and -
 and bramble wine, it was really intoxicating the bramble wine. I remember tasting it once and I felt my head fairly wandering. And maybe something put in. Elderberry wine, all these things. And - even nettles, grandma used to get us to go up the roadside
s and gather the new nettles and she made nettle broth and it was lovely, just with the usual vegetables. Nettles. You see, they used a lot of these - things, and she used to make }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2039055\charrsid2967080 embrocating}
{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080  and things from - horehound and all that - sort of thing, grandma did, she was a great one for cures you know, old fashioned - things, ointments and that. When I think of all -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did she just do it for her own family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh she used to help other - people, I remember - if anyone sprained an ankle or arms or anything she used to give them this }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2039055\charrsid2967080 embrocating}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
 she made to rub with and - it helped it. I remember I once sprained my ankle and I had to walk from Lochmaben to Templand without my shoe just on the side of the road, and - when I got there she made me sit in a ch
air and she rubbed my ankle with this stuff. In the night it was well down, it was right swollen you know, and I was able to go - back - not with my shoe - fastened, but I had it on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Better than it was anyway?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you get meat with your meals every day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Milk.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you get meat every day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
No. No, we did not, not every day. Mostly - the butcher came once a week. And - latterly we had a butcher in Templand, but this was a man, I don't know where he came from, he had - a sor
t of gig affair that opened at the back, and he had the butcher meat, it was all nice and clean, hanging - on - clicks, you know, the - that were - the steak and mince and that. We used to get a - a good piece of meat at the weekend and - well mother made
 
broth or maybe meat for to make hot pot you know, and that would do us maybe two days. Well - that was really the best - time we had for meat. We got rabbits, and - any amount of potatoes we had, we'd - good gardens. And - plenty of vegetables, and someti
m
es we just got soup for dinner, if it was - broth we maybe had rice to follow. Not meat then, might make the meat do for the next day - sort of span it out like that. Then we'd always plenty of eggs and as I told you we kept pigs so we - we - although we 
didn't get butcher meat we'd always something. We never went hungry. No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Do you remember ever seeing your mother taking less so that the rest of you or maybe your father could get more?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Took what less?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Do you think your mother ever went without, went short herself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
I don't think so, no, I don't think so. I remember in the wartime, now mother liked sweet things, she was very fond of sweet things, and my father gave up sugar - to let her get the - sugar, you know, for her tea and cocoa a
nd that - whe - he gave up - he - he used to say that - if you set yourself to do a thing, you could do it, that was his maxim. And - he once said to mother as she went out, I remember, and she said, are you not coming in to go to bed? Oh, he says, I coul
d
 do - without sleep. I've seen him do without it if he was busy in his garden. I've seen him do without it for one day, but he was jolly glad to get to bed the next. Aye, he used to do these kind of things. Or if he was keen to get away fishing or anythin
g
 like that. Aye. Aye. Aye. It was trout fishes my father, he never went for salmon. No. And I tell you where he used to go to, he used to go into the loch at Lochfoot, you know, the waterworks, he knew the man there. I forget his name. And he used to catc
h
 these pike, you know, and - they were quite terrible amount of bones in them but it wasnae - I've tasted it mind and it was lovely white flesh, but it was more boiled for the hens, you know, then the hens just had it, it was just for a - an outing for hi
m, he used to go there, he used to go out in a boat on the - on the loch.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 But if he caught some trout for you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh the trouts were lovely. Aye, they were lovely, the trouts. Lovely. Seemed to be plentiful, they're not so plentiful now. No, they do
n't seem to be, the Kinnel, he used to go and fish in the Kinnel and up to the morning, and there - there's not much in the Kinnel now at all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Your father would his breakfast before the rest of you were up in the morning?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes, he had. Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 But were you all together for your meal at night usually?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 We were all together mostly at night for our meal, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What about Sundays, what about breakfast time on Sundays, did you get a big Sunday breakfast?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh - well, no - Sunday was mos
tly the church day. But - I - I told you before, we children didn't go to church, because - we had our Sunday school and then about every fortnight one of the ministers came up, there was three ministers in Lochmaben then, three churches, there's only one
 
now, and - the ministers took turn at coming up and we had meetings in the hall and we were made to go to them with both our parents, but it was mostly father that went to church, he had his bicycle you see, and - was no way of getting down, you had to wa
lk. So - he mostly went to church. And - we had a good dinner when he come home. Then we were sent away up - the road for a walk and told to behave ourselves, remember what day it was. Wasn't allowed to play on Sundays. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What if it was a wet day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Well, we'd plenty of books and - things, we were told to read our story books or maybe - mother would tell us stories or - something like that, but you wasn't allowed to play on a Sunday, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You had quite a lot of books in the house then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 O
h we had, yes, we'd story books. Well we'd plenty of uncles and aunts coming you see for holidays and they used to bring us - story books and - and - Anderson's Fairy Tales, Grimms Fairy Tales, we'd all these - things. And the boys -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 And you got papers every week?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 And got papers every week.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you get a daily paper as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
No. Weekly paper, Weekly News and Peoples Friend. Aye. And - as I told you before we were not allowed - we'd our wee jobs to do on Saturday I tell you, and - well 
I can remember - the story that - was in the Friend in these days was called - Bond of Blood by a Miss C. Mitchell, and it was a lovely story, I used to hear mother and my aunt - that was just ten years older than me, talking about it, and when we got old
 
enough to read a book, I felt I wanted something more to read, and the first book I ever read was Aldersyde by Annie S. Swan. It was a lovely story and I've read it hundreds of times. Oh yes, and I had - that's the grandfather - I'd to read it to grandpa,
 
he used to come in before we had our jobs done, well, can I hear what Jean McFarland's doing? Oh no, it's too soon yet, they haven't go their work finished. So he had to go away until we had our work done. And she knew if we stopped we wouldna start again
.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you have any games to play in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 I've heard of a bawbee for a ha'penny.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 But not a maik.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Aye. That's a new one. Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Could you beat him, could you beat your grandpa?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh he didna like whe
n you beat him. But - but we did beat him occasionally. No, he didn't like to be - he was a good player mind you but we got as good as him because we played that often. Ad - especially after grandma died, he used to come in more, grandma died - when she w
as sixty-nine, and he lived on to be - eighty-four. Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Sometimes on a Sunday you would be in your own house and sometimes in your grandma's?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 No, it was mostly in our own - own house that we played, aye, because thar's where the dominoes were yo
u see, and - we'd lots of games, we played tiddly winks and all, just - snakes and ladders and things -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 And your mother and father would join in too would they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh well, no so much my father, my mother would - my father had his - he - he had wha
t he called his time to keep, you know, he had to keep his - time, aye and all that sort of thing and he used to be doing that sometimes at nights too. And mostly when he had time at all he got his fiddle down, he was very fond of it. And we had - a gamek
e
eper and his son lived not so far off us, and they were great too and were grand players too, had some grand nights, listening to them. Then we used to dance you know, caper about the - floor, us children. Aye. Aye, that's what they - that's - aye, aye, t
h
ey have, aye, and then my young sister, and my sister-in-law could - they could play the piano, just by ear, I never - I don't know I was out to work soon, and - we hadna got a piano then but when my youngest sister was - I think - I don't know what birth
d
ay she had but they bought her a - they got the chance of this piano, it was Mrs Meire' piano, and - she - they just - they - they - they just can play by ear and so can - so can my sister's daughters like, just need to sit down and play anything you like
 just by ear. Mary went to music but Miss Eldon said - it was just a throw away of money because she was reverting in - just her own - the way she did play.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Do you remember any funerals in the family when you were wee?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 I don't remember any funerals in the family when I was wee but I remember funerals in the village.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Can you tell me what a funeral was like in the village then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Well - this whole family, they called them Colander, and he worked in the quarry, I remember - I can them you k
now quite plain, and Bill Calendar was in our class in school, and do you know, that family took consumption, and one by one the whole family went. Well that was the first time I'd ever seen anyone dead. And I was taken down to see Billy Colander. I wante
d
 to go. And - a - the funeral was - oh it was a dad affair you know, the minister came up and - and there was a service, I was in there, and - there was - the man from Lochmaben, McMinn they called him, brought the funeral hearse. And it had all - oh it w
as - the horses had plumes in their head, everything - and the men had - the hats with - black - oh mercy on - I was frightened for that, now I can tell, I didna like -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Were you just quite young at the time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 I was quite young, was at the school b
ut I was - maybe - eleven or twelve, and it made a great impression, you didna forget it for a long time. But - all the same I think - it was just so that I could see - she'd been very friendly, this wee girl with us and played with us, and I couldna beli
e
ve really that she was - gone, she was among the first to go, and that whole family went. We've often talked about it, mother and - us since, and they lived in a - they had two rooms and a kitchen - and mother used to wonder after, she said - she wondered
 
if the bedclothes had been washed and that after. You know, mother was very particular about that, I don't know but - the father and mother went as well and they all had the same trouble. There was two - there was other two girls and two boys and one by o
ne they were completely wiped out. Now you see - they never were taken away or anything, of course there was no sanatorium at Lochmaben in those days. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Do you remember going on any outings with your parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Any what?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Outings.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Well 
there was - well - when there was Sunday school picnics, and - that was just in a farm cart, they were taking - maybe to a neighbouring farmer, one of the farmers sons - was our - one of our Sunday school teachers, who had - one - two, three, four Sunday 
s
chool teachers, a lot of children came to the Sunday school, and we used to go there to Fishbeck, that was the name of the farm. And - we got - tea and - bags, oh that was a great day and ran races you know and ' and had a grand time, we thought it was lo
v
ely, with flags waving and bunting on the horses, they had them all decorated you know. Maybe four or six carts, some of the children lived quite near the farm so they - just joined in. And they were - and then - then latterly - oh but it got better than 
t
hat latterly. I remember once being taken to Moffat by train and that was a great adventure. We marched to Nethercleugh station, which was - oh maybe three mile, aye, three mile from Templand, but we were all bigger children then, and got in the train. Wh
at an adventure it was, and up to Moffat. And -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Was that your first time in a train do you think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
I think so. I think it would be. No. No. It wouldnae be. Because mother used to take us to Dumfries about Christmastime to see Santa Claus, that wa
s in McGowans in Plainstones where Binns is now, and we used to go in the train, from Lochmaben, to Dumfries, that was a great adventure too. But this was a grand - trip up to Moffat, we fair enjoyed ourselves because it was a lovely sunny day. And I reme
mber coming back we were fair tired, we got into the train, and back home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 And especially if you'd got to walk another three miles when you got off the train?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes. Sometimes we went to Lochmaben Castle for our picnics. You know, but that was thre
e miles down from Templand. And you had grand picnics there and they told as about - Robert the Bruce and - oh, when we were children used to supposed to be hunting for his fossil and digging up you know and - you never found it or anything but it was - i
t was wonderful to be there and to hear all about - them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you ever go any further a field with your mother and father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes. We went once - mother as I told you had two brothers in Newcastle policemen. And we went once - my - sister next to me
, there must have been only the two of us, then. No, no, there was my brother because I remember he had a kilt on and they were all - entertained with this boy with a kilt on, they all come in to see him, but he was just a wee boy, not at the school. Newc
a
stle we went to for a week. Grandma was here so she would likely be doing anything my father would manage you know, but I mean he could always go down - down to grandma's, were quite near. And - we had a grand time. They took us - over to Gateshead, we sa
w
 - you know, the bridge over the Tyne and I remember the - children used to come and play around about and they were fair taken on with our - funny talks, Scotch. Aye. Then later on, before we let school we're allowed to go - our holidays to Paisley, my s
ister and I.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 On your own?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Aye, on our own. Well - it wouldnae be on our own to begin with because - that aunt - the young - the aunt that was younger than me, she married a contractor there and he had a pony and trap, pony and - well it's a big h
igh trap, and he used to come through for holidays, so they would probably take us back, and we stayed a wee while with them, sometimes a fortnight wed go, and - then we went to - to our uncle Ken's where aunt - you know - the - seven children then, went 
t
o Uncle Ken's. And I remember when we come back - they brought us back, we were never in the train on our own or that, Uncle Ken used to take us places, they were kind to us when we were there, and - Uncle Matthew had to go - on business, about his busine
s
s and took us over Eskin Ferry once I remember that, it was an awful hot day and he went into a shop to buy us strawberries but by the time we got home the strawberries were all eaten up. This was strawberries for our tea. I remember these things. And whe
n
 we come home after our fortnight we went to bed at four o'clock in the afternoon, mother put us to bed, because we were so miserable - being back from the holiday. And she said, well you're never getting away again. And I don't think we ever were. Oh fai
r
 crying ourself to sleep. And - and another thing that vexed us - we had a cat that we'd had for years and years, Topsy we called it, and it wasna very well when we went away, do you know I was frightened to ask about it and it was dead right enough, they
'd had to get to put it to sleep, well between that and the misery of - all the good times being past we were put to bed at four o'clock in the afternoon.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you have any other pets, did you have any dogs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Mother was frightened of dogs and she liked them but she was frightened of them, no, we had rabbits, and we'd always a canary. Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 The same one?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh no, we had various ones. But mother always liked a c}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2039055\charrsid2967080 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 nary. And - we kept pet rabbits, we'd to clean them out and - go up the road and 
gather dandelions and - you know, food for them and - made them up with tea leaves and oatmeal. Aye. And - and then we - they could get out as long as we watched where they went you see, could get out in the garden on Saturdays when we were at home. So - 
a
nd pets, but mother - she liked dogs well enough and funny thing, grandma must have been the same because she had a big dog - I remember it's name, Sally, it was a - a collie, a sable collie, it was a beautiful dog, but it was one of the uncles that had b
r
ought it home. He - he was apprenticed to a grocer in Lockerbie, that was Uncle Sam, he brought this dog home. And it used to - lie in front of the fire and grandma was frightened to shift it to get the grate cleaned. So one day she said to him, Uncle Sam
, he wasnae so much older you see, he was next to the aunt - that -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 He was the second youngest then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Aye. Yes. And she said, Sam you'll have to take that dog away and try and get a home for it, for I'm frightened to shift it and it wouldnae touch
 you, but she just had a fear of it, I think mother must have been the same, she wasnae keen on dogs at all. And - Uncle Sam was vexed but he took the dog away. And he gave it to a man in Lockerbie, it was home before him at night. It must have been keen 
to be there. So that was the only dog }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2039055\charrsid2967080 \endash  th}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 at they ever had, that I can remember. She's a nice dog.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 When you went shopping to Dumfries, did your father ever go with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Well, my father - my father - went occasionally, if there was anything neede
d for the house, you know, if they were - going to buy anything for the house - my father us}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2039055\charrsid2967080 ed to go, but - mother was the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
one that - did the choosing really, my father would - maybe say, well would this no be better, but it always ended up with mother's -
 it seemed to depend on her, aye, but - she - chose things more than my father, and we had a woman used to come - these relatives in - Lochmaben yet, she used to come with a pack on her back. Aye. And - she'd the grandest things, you know, flannelette she
e
ts and - pillow slips and I don't know where she got them but they called her Mrs Kennedy, and - she used to come to the door - front door she always came to and she used to open the door, are you going to draw that long purse of yours today? This was alw
ays how she entered just herself. And sometimes mother bought things from her, for the house, towels or }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2039055\charrsid2967080 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080  tea}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2039055\charrsid2967080 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
towels, sometimes sheets and - I of - many a time wonder mother seemed always to have good - do that, she must have been a saver you know, and - wh
en we were - when my sister marr - was married that same - Mrs Kennedy was alive and she gave us lovely cheese dishes, wedge}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2039055\charrsid2967080 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
wood - cheese dishes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 As a wedding present?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Aye, as a wedding present. I have mine yet, my sister's broken hers, but - I
've got mine. 'Cos she'd more family and - me, no one about much.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 It was always your mother got the telling off to do, your father wasn't keen on that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh yes, my father never interfered, he used to - check us if we were doing wrong and the boys
 too, but he never - he never hit us or anything. He used to give us a telling off and that was enough. But mother used to skelp us, good and hard, if we was doing -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 With her hand?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Aye, she did, oh yes, just with her hand.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What sort of thing would you get skelped for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh well, if we told fibs for instance. I can remember once I came home and - had.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Say if a child had hit your wee brother, you wouldn't go and wall}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2039055\charrsid2967080 o}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 p the one that had done the hitting?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Well - we - we might hav
e done but we were frightened for the parents because they seemed to be all alike. I remember once at school - I never forgot this - just in that same house but in later years for that family that was all - sorted the house you know, rebuilt and that. Wel
l
 - a fitter came from Glasgow to the quarry, you know, to - to do any work, permanent and a good wage then. Well - they were Glasgow folk, they called them Young, and the mother was a - fair terrible one for fighting with neighbours. And the woman that li
ved next door to her was a very }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2039055\charrsid2967080 impeccable}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
 body but they seemed to rub each other up the wrong way. And whether they had fought about children I don't know how the fight started, but in the finish this Mrs Young had this other person by the hair of the head
 and trailed her about the close. And the police came up from Lochmaben, there was a police - court over that, well - the children - there was a boy just about my age, Wal - Walter Gelon, he was in my class and he couldnae do his lessons very well, and we
'
re all standing this day around the stove, was a wee stove you could shut up, but the master opened; it when we were getting lessons and the heat come up. And we're all standing - just in a semi-circle, and - it was a geography lesson and he couldnae do i
t
, and he knew fine what he'd get. And the strap was there, and someone came to the door, do you know, he stuck in the stove, time the master was out and burnt the strap. Yes. And none of us dare say he'd done it, nobody. And he tried to get us to say but 
w
e wouldna speak, because you knew what they would do, they were terrible fighting children, these. Well he - he didna get the strap but he got the cane, and that was worse, for he got it round the legs and all, and he wasn't - it - it was - quick tempered
,
 the master you know. Well he ran out of the school. The boy was fair crying, he ran out and his mother went right to the quarry and brought his father. And when his father came knocking at the door he knocked the master down when he opened the door. That
 was another court case. Wasn't that terrible.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Just not like the other folk in the village at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
No, they werena like the village, but they didna stay very long, maybe six month or that but she was a - she was a wee stout woman and round like a
 barrel and red hair and she was a terrible one, and her husband, I don't think he would have been as bad if it handae been for her. As Burns says the women are the bad ones. He always, said the women are the bad ones anyway. I don't think he would have b
een so bad but she would make him do it you see, for doing that to her children. Ah well, these folk are from Glasgow, and that was - the only - family in th}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2039055\charrsid2967080 e village I think, they were impec}
{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 cable people you know, mostly.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You say the policeman had to come from Lochmaben?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Aye, the policeman had to come -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You didn't have any policemen here then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 We had no policemen in the village. No. He'd to come from Lochmaben.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did he come round regularly?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes, occasionally he did, occasiona
lly he come round on his bike, I expect he had to get papers signed you see for coming on his rounds. Thought that since, he didna get them signed at our house or anything, but - he must have gone maybe to the shop or - there was a - two shops in the vill
a
ge, grocers, that was a - a sculptor in the village. A sculptor, yes, and he's daughter's still living at Eastriggs. She'd seen my name in the paper once and she asked one of the Eastrigg member if I - if my name was Haliday. You see. She'd eighty - in he
r eighties now and - Mary King, she used to go to school with my aunt, you know, the one I'm telling you about. Aye, a sculptor. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What sort of things did he do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Well, he made headstones. Beautiful headstone, and used to stand and watch him, 
and did all the lettering too of the quarry stone. And - he could do any sculpting and sometimes he went away and did jobs for other people, you know, at a distance. King they called him. And - he - there was a - shoemaker. One that - soled our shoes, or 
-
 clogs we used to wear to begin with when we were small. And - shoemaker. And I was trying to think if there was anything else, likely we got the - the Post Office back to the village, it was away a long time, but - the village - in the time that the quar
r
y was busy got full up of people you see, although there was - they were all staying - lodging, you understand, in the houses, it was a busy place then. In those days. Two - charabancs used to come up from Lochmaben with the men from Lochmaben worked ther
e. It was the main - source of income - for all round about, the quarry, you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What did the children in the village think about the policeman?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh they were frightened for him. Yes, they were frightened for him, and - when we lived at the Shaw 
- Shaw cottage - the house next door got empty, and - we'd been playing on the Saturday and it was one of the boys from the next door again that broke the window. Well Willie Sproat, he threw a stone just for mischief you know, but none of us told. And he
r
e this policeman came, but not the Lochmaben one, a Johnston Bridge one. And I was quite a big girl then, I'd be about eleven or twelve, and I said to the boy he shouldna have done that but I never told mother he had done it or anything, never told - we n
e
ver told on each other. So - mother used to say not to tell tales you know. Well - this policeman came, it was a Saturday morning and - he said, get the children in. And mother wondered what on earth was wrong and she said, yes, and she was looking at us 
a
s much as to say, what have you been doing? Oh, he said - it's about the house next door, it's had a window broken and the occupier had - man that it belonged to had been to - to see if he could find out because he was going to nick the parents. He though
t it would be some of the houses near because there was just about four houses. And I said, oh it wasnae us, I said, it without thinking, I said, it was Will Sproat. That was all it wanted. I sure got a lot for telling him. I still -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You said your mother told you you should never tell tales?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Do you think your mother had more influence on the way you behaved than your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh I think so. There's no doubt about it. Aye, I think so, mother had more influence - over us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Was your father the sort of person that you could go and talk to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 If you were worried about anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh yes. He would do anything for us. Especially me, they always said I was his favourite. Aye, mostly. He used to - he used to listen t
o me, I can think of that you know, when I was telling him anything. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 He had quite a lot of patience with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh, good patience he had, yes, we'd a good home life.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You were obviously very fond of both your mother and father.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Were you the kind of family that showed your affection, did you kiss each other often or that sort of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Well, do you know, there wasnae so much of that unless it was special days. My; mot}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2039055\charrsid2967080 h}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 er used to but my father didn't. No. No, but my fa
ther used to put his arm round us and that and give you a pat on the back or - that sort of thing, but he wasnae one that kissed you a lot. No. No. No, he wasnae. Our uncles and that you know, my mother's side were more on for that but my father wasnae. N
o, he was a quiet - kind of man. Kindly ways he had with him. Very kind he was. And so was mother, they were equally - kind. And they were always good to us even when we were grown up you know, they were always - mother was always buying something for}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2039055\charrsid2967080  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 us, a
ny time she came to see us - she always brought us something, my husband had a ten shilling - a - a half a sovereign she once gave him, you know, when they were getting scarce. She had two, she had a sovereign and a half sovereign. And she gave - the sove
r
eign to my aunt you know, because they belonged to grandpa I think originally, and - she gave - I thought she would have given it to me she given it to - him. She gave me - a two shilling piece, the first one minted when - that she had like, when the Geor
ge VI came I was always going to get a pin put in it. But I never had - had done it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you ever do any part time jobs while you were still at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Beg pardon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you do any wee jobs while you were still at school that you got paid for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh - well - well any wee jobs that I did was to help grandma, you know. Just -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You didn't work for anybody else?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 So your first job was when you went to the minister?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes. That was before I was fourteen. I shouldn't hav
e - been leaving school - 'til the June of that year, but in the beginning of the year, an elder that we had in Tampland, of the church, he came up to see my father and mother and said he'd heard of a grand job for me, and if I would go. So mother said wh
e
re was it, and he said, well Mrs Neil Rae likes to get a young girl - and train them for house and table work. If I'd any notion to go, and so - my mother says, oh she - she'll no be left school till June but - I'd been through the classes you see, I was 
t
wo years in the last class. And - my father wrote to the School Board, it was the School Board these days, and - knowing that I was up to standard you see, I got - exemption and off I went to the Manse. So - mother went down with me, - it was just two mil
e
 and a half from home. And it was a lovely day and we were walking down. I just had a wee case I didna know whether I would like it or not you see, but - I was there three years. And - it was table work. I've often said - that at that Manse they had most 
b
eautiful silver - that I ever saw in any of the places that ever I was in. Beautiful silver they had. And - Mrs Rae I think - must have had money in her own right, because they kept a lot of company, more than what a - a Manse usually does, they're always
 
having visitors. And - on communion Sundays they had all the Elders in to dinner. All the time I was there, they don't do it now. But - they had a - what a spread they used to have. They had a cook you see, and then there was a Mrs Manners that lived just
 across from the Manse, she used to come in and help when there was anything extra on. And everything was made at home. There was nothing bought in. For dinner they would have big s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2039055\charrsid2967080 i}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 rloin - of beef. Four roasted chickens. Beef steak pie. And - what was the 
other thing, there was the four things. Oh a tongue, pressed, ox tongue, and that was sent from the butchers and they had a big press that the cook did all this herself, she'd a lot of work. And - all that was on the table for Sunday dinner, and there wou
ld be trifles, the - the puddings were all - all cold at Sunday, blanc}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2039055\charrsid2967080 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
mages and - trifles and - apple tart, but - it was just - put into the oven when they - come home from - communion, it soon heated through, it was cooked, I mean just heated. And - tea o
r coffee, and biscuits and cheese. Well - the afternoon communion was at three o'clock, so they didna go away, just stayed in the drawing room, it was a big - big Manse, beautiful big rooms they had, and - they had tea before they went out again. No, I'm 
t
elling a lie, they went out they had a cup of tea just in their hands in the drawing room, and then had the tea, so that we were well treated. I remember telling Mr Gibb, he was the minister - about four, five, six years ago, since he went away from Lochm
a
ben, and he asked me one day, he said, I've been hearing that they used to always give the Elders and anyone in connection with the church dinner, I said, so they did, because I was there - and helped to wait at the table, you see. And he said, dear me, h
e
 says, what a work it must have been. I said, it certainly was. And - all these communion clothes were washed at home, there was sending - no laundries these days you see, they were all done at home. But this Mrs Manners used to come and help the cook to 
do the washing. And I had to do the cooking.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What was your job when you started there first, what did you have to do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Well - when I }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2039055\charrsid2967080 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080  house}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2039055\charrsid2967080 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 table}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2039055\charrsid2967080 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 maid I was, between the house and table, they had a woman come in to help with the rough work.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 So what sort of things did you have to do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Aye, just was to train me for this you see. And - the first thing was to - in the morning, was to light the study fire. They usually sat in the study, what was the minister's study. And - when they were alo
ne had their meals there too, but if there was any visitors the dining room was always used. And - then - after I had the fireside cleaned up and - the room swept and dusted, I used to take up - their breakfast, they had no early morning tea. I'd to take 
i
t up to their bedroom, they were elderly you see, they were elderly people. And - each had a tray. Mr Rae's was a - a little - sort of table thing sat on legs, oh but first of all I had to give them their - morning doses. Their morning doses. Mr - Rae too
k
 Eno's Fruit Salt, you know, and Mrs Rae took something else, Saline of some sort of I had that to do first, and then - take up hot water in a jug and - and there was cold water in the bedroom you see, and give them each their morning doses and then - the
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2039055\charrsid2967080 ir breakfast. Mr Rae - took Sco}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
ts MOF food, that was - and then just a plain breakfast after, marmalade, toast, and - or a roll or something like that. Mrs Rae - sometimes had a cooked breakfast, sometimes not, but this was always ordered the night before s
o that I knew - and then - after that was cleared away I used to - in the wintertime, it was cold days you see when I was there, I had to clean up their grate while they were in their beds, they didna get up early. They'd always a fire on in their bedroom
.
 No labour saving devices with gas or anything like that in these days, it was all coal fires. So I had that to clean up, but that's all I did like, just cleaned up the grate and - and - if it was cold morning lit the fire again. Depended on how long they
 were going to be in bed. And -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What time did you have to be up in the morning?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh I was always up about six o'clock there. Six. And - it was a coal - range in the kitchen, of course that was the cook's job you see. And then - if the drawing roo
m had been used at all, it wasnae - used much - unless - on her afternoon, she had afternoons for ladies coming in, and the fire was on then but - it was only to dust over you know if it hadnae been used. So - I washed the breakfast dishes - after that, a
n
d then - I used to sweep the stair down or - do - do a job like that, you couldnae do the bathroom or anything like that 'til after they were up. And - some days I had the silver to clean, I canna remember - the order of that now, but there was plenty to 
d
o. I mean it wasnae a hard place but you were kept at it. And - the cook had a lot to do, she was - kept very busy, she did all the baking and everything. All sorts of scones, I'd never seen so many scones of - every description, potato scones and - and -
 
oatmeal potato scones. And - they used to make scones with maize meal, they believed in all these sort of things. And she'd plenty to do. And big ironings you know after the wash and - there was - always a lot of iron, I used to help her with that, servie
ttes and tablecloths and everything was done at home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 She wasn't really just a cook?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
No, she was a cook general. That's what she was. Cook general. But if there was anything special on or when they had visitors we always got help. This Mrs Manner
s used to come - if they were having parties or anything, she used to come in and help in the evening. And they'd always a lot of visitors in the summertime. Friends of their own, and they went away too. And every Friday they went always to Worthing or so
m
e of these places down south for the baths you see. And - what was I going to say - when Mr Rae was away we really - didnae get our holidays because there was always a minister too come in his place, so we had to stay there, but we got it easier you see b
ecause - there was just the minister staying there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 There wouldn't be entertaining to do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
There wasnae so much to do, there was just his bedroom and - he was a younger man that came always, so - he got up early, I didna need to carry the food up the stairs, and that sort of thing. But they were -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What about your holidays then, did you get any?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh yes, we got holidays. But we got the holidays at different times. I remember once - I got my holidays when they were away, but the cook didn'
t because the minister was coming, but she had a sister came to stay with her, and they asked me if I would take the dog with me. Oh dear. My father says, dear me, when he saw the size of the Girlie - Girlie they called it, he says, how on earth do you fe
e
d that dog? And I said, well it just gets what we got you see, but - being at home it couldna get the feeds that it got at the Manse. He says, I'll be sending a fine big bill, but this was only a laugh, only fun. I remember my father laughing when he saw 
it. It was a nice dog but you - it did take a lot to keep it you know. Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What was the food like for you at the Manse?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh splendid, we just got what they - got. Grand food. There was no lack of food. No, we just got what they got. And on the Fr
iday evenings, I was thinking about this this morning, I was cleaning up the grate, I'd always to go in - they had one son, and he was out in - Africa, and every Friday evening, in case they had forgotten - about five o'clock - I'd to go and ask them if t
h
ey had remembered Mr Neils letter, because - they were forgetful, a bit forgetful. Mr Rae wasn't so bad, but Mrs Rae was kind of forgetful, and - if they had - had forgot to get it ready they would be writing it all week you know, their own daily - what w
as going on, and I had to - go and remind them, sometimes they had forgotten, and it would have been - goodness help me if I had never remembered. I had to keep that in mind. And on a Sunday we got home - got no evenings out.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 None at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 None at
 all. Church every Sunday morning. And - on - second Sunday after dinner, I got away home. But on the Sunday that the cook was out, Mrs Rae told me to invite my sister down - for the afternoon. So - she, my sister, was down every Sunday afternoon. Ad - I 
used to get going up the road a wee bit with her, about six o'clock she usually went away.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What time did you have to be back on the Sundays that you went home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Half past nine for prayers. We got prayers every night and - I tell you a story about 
that. Didna matter if it was - rain, hail, thunder or lightning, you'd to be in for prayers, and if you were late they waited for you. Would wait 'til you changed if you were soaking, it wouldna matter whether you were soaking or not, they would wait for 
y
ou to change. So - after I'd been there maybe about two years, Mr Rae found that - there was two services every Sunday you see, he found that things were getting a bit - too much for him, so he applied for an assistant. And the first - he had three assist
a
nts while I was there, and the first one that came was a Mr Hunter. And - he was a - well - he wasn't middle aged, he was further on than that, but he was quite a good - preacher. And he stayed in the Manse for a little while, but this was going to be too
 
much work for the cook and she complained. And - they found a place for him to - to go. And - what happened to him, something happened to each of them. It came - very frosty weather, and they held the curling on the castle wall at Lochmaben. And this was 
-
 at a weekend, they were having a curling match. Well - Mr Hunter - it appeared was very fond of watching it so he was on the loch this day, and Mrs Doctor Sanders was one of the ladies sitting - up at the window of one of these villas that looks onto the
 
castle, and she saw the ice breaking through her glasses, and a man disappeared, the first one was her own husband, Doctor Sanders, but they got him out, the ice had been - melting a bit in - right in the middle of the loch. And the next one that went in 
w
as Mr Hunter, the minister. And - he got a chill and was very very ill for a long time. And after he - got better I think he had pneumonia looking back, he didn't come back, he gave up the job. So the next one that came was Mr Ure, Ure, a young minister, 
q
uite a young - student he was, very nice, tall young man, I'm sure he was six feet. And he got in at this same place where Mr Hunter had been staying. And he studied so hard that he went off his head. And had to be - had to go away, and was, you know, in 
a
 place - he would get all right, but that was what happened to the second one, wasn't it unfortunate? Well, the third one that came - was a Mr Tate, a man I should think between thirty and forty looking back now, and - the cook - had left by this time, he
r
 mother died, and she had to go home to keep house to her father. So we got another - girl - Geddes was her name, June Geddes, and she came from Hightae Moss, a cottage there, and - she was a very pretty girl, I can remember her, she had - black - curly b
l
ack hair, wavy, you know, not done with pins but - really naturally. Beautiful skin she had and red red cheeks, she was a very fine looking girl. And they called her mother, she must have taken after her mother, the Moss Ross. That's what she was called. 
W
ell, this Mr Tate was the new minister, and couldn't - we used to sit - there was the minister there, and Mrs Rae there. And Mr Tate was just there, well we sat just beside the bookcase, just at the side of them, and you know he fastened his eyes on this 
g
irl - it must have been love at first sight I think because - I left, I'd been three years there and I left, but I knew fine - I - I was getting on, I would be what, I would be fourteen, fifteen, sixteen, I would be - over sixteen by then, I knew fine tha
t
 there was something between them, because if he got a chance he was always talking to her you see. So after I left, she told me this herself, we corresponded, and - there was one day - Mrs Rae was out at a meeting, and when she come in, they were - so bu
s
y standing talking at the hall table, that - they never heard her 'til she was right in the hall. And she just looked at them, she'd never suspected anything you see, and she says, what are you doing here June, get to the kitchen. Just like that. So Mr Ta
t
e - turned round and said, Mrs Rae, this girl - I hope to marry. He'd proposed to her and everything was all done and nobody knew - he'd been to see her parents and everything. And - here I happened to meet her one day in Lockerbie, I was in Lockerbie the
re, and she was beautifully dressed, she was a fine looking girl, and - she told me this and I said, and are you getting married, I said, good for you? Marrying a minister you see. So she told me this -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What did Mrs Rae have to say about this then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh - furious. Furious. Fair furious, and so were all the girls in the choir for they were all setting their caps at him. They really were, you know. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Why was she annoyed, because it was from her house they were meeting?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes, because she
 didna know anything that was going on, and she would like to think it was above her, it wouldnae be above her at all, I mean he was - he was a clever man and had got on, but they were quite nice - decent people. So - some had more money than others that'
s
 how I look on them. Well - anyway, she told me that they were getting married in such a like day, and that - they were going to Hawick, he'd got a church Hawick, but alas - it never came off. It appeared - oh I was sorry for her, the last time I saw her 
she was fair heartbroken. She'd a beautiful engagement ring on and everything. And - it appeared - that when - now this was the funny thing about it, she was ill}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2039055\charrsid2967080 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 gitimate, she'd been born but - her name was Geddes, well her mother's was Vatchet, she'd been 
born, Mr Watt wasn't her father you see, she'd taken her mother's name, and - the church people - shows you how strict they were, gave him the choice to marry her and give up his church, or - take the church and give up - and that's what he did, he gave u
p his church, or - take the church and give up - and that's what he did, he gave up here. Wasn't it terrible.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 I didn't think the church would have been as strict as that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Neither - oh but that church was. That church was, and the Rae's were terri
bly strict, if you were - at that time - I don't know, it's not now, but - if - if any girl had made a mistake and had a child like before she was married, this was taking place when I was at the Manse, they would not be admitted into the church again, un
t
il they had stood what they called the session, Burns writes about that. Yes, but it was in my day too. That's honestly now, and I could quote you two or three instances of it. And Mr Rae once preached from the pulpit about brides coming to the church you
 
know and not bridges at all, and - these Hoskiths left the church over it because both of their daughters was expecting when they were getting married, and they took it for themself, well - these girls had to come in front of all these Elders and admit - 
a
nd the minister - admit that they had done wrong, and - asked for pardon. And what I couldnae - I didnae see it then, but since, when I grew up and knew the character of some of them that was Elders, I didna think it was right at all, and I spoke out my m
ind and told them that. But that's what they did in these days, so - you see - when they knew that she was ill}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2039055\charrsid2967080 egiti}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
mate, that - the - Mr Watchet wasn't her father, and that she would only have her mother's name on - you see - on her birth certificate they w
ouldnae have him - as the minister, unless he gave her up, or - went out of the church, and he gave her up. She - she married a -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 It doesn't say much for him does it?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 It didnae, I - he fell in my estimation, I thought he was a nice man, of cour
se so did she. And - oh my, it - what consternation there was because Mr - Watchet, he was a gamekeeper and he was a - he seemed to be a very strait laced man, he had a daughter of his own, Mary, and she was working in Lockerbie, of course I was in Locker
b
ie then, and Mary knew me through her sister. And - she used to go with a young man, and do you know - on her nights off - she never knew where her father would be - about the street watching her to see that she was - behaving herself. And - one night - w
h
en her mother woke up, he was sitting in bed with a razor, going to cut the mother's throat, it put him off his head. Put the - father off his head, the worry - about this. Aye. So he was in the Crichton for a while, but he got all right and of course - h
e died, Mrs Watchet, died and I never heard anymore except, that Jean - married - a soldier, in Edinburgh, she went away from - her native place altogether, and she married a - a regular soldier, I heard that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Were the Rae's very fussy about the way you behaved?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh mercy, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh but if you had had boyfriends as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh got no boyfriends in. We did - they - everybody that came - to the door - had to - come to the front door, there was no back door. There's a big gate - it's still there
 yet at the Manse, and that was kept locked. And - if anybody wanted out all the bowlers - boards, you know, for bowling, carpet bowling - was kept in - one of these sheds, but they had to come to the front door and get the key, and then we had to lock th
e
 - gate after them, they'd to come to the front door always, no - we werenae allowed - you were allowed visitors like, but unless you were - engaged to a young man or - well - there was nobody there, I mean I was too young, and - I think Maggie - Wilson, 
that was the cook's name, she'd had a young man but he'd been killed and she never had any more time you know, she never married at all, because I knew of her until the day she died. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 How did you get on with her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Well - she was a - you know,
 she was a hard working - woman, but I liked Jean best because - I'd only been there a day or two - the young girl that had been - a funny thing, the young girl that had been there before me - got }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2039055\charrsid2967080 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080  table}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2039055\charrsid2967080 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
maid's job at Newpart where we were before we came 
here, with Mrs Keswick of Newpark and she used to say to me in the morning, have you not that done yet? Have you not finished in there yet? Eeh, you're not like wee Jean McGeorge. This was always - well - well, I was only new, but - I mean apart from that
, she was - you know, she was a good cook and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What did you have to call her, did you call her by her first name?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Maggie just. Aye, oh yes, we sat together you see. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 And what did Mrs Rae call you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Martha. Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 She used first names, what did you call her, did you have to call her madam?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh no, just Mrs Rae. Oh they were - they were nice people, and - they were - they were really good - good to us you know, in every way, we got whatever they were getting we got, we didn'
t have anything different than what we had, and - they used to - when I - when I left them there I got that Bible from Mr Rae, he gave me that Bible. And - she told me how to - you know, gave me a great lecture about walking the straight and narrow path y
o
u know, of course it was all for my good - before I came away, they were very - very - religious people, very strict, and - he went on a bicycle up to visit you know, Templand, the folk round Templand, and I'd always to lace up his boots for him, he could
nae - I'd lots to do for them you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You were a personal maid as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
I was a personal maid. Yes. And he used to say tome, now - if you bring me down word - when you go up today, where's your grandpa this weather that he's no coming to church.
 So I had to bring him down. But they were kind you know, they just made you like themselves, they took a - a charge of you, it was just - really like being at home. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What sort of place did you have to sleep, did you have a room of your own?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Yes, we had a room of our own. And - I was going to tell you about - one night. Oh dear, I'll never forget it as long as I live. One night - when these bowling boards were out, these two lads - we knew them, we knew plenty of lads but we darena have them
 in, and - this one was a joiner, and he had a fancy for this Jean you see, and - they - one that worked with him, he was a Lochmaben lad too so they said - are you not allowed any lads in at night? And we said, no. So - they said, well - come to the gate
 
tonight. What time have you to be upstairs? Ten o'clock. Well, come to the gate about half past nine, and we'll have some chocolates for you, for both of us. So they did, they brought us boxes of chocolates, we were standing talking at the gate, we know t
hey - knew they were quite safe in the study. But Mr Rae always come through to my pantry, the last thing at night, for - he always took whisky, and - what was it - seltzer he called it, I made it, they learned me how to make it, a great - big }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2039055\charrsid2967080 siphon}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 , you g
ot the powders at the chemist. Soda water is was really. And he always come through, so - while we were standing there, I don't know whether he was early or not, but we saw the light going on in my pantry. Oh we just about dropped, so we left the lads, yo
u know, and slipped in the back }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2039055\charrsid2967080 d}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 oor and -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 We slipped into this bee room.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What was the bee room?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Bee room? Bee. Bee. He kept bees. Bees, the minister, and he got them - got a lot of honey, and this woman that used to come in, Tibby they ca
lled her - she was grand at - at - helping the minister with bees, I couldna - I didna want to learn anything about them because we'd had them at home, and I was frightened for them. But Tibby could work with them too, they'd a lovely big garden, an enclo
sed garden, and he used to work away there amongst the flowe}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2039055\charrsid2967080 rs, they got a man to come in a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
nd do the vegetables, strawberries and - beautiful garden they had, and - we stood there in this bee room, 'til he went through to the study and we were past - past o
urselves because we'd to go past the study door and up the stair and we took off our shoes, it was after ten o'clock you see, and when we got into the bedroom - we both went into Maggie's bedroom and we - of course it was Jean then, and - when you recover
 we said, never again will we do that, and we never did. Oh dear.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you feel homesick when you went away first?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh terrible. I remember mother used to come down and see me sometimes. Saturday afternoons. Mrs Rae would say, now when your mother 
coming down to see you, tell her if she's down - for messages to come round and have a cup of tea with you, they were very good that way. So - they took her into the study, and of course I didn't know anything that was - passing, but - Mrs Rae had said to
 her - that I cried and I cried, so I did, you see, my wee sister was just - well I was nearly leaving the school when she was born, the youngest one you see, and I used to take her out in her}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2039055\charrsid2967080 
 }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 pram at night, and - I missed her terribly, it was her I was mis
sing more than anything. But after about three months, it took me three months to get - I never thought about wanting away or anything, I knew that I was - doing right to the working you see, but - I would have been quite happy if mother had said, come ho
me. But - I stuck in it and I stayed there for three years. That was as long as she kept them, this was the training you see. Only like my husband did, I only got three pounds - in the six month, that was all he got. But he had good food and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You were lucky with your food weren't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Aye. Oh were lucky.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What about clothes, did Mrs Rae give you a special uniform to wear?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes. White - linen aprons in the morning and - nice fancy one for the afternoon. You know, muslin they were. The - t
he morning one - was - linen you know, that unbleached calico - stuff, when it was boiled they - they - turned white you see. Maggie did these but - but - and Mrs Manners, but I took all my other things home. Mother told me to take my personal washing hom
e and she would do them, because -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you get a dress to wear under your aprons?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did Mrs Rae provide that for you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Either - either blue - or - print dress, either blue - I had a blue one - and I had sort of - reddish one she gav
e me too, dresses to wear. And black in the afternoon when you had your wee - fancy apron on. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you ever have to do any of the shopping?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Was that one of your jobs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 I used to go out often and do the shopping in the 
morning. There was a little fish shop - not far off the Manse in the high street, and - Mrs Rae would maybe have - told the fish lady the day before - he'd have some fillet in the morning, she took a breakfast, Mr Rae didna always take it, so often we had
 fish, we'd always something for breakfast. Bacon and eggs or boiled eggs or - fish or something like that, we always got our breakfast, we did - every morning. We didna get porridge - thank goodness. I'd had enough at home. Oh I hated it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 So you were fed very well then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Aye. Aye. We were fed well. Cup of tea - ten o'clock, cup of tea. Ten or half past. Or - you know, dinner was at one. They had a dinner - through the day always, and then just a supper at night you see. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You would have to wait 'til after you had served their dinner?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Well, I'd - they didna want you to wait on them when they were alone, you just took it in - and Mr Rae - gave out - I had to pass Mrs Rae's hers you see, and then - you're finished. They didna keep you w
aiting on them - when they were there alone, but when they had visitors you did, always waited on them, so go ours in between, taking in the next course like dinner, we would - we would take out - I would take in the meat, and - then as soon as it come ou
t if it was roast or whatever it was, we had our - meat, and then - take the pudding in, by the time I come back from putting the pudding in, Maggie had the meat cut up for us and we got our dinner, we just had it - along with them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 It sometimes wouldn't be very hot then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh well - maybe she heated it, I don't know, there was always a grand - got a beautiful big range, she maybe put it in - when I brought it out she maybe put it into the oven, I can't remember that. But it was grand food. I think -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Was it a big kitchen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes. A monstrous big kitchen. Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Was that the only place that you had to go apart from your own room when you weren't working?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes, just the kitchen, but it was comfortable mind. We'd - had - comfortable cha
irs each, and - we had each our own pantries, Maggie had a pantry and I had a pantry. And I had to save all the tea - all the tea that was left, you know, sometimes the teapot wasn't emptied, Mrs Rae watered all her flowers with tea, she'd the loveliest g
l
ossy leafed plants and that's what she said - put water in it like but she always did that. She looked after all her plants herself, in the drawing room window and - at the dining room window, there were great big - all her windows, the drawing room windo
w opened into the garden, a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2039055\charrsid2967080 F}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
rench window. It was a nice house, old fashioned now, it's still the same - Mr Dibb told me, he says, we still have the stone floor in the kitchen. And - it's not a Manse now, they call it the - what do they call it now, it's a 
name - St Magdalen's - no, Magdalen's House, it has a different name now, but - the Manse now is - the Barras. The Barras Manse. But - it's let to a - teacher, there's a - a Mr Roberts I think his name is, he's in the Manse now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You say there was a stone floor in the kitchen, did you have to wash the floor,
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh no. No, Maggie did that herself. Or else - Tibby, that woman that come in to do the rough work, it depended if we had visitors, they always got help - so they must have had means because I mean - a minister's stipend wouldna have run to all that.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You say Mrs Rae used to have the ladies in the afternoon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What sort of folk came there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Mrs Douglas of Halleaths came, the lady from Halleaths, she was up there - a consta
nt visitor, and - she used to come up and - and a basket of fruit handed me this, this was for Mrs Rae from the greenhouses at Halleaths. She was an awful nice lady, a real lady. And all these maids used to come to church, and they all had little bonnets 
o
n. Oh the staff they kept, you know, the butler and - and footmen, she'd always a man with livery with her, you know, it was a - a carriage and pair, you know what I mean. Not a motor car. Aye. A brougham. Well that's what used to come for her and then - 
i
f she was going to make a long visit he used to go away and she would tell him to come back at - maybe half past four, this would be afternoon tea they had brought in the drawing room, a - big silver tray and - oh - they'd beautiful silver, I told you tha
t before, and the nicest silver ever I saw. And - in any of the places.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did she have more than one visitor at a time then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh yes, it was an open - afternoon. Unless she had asked Mrs Douglas specially, but she just used to come, and - ladies th
at she knew, canna remember them all, the doctor's wife used to come, Doctor Reid. And - Doctor Reid's wife and - and - lots of ladies that lived in these villas you know down by the loch.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 It was all the people from the bigger houses that came?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh aye. Oh yes, but they used to have other people in too. It would be her at home day. Mr Rae used to - there used to be people come for advice to him you know, and he used to - treat them very nice. It was really a - a nice - they were really a nice cou
ple.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 How did she get on with just the ordinary folk in the village, the ordinary people in the village?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh they all looked up to her. Aye, they - she used to have a - a guild afternoons too, and - there was the Girls Friendly Society, that's the 
young folk you know, they still have it. And - they used to - they used to have an afternoon for them, and they used to be in the drawing room but get their tea in the dining room all round the big - what a big table it was, and then they used to have gam
es, hoop-la and - enormous ground they had in lawn out through the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2039055\charrsid2967080 F}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
rench window. She used to have - lots of things like that, she did a lot of entertaining. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What about the people who came to stay, what sort of folk were they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh they were 
very nice, very nice people. Mr Rae had a nephew I think he would be minister of Brydekirk, the Reverend C.A.A. McVane, I could remember their name, I can remember things - and - oh I've a good memory, and they used to always to be in spare bedroom with t
h
e dressing room, there was a dressing room attached to this - to the big spare bedroom, and they were always in there. And - they had morning tea taken up, you see it was different for visitors. And - used to have their friends came from down south and - 
M
r Neil, the son was never home while I was there. From Africa, he never was home, of course I was just three years there. But he never was home. They went away when they left Lochmaben they went to live in Edinburgh. And I saw first - Mr Neil Rae's death 
and them Mrs Neil Rae's. So -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 When the visitors came how did they treat you?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh, just the same, they were just like themselves, just the same. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 None of them sort of bossed you about?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 No. They didnae, no, they were very nice people
, they were just - just like themselves. I - I've - often though - how nice and friendly they were you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You were there for three years?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Mm-hm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Where did you go after that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh - I went home after that. By home I mean - Mrs Wilson 
of the Commercial Bank House in Lockerbie - wanted a house table maid, and of course - she knew fine there - that you got a good training from Mrs Rae, so Miss Wilson - arrived.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 This was before you actually finished with Mrs Rae?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Before actually
 finished. And - of course Mrs Neil Rae wouldnae know anything about her you see. Or she wouldna have advised me to go, so - I said that I couldn't do anything until I had - seen my parents, but that I would get in touch with her. So I can't remember how 
much they gave me but it was quite a good}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8941568\charrsid2967080  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 wage.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What did you get from Mrs Rae, after the first year?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Well I - it went up every year, but I really can't remember, now that honestly I don't remember, but after the first year you got more, you see, 
you were getting able to do better. It would be to - sort of encourage you, you see. Well anyway I can't remember what I got when I left, but anyway - they were giving me more there, I can't remember what it was really, but - when I talked to my father an
d
 mother they said, well - it's quite near, I mean Lockerbie wasnae so far away, although they did - I didna know Lockerbie. So - mother - went with me, I got - agreed to go. There was - Mr and Mrs Wilson, they were bank - he was a banker, commercial bank,
 
and Miss Wilson, at home. Mr George was in a bank in Edinburgh. But he was at home for holidays. So - when we got to Lockerbie we'd to come up from Lochmaben with the train, I was carrying my case and I - we didnae know where the place was you seed. So - 
I
 said to the porter, or mother would say - can you tell me where the Commercial Bank is? He looked, he says, the Commercial Bank? Are you going there? And I said, yes. Eeh my lassie, you're going home. Now I kennedit - you see, he meant it wasnae a good p
lace. I was dumped right away. So - we went and rung the bell, same there, the back door locked. But worse, there was bars on the window there, you see, for the bank.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Not for your benefit, for the bank?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 So - no. So - mother says, well - you'll n
o be staying if it's no a good place, so dinna worry yourself. So - she seemed quite nice, we saw Mrs Wilson, I hadnae seen her up to then. She was an elderly lady too and her husband too but he was still - working there. He was still manager of the bank.
 
So - they were quite nice and gave my mother a cup of tea, so I thought oh it's maybe no so bad as - as they say. And - there was a girl came the same day, we both knew - from Closeburn Jenny McDowell, and she was an awful nice girl. Her father was gameke
eper at Barraby Castle at Closeburn. And he seemed a nice man, he came there, of course she was older than me, and we were good chums for a blessing, we got on well together, because -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What sort of job was she to do then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Well, just the same work
 but Jenny had - cook general you see. And - after mother was away we were set - sitting at our own cup of tea, and I says, well, I telled her like what the porter had said. She says, well - I didnae get a good report about it either, but, she says, that 
w
asnae 'til after I had engaged to come. And - Mrs Wilson came - there was a speaking tube in the kitchen, you could speak down from the dining room. And she said she would come down and tell us about our work, after we'd had our tea. So down she came. And
 
- she said, now - at ten o'clock - lock the back door, and lock the front door, this was me. Jenny to lock the back door, lock the front door, and bring the keys up to the dining room on a tray - a wee - silver tray. So I did that. Now the house had been 
on fire we couldna have got out, because our bedroom, we'd just the one bedroom there, the bedroom had bars on it you see for the bank - premises were down the hall. The kitchen had bars, the pantry had bars, every place had bars, we were barred in.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You were sleeping downstairs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Sleeping down there too, with bars on the window and a very small bedroom it was. But as long as we were happy together it didnae matter. So the following morning - I had the dining room to do, it was the dining room they 
sat in there, they had a smoke room, a dining room and a drawing room on the first floor, but mind they were up a stair, it was a heavy place to work. And then - the old people's bedroom was on the same floor as the dining room. But Miss Wilson slept up -
 
on the top, very top. Like its up - one, two, three, four storey building. It's still there. So - in the morning - before - the town clock had stopped ringing six I had to be up for the keys. And - sometimes it was a scramble because - they often had part
i
es too, and - you were lte getting to bed and sometimes slept in. I've seen me just - running up with my frock on, nothing underneath to get the keys and then what a job to get dressed, because as soon as you were up she was up. The first morning I was bu
sy doing the grate - in the dining room when I heard a squeak, I could - I could hear better then, here she's standing at the door to see if I had the - the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8941568\charrsid2967080 drug }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 it down on the top of the carpet in case I was doing anything she hadnae told me. And - she jus
t seemed to go about all the time from the time you were up watching. And - I'd to open the window - showed me the window that was opened to air the room, see, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8941568\charrsid2967080 V}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 enetian blind, oh my goodness, they were the bane of my life. Big one in the middle, two at the
 side, and then two - further over, and on a Wednesday I'd to go up and clean these when they were in the room sitting, they watched you like hawks, if you missed one - you missed one, they sat and watched everything you did. Well - we didna get fed there
 
either. The food we got, margarine, no butter. Everything locked past, sugar, tea, and everything locked past. And - Wednesday was her at home day, and used to sit at the dining room window watching - the street to see if anybody was coming to her at home
 
days, we discovered this through time. And then - if they saw any ladies like or any cars stop in the road - cars in the vogue by then - they used to - they had a sort of gas - I don't know what you called it - it was a - a long thing like that, and you l
i
t it, and stuck into the heart of the fire, you see, and this blew up the fire like as if it had been on for ages, and the room would be stone cold, 'cos it was always the drawing room if ladies come in. Well, when the drawing room fire was on you had to 
put }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8941568\charrsid2967080 drug }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
it from the door, right up to the fire, you daren't walk on the carpet, she thought it was too good you see for us to walk on, and - clean the grate that way. And she was up as usual watching. But - what was worse than everything she used to put ha
lf crowns and things below the carpet to see if we lifted the rug. But I told her one day, I said you don't need to put that money - there to tempt me Mrs Wilson, because I don't steal what's not mine, I just said it. Oh, she says, I didn't do that. Now, 
I
 says, if that money dropped it couldn't drop right into the middle of the carpet, but they never hid it, you see, everybody knew. So at once Jenny says, well I don't know about you, she says, I was ill for about a fortnight, just malnutrition I think, an
d they got my sister - Nean to come - and - do my work, they wouldna let us home because they knew fine I wouldna come back.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 How long were you there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 A year. Well - we didnae get any money, we were only paid once the six month we were engaged. J
enny McDowell says, now, she says - please yourself, but she says - I'm leaving. She says, suppose I get nothing, she says, I couldnae stick this, so she wrote to her father - to come, and - get her away. And - her father arrived a nice - big - nice looki
n
g man, and he said, would you ask Mrs Wilson if she would speak to me. Well, what could I do, I had to go up to the dining room and said Mr McDowell - would like to speak to you. I'm not going to speak to him, she says, send him in to Mr Wilson in the ban
k. I says, by }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8941568\charrsid2967080 J}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
ove, that's the very bit I wanted to get. So in he went to the bank, of course I didnae know what took place, Mr Wilson had a room to himself in there. There was three or four clerks, but they all knew, the clerks and everybody knew what a pl
ace it was. So - he said, my girl is not getting fed here Mr Wilson. He said - they're not - they're - neither of them are getting their food, he says, of course I'm speaking for my own daughter, and, he says, it's no place at all this, he says, you've an
 awful cheek to advertise for girls to come to this place. He said, but could she have her money, she's worked and deserves the three months pay she's worked. No, you get no mon}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8941568\charrsid2967080 ey}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080  he says, six months engagement, if you br}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8941568\charrsid2967080 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
ak it you can't get any money. Well
, he says, it doesn't matter for the money, and he opened the door then, so that the clerks would hear him, and he says, never did I think such people as you existed, in the - at this enlightened day, but, he says, I'm taking my daughter away now, and tha
n
kful to have her in my - under my own roof tonight, and all the clerks was - they were pleased you see. So - Jenny went away and there I was left. So - when I went home, we got a weekend, I forgot, once a month. I said, mother I must get away from there b
e
cause there's no cook now, and she was coming down and - it was worse than ever, and just myself, no one to talk to. So my mother says, oh - the - the - she seemed all right. You see, she was all right with my mother and they would think I was just - mayb
e
 being led away with Jenny, with her. They got an old woman, I forget her name, she was seventy, and she couldn't cook at all. She came in, and she was no company for me, so I says - mother says, you stick this six month - we'll get you away then. Well - 
f
rom then they were far nicer to me, but this was what was coming on the turn you see, and I must have been suiting them because they - they honestly didna want me away, and in fact after I left them at the year's end - Miss Wilson saw me from the window a
n
d came and said, would you not like to come back to us and - and mother'll give you - I forget how much money, but I said, oh no, I'm not coming back, and I hadnae got a job, but I said, I'm not coming back. So - when I went - to one of the places I did g
o
 to eventually - the lady went to Mrs Wilson for a reference, you see, you had always to have two separate references. Oh, she says, I wouldn't take her, she's not at all a strong girl. She was ill several times while I - while - she was with me, and I do
n
't think she's really suited for the - for the work. So - she had - wanted me to go, this lady, and she said to the - to the - husband, well - I've got neither - not such a good report of the girl, she's not very strong. He says, how long was she at the b
a
nk? She says, a year. Well, he says, take her, she deserves a gold medal for staying a year. That's as sure as - the lady told me herself. Oh yes, I forgot about that. They were having a - a big do, Mr George - was coming of age, and they were having a - 
a
 - it was really a dinner in the middle of the day, and I hadna been feeling well, it was just the - want of proper food. The - what they gave us was these pickled eggs and you know half the time when we broke them they were rotten, and therefore we had n
o
thing for our breakfast, just bread and margarine. Not - not even butter. Just margarine. And - the - this big party was coming on and Miss - I forget their name that was in Gillespie Hall but big nobs, but they were coming to this luncheon party - and th
e
y had a - a Miss - Jessie - what now - Jessie Munro was coming in to help me to wait, oh they were - liked all their orders there waiting on the table, even when they were alone I had to wait on them. Well - the day before I wasnae feeling well at all and
 was pains in my stomach and I think it was a ch}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8941568\charrsid2967080 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
ll I had got, and I - oh I couldna hardly do anything, so - in the finish about a quarter to one I went up to her, I said, I'm very sorry Mrs Wilson, but I could not wait the table today. I said, I'm feeling 
so ill, I said, Jessie will have to manage on her own. And there was not many coming. She says, you go downstairs and I'll come down. Well she come down, and she brought me - what would be half a glass of whisky, and she put twenty drops of laudanum in it
 
to kill the pain. I never knew any more. It might have killed me. When I wakened it was one o'clock, it was ten o'clock at night, I couldna believe when I saw the dark, and I could hear them still washing the dishes through in the pantry, from the bedroom
.
 And when Jenny - Jenny they called this old woman, Jenny what - I can't remember her name - when she come in she says, we thought you were gone. We thought she had killed you. Well she might have. When I told my mother what she had done she says, that's 
t
errible. Counted the drops - into the - wasn't that terrible. To kill the pain, it would certainly kill the pain. Yes. Oh dear. Well - we heard the greatest tales about - about the girls that had been at that place you know, the people in Lockerbie told u
s
 about them, they were having a party one night, and both of them, both the cook and the table maid had been up stairs helping maybe carrying down dishes, and they were taking off their aprons and they're down and they had their cases packed and a cab and
 away, and they left them with all the dishes to - isn't that a terrible place mind.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You would take it terribly hard after being with such nice people before?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh, it was terrible. Well I just stayed a year there. By jiminy it was a hard year for me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 If you had gone straight there from home you wouldn't have known what a good house would be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 No. I wouldn't have known what a good place was. Well - after I'd been there -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 It would be a bit different at the Grove because it was a great big place wasn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
There was a staff there, yes, I was one of the housemaids, I went in for the house - I liked housework best, I liked the table too you know, but I liked housework best. So there was three housemaids, and - funny thing, at the Gr
ove there was three holidays, will you believe that, there was one holiday, I was one, Halliday was my name, Halliday was Effie, the head housemaid's name, then there was me, and there was Bessie Anderson, that came from Glen Lee, New Galloway, her dad wa
s gamekeeper in Glen Lee, and the ladies maid was Miss Haliday. Wasn't that funny.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You weren't related at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 No relation whatever, wasn't that a funny thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 How did you get the job there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Well, I'd been - I had a rest for a wee whil
e after I left - Mrs Wilson's - and one - one day I was walking - just across from the bank where they lived, and - here Miss Wilson had seen from the window, and she come down and she said, we noticed you from the window. She said, have you got a - not w
o
rking yes? And I said, no, not yet. She says, would you like to come back to us, because we would like you? I said, oh no thank you, I said I'm in hands for a job, well I wasna, but it wasnae certain, but to go back there I'd no notion. I was glad to get 
a
way from it. So - this job was in the - paper, in the Dumfries paper, but Miss Faulds was the lady at the - had a register office at Dumfries and I had put my name in there. And I went in to see her this day and she had this - housemaid's job, she says, h
o
w do you like that? So I said, whereabouts was it. And she said at the Grove. It was Maxwell's of the Grove, but it was let to people - the name of Church. And - I didn't see the place or anything before I went, a lady to wrote to me when I applied for th
e job and she said she thought that I would be suitable, and would I come - I forget now how much I was to get, it was more than what I had at the bank, and - would I come on a certain date, so I just went out, I'd never seen the place. And -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 It would be difficult to get away out there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Ah - from Dumfries. She told me what to do like, to get a cab and they would pay it, they conveyance out. So - I didn't know whether I would like it or not you know, so many, because I'd been just used with the - 
two. However - they were quite a cheery lot of girls, and - they had a butler, and they had a hall boy, and a housekeeper and when I went she was a very nice person. Mrs Wright they called her and she must have taken to me just as I took to her, and - she
 
was leaving thought when I went, which I was very sorry about, she left there and went to Capenoch, Gladstones of Capenoch. Well - Mr Bonwick the butler said - I'd been there maybe - three weeks, he says, well girls, one day in the hall, he says, well gir
l
s, he says, you're getting a housekeeper that they had in London, they had a house in London. And he says, they had eight housemaids in six month, when she was here, and why ever they'd taken her back, he says, I do not know. But she was a splendid organi
ser. Very strict, you know, print frock she wore and all starched you know. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Was she English?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 She was English. Mr Bonwick was English, Thomas was English too. You see, they - went so long to London and so long up in - Dumfriesshire.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did they take some of the staff with them when they went?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
No, they didnae take any of the staff with them, because they must have had staff there, in London. Maybe they would be on board wages you see, to keep their house, you know, to keep their house 
aired and that. Give them less wage but they would be getting their food. There wouldna be no -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 They wouldn't have the same work to do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 No, there would be somebody in the house anyway, we didn't learn that, but they never took their staff from D
umfries with them. So Mrs Haller came and - the butler and Miss - and the housekeeper and that, there was what they called the pugs parlour, that was supposed to be where the upper servants - took their food, but they never used it, we all sat together in
 the hall. You see, we all sat together. But the under ones weren't allowed to speak at the table, unless to say - please pass the butter or pass the bread, no conversation, wasn't that terrible.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Were you included in that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 I was included in that
, just the - the head housemaid, the lady's maid, the housekeeper, and - Mr Bonwick, these were the ones that could talk, of course they could address you and you could address them back, but you werenae allowed to carry on - conversation with any of your
 
own friends. So - one day the - chauffeur came from Terregles, Galbraith's of Terregles, and it was quite different there, they were free and easy, they were allowed to talk. So strange to say he sat down beside me, you know, he come in for his tea and hi
s
 people were in having afternoon tea, and of course he started to talk and I was just answering him and no more, I wasnae carrying on a conversation, so when he rose to go out he says - thank you for my tea Mrs Hall, and he says, and Bonwick, this was the
 
butler, he says, the next time I come put me beside a girl that can talk to me. Of course Mr Bonwick told him outside we werena allowed to, he was a new chauffeur then. And he apologised, but he thought I was a dummy I think. Oh dear. Yes. There was a - a
 
- governess for the children, there was three children, and I had that - I had that part of the house to do, the schoolroom. And - I was up at five in the morning, no wonder I get up at five, I had to because - you know, there wasnae the labour saving dev
i
ces you have now. And the first morning, Margaret often laughs, I though Effie the head housemaid would have been up, she showed me the night before what I had to do, I had the outer hall to keep and a great - great big fireplace, all steel, old fashioned
. Crikey. And marble mats just about the floor, I expect it's the same yet. And all round about all sorts of game, but I'd nothing to do with that, the butler and the hall boy used to -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Game did you say?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Well, heads. Lions and tigers and all thes
e sort of things, I expect that would; belong to the Maxwell's you know, and - they used to take these down once a year and do them - brush them and do them all with Keaings powder and that and everything, when the people were away. So the first morning I
 
went down I went, I went through off our landing, our landing opened off their main one landing, and a candle. And I put my foot in a tiger's mouth, you know, there was tiger - and down the hall I went flying. Nobody heard me, and what a job I had to find
 
lights, because you see all was strange to me really. Oh dear me, I thought I wished I'd never come here, that was what I thought. However, it was quite nice as long as Mrs Wright was there. I quite enjoyed it. But after Mrs Hall came - she used to have a
 
- a terrible manner. And first of all she fell out with the ladies maid, the ladies maid sat beside her - at table, and Mr Bonwick the butler sat at the other end, and she used to be so taken to Miss Halliday that we fair felt it you know. And - Miss Hall
i
day used to rise up from the table sometimes when we were at our food and she would be in tears, the sort of way she spoke to her. And - she told Mrs Church that she was leaving. And I think Mrs Church would speak to Mrs Hall. And - they were - you know, 
they spoke but it was - it was terrible for us because you felt if you were speaking to one the other resented it. It was terrible. Well the next -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 It's not a nice atmosphere is it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 No. The next one she fell out with was the butler, Mr Bonwich, 
she fell out with him. I don't think he - thought about going away because he knew what she was you see before she came. 'til in the finish there was nobody speaking to her but me, and it was - the rest used to say, I don't know how you - you can keep wel
l
 - I wasna in the habit of fighting with people you know. However - it was Bessie's afternoon off, there was nowhere to go. You would - you hadna time to go to Dumfries, there was no transport, I was one - once in Dumfries - the six month I was there, and
 I never was home all that time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you not get much time off at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
No, we got Sunday afternoon off - one - one morning, and Sunday - you went to church, well I was glad to go, for somewhere to go to, Irongray Church, I liked going to church. 
You used to go through the gardens and it was quite near. And then - you were in for the rest of the day. The following Sunday you got out for the afternoon, but there was no place to go, you could go for a walk but there was no place to get anything to e
a
t, you had to come in if you wanted something, and unless you came in the tea hour you didna get any, you'd to wait to - nine o'clock for suppertime. So - sometimes we didna go out at all. So this day - Bessie was out, and there was drawing room tea to ge
t
, there was some ladies in for tea, and Bessie said to me, will you manage the hall tea? I said, oh I'll manage it. So I had the two teas to do. And - when Mrs Hall went up for her hour's rest she said to me - please tell me when the post comes, that was 
four o'clock, she never put her letters down on the table like us, she came down and gave the post her letters so that we wouldna know who she was writing to or anything. Secretive she was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did the postman come up to collect the letters at the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
The postman came in the afternoon and waited on the letters, we used to have them on a table just in the passage, but she came down to him. Well, do you know, I heard the - I heard the post - but it - I was busy cutting thin bread and butter, you know
, I was - I was - had too much to do really. And I let him away, and I never thought about Mrs Hall or what she had said. So Bonwick says, did you tell Mrs - oh, I said, I forgot. Well, he says, the fat's in the fire now. He was English of course. He says
,
 you'll be getting it next. So - she come down with a nice smile on her face, you see, she was still talking to me, and she says, is the postman never passed yet? I said, I'm very sorry Mrs Hall, I forgot to tell you, I said, I had so much to do, getting 
t
he two teas ready, and - huh, I might have known as much. Just like the rest of them. She says, so that was her out way with me. So the next thing was - she was a going away, she got the sack because nobody would stay. Previous to this Bessie had given he
r
 notice, the kitchen maid had given her notice, she couldnae - and I had given mine, because I wanted away, you know, back into - civilization. It was a nice place mind you - beautiful situated place but no - nothing to do on your afternoon out or anythin
g, you couldna get time, you'd to walk to Dumfries, my - I and the kitchen maid walked once in the time we were there, for a good long walk, four miles - out and four miles in and - so -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What size of house is it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh, a big house. Aye, a big hous
e. Beautifully furnished house it was then. And - Mr Church had a - a business room. Now what - what was his business room, I had - had to keep - always to the back of the house, and - he used to do a lot of carpentry, making - things to feed - the grouse
 
and that you know how they used to bring out - pheasants, when you'd pheasants and - grouse and that, he used to make these things, hoppers he called them to feed them in, and he had the place littered with shavings, you never know what you were going to 
have to clean up in the afternoon when you went in, but you had to keep it tidy.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 This was just a hobby of his?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Just a hobby. He'd nothing much to do. And - he was retired from the Army you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What sort of age would he be then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Well t
hey were quite young people, I mean, between forty and fifty I should think. They - master Jim was just three when I was there so - they wouldna be very old. Judy and - and - Geggie they called the eldest one, I don't what their right names was, that was 
-
 there were three - two girls and a boy, and you know, I've seen his name in the papers, Colonel - George something Church, it'll be him right enough. No so long ago I saw it in the paper, and - she was a very - lady like but very strict and stern, I didn
ae care for her, you know they was}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8941568\charrsid2967080 n}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
ae like a - a bit homely, they just thought themselves superior to you, I daresay they were in a sense, they had more money and everything but - even ladies treat you like human beings don't they, when we used to hear her 
coming down the passage we used to slip into a door not to meet her, she was always looking for work for you, something else to do. There was a great big passage - from the dining room right past the butler's pantry, right down - right - and right to the 
k
itchen door, and a wide passage about half the - width of this room, brown linoleum, it was scrubbed twice a week and I had to do that. And she came along one day, I didna hear her, and I was just at the head of the stairs when she said - I was just think
ing, this passage could do scrubbed three times a week, wasn't that awful for the rest of the work you had to do I thought to myself, well it'll no be scrubbed by me much oftener.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What other jobs did you have to do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Mostly - I had the - schoolro
om to do in the morning before they governess come down. You see. They had their tea in a wee room off the schoolroom, Effie did that, thats the housemaid, but I had the schoolroom to do for they kept - there was a nice - fire to do, and fireside to clean
 
up, all black lead and - no modern grates like we have now. And - brass - fender to clean too. And the carpet to sweep, and there was just sweepers, you know there was none of these cleaners then. And when you did - did it out thoroughly, tea leaves down 
to keep down the dust, oh - couldna - Effie was supposed to do that but she was never up. That's the truth, the head housemaid was supposed to do the so I got -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Was she kind of lazy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 No, she was - she was a good worker, but she wasna - an early r
iser in the morning. And - you see, the schoolroom was a thing that needed early to get into, Miss Hunt they called the teacher, the governess, she was up early and you had to have it done so that you were out of her way. I had that to do, then I had this
 
front hall to do. And a passage - right past all the rooms. Effie did the drawing room. And Bessie helped her with the dining room. Effie did the drawing room on her own, that was the head housemaid, Bessie had the - the dining room. And I had the front h
all to do. The schoolroom, and this passage, I had a lot to do, that's why I got up so early. And - that was how we had to in the morning like. And the head - and you had your own room to keep, and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What sort of room did you have there? Did you have one to yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
No. My ma and I shared the room, Mima was the kitchen maid, and - there was - Bessie had a room on her own, Effie had a room on her own, Bella Moore, she was the nursemaid - she'd a room on her own. And there was really two rooms - I 
could have been in a room on my own, but it - it looked out on the back, it was an awful dull room and Mima said - Eslpeth, the one that had been before me, and I - brought a bed in here, but she said if you want to go in to this single room, I said, oh n
o
, just leave it where it is, you'll be glad of somebody to talk to. She was a nice soul. She was engaged when I went, this Mima - Mima what was her name? Oh I remember her name then - that day, she was engaged to a chauffeur at Capenoch, Thornhill, where 
M
rs Wright went to, and told me something, they called here - he used to come and see her, and she left before I did. And she went away down to Burley in Wharfdale, Yorkshire, and she corresponded with me for a long time, and she got on with another lad do
w
n there, George, for all she was engaged to Tommy. And - she used to come up to Penpoint was where she came from, and - she used to write and tell me, she says, I don't know what to do, because when I'm up here I always think I like Tommy best, but when I
 go back I go back to George, well she married George in the finish. And it was as well for he was killed in the war, Tommy. I saw his death in the paper. Aye. He was -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What was the position about boyfriends there, were you allowed to have visitors?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
You were allowed if you asked and it was in the - and the housekeeper was on - was pleased enough to have them, there's the only the - servants hall to have them in, and it meant - that - if you had them you had to have them at a time when your work w
as finished, you couldnae neglect your work to have your boyfriend there. No, Mrs Wright was all right, she dinda mind you having anybody in but Mrs Hall was a different problem. So - I canna say I enjoyed my life there on the whole.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What was the food like there, was it a bit better than it had been at the bank?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh was splendid food. Lovely food, we got as much as we ever need - could eat. And - at night - they had late dinner every night you see, I think it was half past seven, I'm no just - I c
annae just remember that, but we had our supper in the hall at nine o'clock, and we got whatever was left over from the dining room was put on the table, and what I remember was - they used to make - the cook used to make a lot of that peach melba, that w
a
s one of the things on the - and I thought about having it but you know I canna do ice cream now, so I said to Margaret McCarthy, you take it, it's lovely. But they didna, - they took trifle. Well it - by the time it come our time to ask what pudding they
 liked there was none left, for all the top ones got it you see, and we'd to take what was left. Aye. So I was quite pleased to get away - from - there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 How many staff were there altogether in the servants hall?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 How many? There was Mrs Hall, I - 
I can - I'll - I'll just - there was Mrs Hall at the top of the table. Then there was Miss Halliday next to her. Then }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8941568\charrsid2967080 this}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
 was another Miss Halliday, Effie. Effie she got. And - who came next to Effie now? Bella Moore, the - the nursery maid, Bella Moore. 
And - and there was Mr Bonwick, there was Thomas, there was Bessie, myself - wait a minute now 'til I think - myself, Mima Tweddle, that was the kitchen maid. How many's that? Nine. There was ten. But I'll tell you what they did - in the busy time, which 
w
as the summer months - they had a - scullery maid as well - to help, because there were big - always a lot of visitors in the summer months, but I didnae see much of that - I was just six month there, it was the end of the year when I went, November or De
c
ember, January, February, March, April - I didnae see very much, they did have two or three visitors mind, the time I was there. I remember Mrs - Church's sister came, and she had all her food - with her, had to take it up to her, she seemed to lie in her
 bed an awful lot, whether she wasnae very strong I don't know, but - Mr Bonwick used to shake his head when he was getting the trays ready, he says, young people lying in their bed to this time of the day. No, he didnae approve. So -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you come in contact with the children at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh yes, they were nice children, very nice, and the wee boy was a nice wee soul, he was just three, and - they ran about you know and - we saw them outside you know, if we were out shaking the mats and that, they alw
ays came and talked to you because they didna know that we were servants, you know what I mean.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What did they call you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh - they called you Halliday. That's what you got there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You just got your surname?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh you just got your second n
ames there. So did Miss Halliday too, not Miss Halliday, she got Miss Halliday, but Effie just got Halliday, I got Halliday, and - Bessie Bessie - what was her name, oh she was an awfully nice lassie. I wrote to her too for ages. It's queer how names - I 
can remember her first name but no her second her second, that's funny.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What did you call the children when you were talking to them, you called the wee boy master?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh we just called them by their - the children? Oh Master Jim. Miss Judy. And - a
nd master Jim if you were talking about them, but if we were talking about them a - amongst ourselves we just called them their names, Bella did too, Bella Moore was the nursery mai}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8941568\charrsid2967080 d}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080  you see, she used to take them out. She was a nice soul too. In fact they were all - they were all nice, we used to go and have wee chats in each other's room, you know, when we went up - we -

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 When you had time off did you go to your own room?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 We went to our own room, we always did because if you went into the hall w
rite letters and Mrs Hall come in it was misery. And - well there was no other room except what they called - the servants hall, it was a nice comfortable room you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Were there comfortable seats and that kind of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh they were comfortab
le, yes, oh yes. But - Mrs Hall used to go up for an hour up to her room in the afternoon because she'd to be down again for the dinner at night you see. She come down for tea. Sometimes she sent word that - she wouldn't be down for tea, we used to take h
e
r a cup up, I was glad to do it to get her to stay. Well she was always nice with me up to the last - and after that she never spoke, but I had no long to put in. I had - was it Bessie and I left on the same day, or Mima and I, no, I think Mima was away, 
I
 says to Bessie, how are we going to get our money because - they were away, and nothing had been said. And - we'd ordered a cab to come for us you see at a certain time. So it was a beautiful sunny morning I remember, and we took Mrs Hall's cup of tea in
 
at ten o'clock, she was sitting in there. And we were just having ours at the kitchen table. And she said - she never spoke, so I said, we're going off this morning Mrs Hall. I said, Mrs Church didn't say anything about pay did she? Oh yes, I've got your 
p
ay. So she give us our pay. You're getting a lovely morning to go away, and that was the first time she'd spoken, so I say's to Bessie, that old Besom, she condescended to say that, so I says, we're getting our pay all right, so - we were quite pleased to
 wash our hands of the whole thing.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 If you had been there longer would you have got holidays do you think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh - must - we must have got holidays surely, yes - aye, we were kept at the whole time. And - the only time we were free was when - they 
were away in London, we did the spring cleaning it was done before our - you know, before - before we left, all the spring cleaning, it was a big house too, but we were cheery you know, and - were - were working, the rest of them were all right, but - wel
l - when -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did the mistress give you your orders for the day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh no. You knew your orders, you knew what you had to do. Effie was the head housemaid you know, if there was any change or anybody coming - she told Effie. But - she only came once - 
in the morning, ten o'clock to the kitchen, for orders for the day, there was a slate at the end of the - and Mrs Hall would have the menu written out for the day. Now, if she wanted it changed she would consult it you see and say - so and so was coming f
o
r lunch and she would like - this changed you see, and - if there was any - orders at all she left it on the slate and Mrs Hall used to tell us at teatime when we had our - elevenses as they called it. It was just after she went away at ten o'clock, and i
f there was any different orders she told us. We never seen much of them at all you see, except they were - coming into the rooms while you were cleaning them, you were just trying to finish before they would be in their places where they were.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 As long as you did the work they didn't interfere with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
They didn't, no, they never interfered with us, no. Oh no, they never interfered. They were out a lot and - and they had a lot of visitors too. They were out shooting you know. My goodness, we used
 to look into the - larders were down under the - in the basement, and you used to look in and see this stuff hanging you know, shoots, big shoots and - hares hanging up, grouse and - all sorts of - poultry and everything down in here where it was refrige
r
ated you know. Oh. I did - didnae care for it and I said never again would I go into a place like that. No. They said at Terregles it was quite different, they were all friendly there. But it was unfortunate that she brought that Mrs Hall back again when 
she knew fine that the maids wouldna stay there. She must -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Id Mrs Wright had stayed on you would probably have been a lot happier?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh she was nice, yes. She wrote to me too after she went away to Capenoch. She used to - get writing paper and th
at from me when she ran out - because just }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8941568\charrsid2967080 g}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
oing I had laid in plenty of stocks of everything you know to go with, and after she went away she sent me a nice - box of writing paper and thanked me for being so kind to her. She was a nice person, I don't kno
w how they didnae get on with her, but - she must have rubbed them up some way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 How about the governess, did you have much to do with her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 No, no much to do at all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did she consider herself above the rest of you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 She - she - oh she wo
uld, I think so, yes, she spoke to you, she was quite free if she met you, you were outside she always passed the time of day, but not friendly. No. Oh no. I wouldnae -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did the children spend a lot of the time with her, do you think they would see much of their parents at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh - they just went down at a certain time, down into the drawing room, aye. They didnae see much of their parents at all, just were always entertaining, having ladies and - gentlemen in for tea or out shooting, that was th
eir life you see. But they used to go down into the drawing room, Miss Hunt would take them down at night - or maybe through the day if they were going to have people in in the evening. I expect Mrs Church would go up and see them in their beds very likel
y
, I don't know though. I know they went down to the drawing room at a certain time. Funny life isn't it? Aye. Funny. And she did the flowers, Mrs Church did the flowers herself. There was a room where she - oh and the mess she used to make you know, in th
a
t flower room, you know, just - dirty vases left and - and - flowers thrown about, water all over the floor, you'd always to go - even although you had tidied it in the morning you'd always to go in again and tidy it up, because it was - and she'd have be
en saying something if she'd - went in later and it no tidy.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You said you liked to go to the church as somewhere to go?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 I did. And I saw Jeanie Deans' grave there, you know, at Irongray church, and I looked for that right away whenever I went. So
metimes - now they were very - they went to the church too, and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did they make all their servants go to the church?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Not so many of them. Bessie went with me one Sunday morning, Thomas was off one Sunday and he went with me, but I never knew Mr
 Bonwick to go. He would be English church you see, and - this morning, I happened to there on my own and here I saw them coming in, they sat near the front, and - when she - I'd seen Mrs Halls she said, never say - you - spoke when they passed me you kno
w
, and they walked through the garden too, they sometimes didna take the car and she spoke, said, good morning, and - quite nice they were to speak to - ah, but that was all. So she said to Mrs Hall, a very poor attendance, was there no one out - no one of
f duty on Sunday morning, there's not much to do on Sunday morning. I didn't see very many at the church, had spoken about that, there was only me out of the lot of them. I was glad to get out you know, get - get out for the fresh air. Aye. Oh dear.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 So you were there for six months?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Just six month, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you have another job to go to be}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8941568\charrsid2967080 f}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 ore you left there, or did you just hand in your notice and then look for something?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Now wait 'til I think, oh I handed in my notice, I determined I 
wasn't going to stay there. They were all leaving you see and you didna know what you were going to get, new people coming. And - I don't think I had another job to go to. Was that - was that - I'd been to Wilson's, yes, and then to the Grove. Well - my s
i
ster was looking for a job about that time, she was younger than I, and - they'd seen a job in the paper, and this was to go to Highfield, where my husband worked. And - they sent word for my sister to go - in and she was rather young, you see, it was her
 
first job. And - the - Mrs McJerrow had said - she's rather young, well my mother thought about me, and she told her about me, she says, yes that would be - suit us better, she says, she's rather young - for us. So - mother told me and I went in to see he
r
, and - here she was away to Watford. Her eldest daughter was in school down at Watford and had taken ill. And - she was staying with the granny at the time, the girl like, Norah, but there was Miss Beele, the governess there, and she interviewed me becau
s
e she had been with them a long time and she knew just what they wanted, and she said, I think you'll just be the very - one to suit them. So - there was only Marjorie at home, she was governess to this wee girl. There was two of them at home really, but 
-
 Noele, the second one, was going away to boarding school, just when I went. So she went away to boarding school and Marjorie was - she was my - baby all the time I was there. She was a nice wee girl, I liked her, and - I went to them and then - that was 
w
hen - 1913 it would be, it was the year before the war broke out, and then the war broke out, and - they got a Belgian lady and wee girl to stay with them. The Belgian girl - what was her name again, the Belgian girl. I know this name - Julia, I was think
ing Judy. Now she was just of an age with Marjorie and the one was good for the other because they learned - Marjorie learned French off her, and - and Julia learned -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 How old would they be then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Well they'd be coming on - she would be - six, sh
e would be coming seven, about seven. And were both good for each other, and - her husband was the Consul, Madam Oester-Smitt, and he was left there you see, and - she come over and - they had the schoolroom, what used to be the schoolroom was made into a
 
bedroom for them. And each had separate beds, the wee girl and her but both in the same room, a great big room it was. And - there were with us a year. And - Madam Oester-Smitt used to come through and ask for confiture, that was chocolate, so that I woul
d
 learn - learning French too, quite picked up a lot you know. The time she was there. And - Mrs McJerrow - I don't think she was very happy with them there really, because - it made a terrible turn up in their way of life, the priest used to come and see 
-
 Madam Oestersmith, you see, she was a Catholic, and they werenae you see, and of course - she'd always to go out of the room and leave the room and she was - deaf, Mrs McJerrow and she didnae hear just all that was going on. And then - Miss - Bell, she w
a
s the governess, and she left - through - bereavement at home, and Miss - they got a Miss Thompson, now she was a happy go lucky - soul, you know, really she was - into everything of mischief and went to the dances and - got on fine with her. She come fro
m
 Cirencester, away down in Gloucestershire, aye, and - she stayed a wee while. About two years I think, and then - she went away, and a Miss Sadler came. Now she was - I think she'd been very strictly brought up, oh a dainty wee soul she was, no very big,
 
and - nice looking wee creature and - her - her father was a painter - Dan - Den - Denbigh Sadler, that was his name, had painted, beautiful pictures and she went in for photography. And - I don't think they liked her as well as they liked Miss Thompson a
n
d Miss Bell, because she was more sedate you know, and - I think she was - come of really - good class people, and - she used to be - I - I think she was miserable for a while, she didnae understand our ways. And - she used to confide in me that she wasn'
t very happy. But however - she stayed a good long time with them and - and - it came time for Marjorie to go to boarding school, and - they got rid of Miss Sadler. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What other staff did they have then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 They just had - the cook, and - myself
, and - they'd a woman come in - to do the wash. And - if any - extra cleaning was done we got a woman to come in and help with that too. Oh the - the work - when these Belgians came there was another family - poorer class people - what was this his name 
w
as, I remember - Pouhlart, Pouhlart. Pouhlart, and - Madam Pouhlart used to come down and help with the work and they'd a woman come in to do sewing. You mind Miss Davidson, used to come in and do mending and sewing for them, they'd plenty of help you kno
w. And - it was quite a happy place, and you came - after I'd been there about a year, I think.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You were there first?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Aye. That's right. And - and - after you went away to the war, you mind the cook left, Jessie - Jessie Byers. And I thought Alic
e came, was Laice there before you went away? Aye. Well - aye, she was English and had different ways.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 If surprises me, the number of English employees.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 I don't know. You see, Alice - was like this, she needed to get out to early communion, whi
ch meant that I had the breakfast to do and all these sort of things and I had my own work to do as well. And if you were a minute past the time and the boss was down he was looking daggers at you because he liked everything didn't he, just on the dot. An
d -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Everything run by the clock was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Aye, clockwork for him, the same at dinnertime too when you brought his thermos with him for - for his tea, and I had to have his tea put in and his piece made up and he took it - up to the office with him 
to save him going out in the afternoon. But if he come down without it I used to go in and say, did you bring your thermos? Oh I forgot it, that meant I had to go up with his tea. He wouldna go out and have it at the - tearooms or anything. But my - I'd t
o take it up to the office and Marjorie along with me. It was a grand excuse - aye, but I'd things to do you know. And - she used to s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8941568\charrsid2967080 ay, are you going up with daddy}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 's tea today? And if I was going - I used to take her into Gladstones and buy her some sweet
s you know, sweets were cheap these days. And she had a wee doll's pram. Eeh she was an awful girl and we had a cat, a black cat, and she used to dress this cat up in doll's clothes and up we went - I told her I didna want her to do it, but I couldna refu
s
e it. She says, no it won't, I'll look after it, I promise. I says, well it's you for it mind. So off we set and everything went well, got up to the town, we were about half road home when a dog came sniffing at the pram and out jumped the cat. And away o
v
er the fields. And what a job we had to get it. Oh dear. And then - at night when she was put to bed - the governess was very strict, this Miss Sadler with her, always remember her for this, she got me into a row over it. She said to me, Marjorie hasn't b
een doing her lessons at all well today, so she's to have bread and butter for her supper only. So I said, all right, now that was orders from Miss Sadler, she'd made th}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8941568\charrsid2967080 
is this evening. However I took}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080  in the bread and butter on the tray, she'd her supper ea
rly you see. And a glass of milk. Mrs McJerrow looks up. Is that all the child's getting for supper? And I said - that was Miss Sadler's orders. She says, nonsense. Go and get her her scrambled egg, now there was the way you put in and of coursed - Miss S
adler never said to me she was sorry about it, I got into a row, she - you'd have thought I had done it, it was Miss Sadler.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8941568\charrsid2967080 Too many }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 bosses?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Aye, too many bosses. So - she used to put her to bed, Miss Sadler, and in two or three minutes I could 
hear her, Martha, Martha, Martha, and this was for me to go up and read her a story, and I used to go up and read her a story, but she liked one made up better, if I would - could make her up - and sometimes Mrs McJerrow, oh that - bad person's up - the s
t
air again, this was me, but she never said a word. She was quite pleased for me to - to do it you see. I remember one day she was asked out to tea, and - it was to Jean and Olive Mares, and - I took her up to the know and the road roller was working in th
e road outside the gate. And - at six o'clock Mrs McJerrow said, will you go up for that child and bring her home, so - she'd promised to leave her 'til seven, but she says, she must get back}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8941568\charrsid2967080  
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 tonight. So six o'clock she saw me, oh, I'm not going home. Yes, I says, you're coming home, that's your mother's orders.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 She wasn't wanting to come home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
She wasnae wanting to come home. So - she never spoke to me when I took her out - took her by the hand but she wouldnae have my hand. So came to the place
 where it was all messed up with a road roller, and she had on a beautiful - blue, I can see it yet, pale blue knitted coat and wee bonnet to match, she looked nice, but her mother had just sent away and got it from Harods. And she ran away from me, tripp
e
d and fell in the mud. This beautiful coat, that was because she was bad, I told her after, I said, now that's because you were a bad girl and doing what you shouldn't have been doing, calling me names. And she said she was sorry, she was always like that
, she said she was sorry. But I said to myself there'll be some facin}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8941568\charrsid2967080 g with this, so he and the mist}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
ress just met us at the front door. Oh dear, me, she says, whatever have you been doing. I said, she was a bad girl. I said, she was angry because I went for
 her early, and, I said, she's been calling me names all the way home, and she fell because she ran away, she tripped and fell. Well she never spoke. Got her supper and she got bathed and away to bed. And here she went into you wee place you know where th
e basin was and she set to, and when she come out with this it was - you never saw anything go out like it, she never had it on again. The coat was ruined. I don't know - it went - instead of - you know, keeping it's -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 A knitted thing like that it would be difficult to keep its shape.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Well - but - but even when she come out with it, just out of the water, it was - it was the length of that and she just took one look and disappeared. She never mentioned it again. No, but Julia got it. You know she 
was a wee bit bigger than Marjorie and I don't know what Madam was - did to it but it - it looked quite all right. And she - never was on Marjorie again.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 How much did Mrs McJerrow have to do with Marjorie then, with bringing her up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh well - th
ey went out together, she took her out you know when they were going out driving or that, they went out with her, but Miss Sadler really had charge of her during the day, in the evening when lessons were finished - it was all right a
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 But you would say she had more to do with her daughter than the Church's had to do with their children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh yes, oh it was different altogether, it was more homely. The Church's - I - I think they just entertained themselves you know all the time, I don't think they 
needed - who did the work or what - what left them or anything, they just - you were just there for a purpose, you know what I mean. They werenae - like - lesser people. I mean that was the idea with them, they're not all the same you know, but they were 
very stand-offish people.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you get on well with Mrs McJerrow?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh yes, oh she told you everything, aye. She was just - she'd just lost her daughter when I went and she used to - I used to be vexed for her, she - used to say -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 The one that was ill died did she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
The one that was ill died, she was fourteen, and she used to say if it had been either of the other two, and I said, don't - don't say that, it wouldna have mattered which one it was. Norah was her first one you see. And they ar
e all dead now, the whole lot of them. They're away too. But - I liked Marjorie, my husband liked the second one best you know. I'd more to do with her. And - at night my sister used to come down, she went as housemaid to the King's Arms later on, and she
 used to come down at night on her night off and Julia was her child and Marjorie was mine, and after supper we used to have such fun in the kitchen, playing games with them you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Well you weren't all that old yourself were you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 No. I wasnae, just about eighteen. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 So you got more time off there did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh yes, yes, and used to get weekends away home too. Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You were nearer home then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 We were nearer home, yes. And got out to the church every Sunday evening - once I
 must tell you about a - an incident that happened. This Sunday evening, we were supposed to go to church but the time was our own, we could do what we liked as long as we were in again for half past nine on a Sunday night. So Bessie Byers, the - her peop
l
e had a farm down at Mungo, and she says to me, what about going down to see my folk tonight instead of going to church, it was a lovely evening. I said, right-o. So off we set. And - how many miles would be? About four. Well - we came to the house. It wa
s
 locked up. She says, well they canna be far away, because a farm you know. And - she says, they'll soon be back, we'll wait about for a wee while. We couldna get in for the door was locked. And - at last she saw a window open, the pantry window, she says
, by }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8941568\charrsid2967080 J}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
ove, it's the pantry window open, I'll get in now. We're both young. So she climbed through the pantry window, and she went into the larder and there was two rhubarb cakes you know - pies. She says, we'll no go back hungry and we - even if they don't 
- they don't come back. So she put two glasses of milk, the cows were milked, and we sat and had this - pice of this rhubarb tart and milk, could have got more but we didna want it. So when we got out, we were just down out the window, and coming down the
 
avenue from the farm we met the minister, Mr what was his name - oh dear - I - I canna remember, but anyway, he says, good evening Miss Byers, of course he didna know me you see, but she said who it was. He said, is your father at home? She said, there's 
n
o one at home, Mr whatever his name was. He says, oh well, I wanted to see him on a small matter but I can see him again. He says, have you walked from Lockerbie? She said, yes. Well come down to the Manse and have some tea. Oh no thank you, she said, we 
n
ever told him we'd been in the house. No thank you she said, we really must get back to Lockerbie, we've got to be in by half past nine. So - we didna hear anymore about it - for a wee while 'til she was back home again. And the minister had gone up later
 
on and got them in, they'd only been at a neighbouring farm. And - he said, you had two visitors the time you were out. She says, oh yes, but they hanna get away hungry anyway, she said, they've been at my - telled him about this - I was going to meet tha
t man, you know, he would have known us again, I ca}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8941568\charrsid2967080 n}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
na mind his name, I was going to meet him right in the face, and instead of meeting him I hadna the courage, I slept into Laidlaw the chemist and I didna know what to ask for. I think I asked for a bar of 
soap or something, 'til he went past. Aye. And - they thought I - I had a guilty conscience. We laughed about it. Oh dear. Oh and we had a grand party the time we were there, she was a go-ahead Jessie, she said to Mrs McJerrow, they had had - visitors in 
y
ou know for Christmas and - and she says, I don't see why we can't have a party? She said, certainly Jessie, you - you remember that? She said, certainly have a party, ask some of your friends and just tell me how many are coming, and - we'll cater for it
. So I asked my father and an uncle, and - Mr.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8941568\charrsid2967080  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 S. and I remember - Walter Young was there. Mrs.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid8941568\charrsid2967080  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 S. Was he there? That would be through you then was it? Aye. And we had Jessie she had a brother. And - the gard}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid8941568\charrsid2967080 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 ner. Aye. Aye. And a lad I was going with at that time Alec}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8941568\charrsid2967080  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Blandy, he was at it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You had plenty of men there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
We had plenty of men. Whatever women had we? We'd - there was - oh maybe Jean was there. Well we had a lovely party, I canna mind - pork pies she got us and - we'd a nice supper, and - and there was singing. Had we dancing, I canna remember? Aye.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you have to have it in the kitchen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 In the kitchen, it was a nice big kitchen. So - I remember - my father and - and uncle had come with the train I think had they. There was
 no buses in these days but they'd to walk home in the morning. We carried on - for best part of the night. And they had to walk home in the morning, and I remember my father, it was my uncle that was the mischief, he says, when we went past Mount Pleasan
t
, he says, it was just breaking daylight and they picked up a handful of gravel and flung it up the windows of the folk that should be up, to waken them up. I says, you didna do that. Oh they knew them. These were the kind of - these were the kind of thin
gs they did. Oh dear. So -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What were your jobs at Highfield then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 House table maid, just the same. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you do some cleaning?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes. Yes. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 And waiting at the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes. They - they didna have much waiting at the tab
le unless there was people there, you'd just the plates to hand round you know, Mr - McJerrow did the carving, he handed the plates round, but they'd often people in, they were - entertained a lot.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What sort of people did they entertain?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Well - 
I canna mind you man that come home from Africa. I - I've often - this old man, he - he used to come and - and - he was a great one for the ladies so they - Mrs McJerrow said to me - has he brought you any sweets? He - used to bring us sweets every time h
e
 came to the door, this man. He - he dis. She says, oh he's a great one for the ladies and I think he'd rather taken a fancy to you. I says, oh well, I havena taken any to him. You cold say anything to her you know. And - she used to say, you're not like 
-
 this was always struck me - tickled him, you're not like an ordinary - girl, you're more like one of us. This is - they used to say that. She used to say that. Used to take me out sometimes with them when they went you know. But - it was just because Mar
jorie was fond of me, she was. She - she - her mother said to me one day she said, Marjorie says she'll never forget you. You've been so good to her, because I was fond of children you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You didn't have to call her Miss Marjorie or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 A
ye. She thought when we had Margaret you know - she ways, well, I did think you'd have called the child for me, or for Marjorie. I never thought about it. No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 How long did you stay at Highfield?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Four years. Four years I was there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Can you remember what sort of pay you got?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh - no, it was better like than what we had had, but it's funny do you know, I - and it's really true that I can't remember what I had. But we - oh I don't know now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 When you were young like that what did you spend your money on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Well -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you buy clothes and that kind of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Aye, well - we - we used to - did we get it monthly? Aye. Got it monthly - oh well, of course your mother was the one that seen that you spent it wisely, I know mine did anyway. And the clothes werenae so dear then you see as what they are now. But you -

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you hand your pay over to your mother usually?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 I think so, she would give me so much back for pocket money, I had always pocket money. Oh she was always 
good to - to all of us, no just to me, she was always good, when I think - how little they had, I often wonder how she was so generous.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Were you interested in clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh yes. I remember - I - I went to - well, I'd been to dances before, the cou
ntry dances. But I remember when Miss Thompson was there - we were asked to a dance up in - in - Town Hall, I cann mind what that dance was - and Jessie Byers, she had a lovely evening dress. And she said, I wish you could come. And I said, oh I cannae co
m
e because I havenae anything like that to wear. Now when Miss Thompson heard of that - she'd a pink - dress that was too tight for her and she made me a lovely evening dress and - I was fair complimented on it. Pink it was, it was nice. Aye. She was kind 
like that, Miss Thompson. She was a harum-scarum wasn't she? Oh she was a harum-scarum.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 She seems to have been a nice person though?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 She was. Aye.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What did you do in your spare time usually, your time off?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Well ......
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you go home most times?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Mostly. I got a bicycle, mind Mrs McJerrow, one of her aunts sold a bicycle a new Hudson, and I bought it off her, I don't know what it was - how much it was, five pounds I think. I think so. So that was my sister and I in Lockerbie 
now, 'cos she was housemaid at the Kind's Arms, and I remember - we learned - well wasna very proficient, but we partly learned to - cycle, but we'd only the one bike. So - this night, it was a nice summer night, we made up our minds we would go home. And
 
what we did was - say I set off, and I went a certain distance and left the bicycle in the roadside, my sister kept walking on then she got it and - we got home - aye. The next - time we went Hetherington's had bicycles - for half a crown for three hours,
 so we hired a bicycle, and we each went home. So - that was how -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You say you went to country dances and things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes. Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you go to them in Templand or Lockerbie?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes, Templand. Went to the dances there, 'cos we knew all the folk
 about there you see. I remember the first time Jessie and I went - Jessie Byers, she was a keen dancer too. We got over all right but we'd to walk back. And we stayed to the last minute, mind you we'd to be back for the breakfast. Well - we stayed - we w
ere living at Corncockle Cottage then and mother said, now before you leave come up and get a cup of tea and no starting off for - Lockerbie, but she didna ken we were staying to the morning.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What time did the dances finish in these days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 About five o'clock in the morning. Aye. They danced all night you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 So you just had time to get your breakfast and start the next day's work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Aye, so - well, we went up and had a cup of tea, and Bob Bryden for the shop - was with Jessie and Alec Va
rner was with me, and I'd only time to walk to Millers Bridge, that wouldna be half road would it, they couldna come all the road because it was time they were back for their - and off we set. And we got into - Lockerbie when the bells were ringing six. S
i
x o'clock in the morning, by the time we get down to Highfield that was just when we were at - you know, where the - Charters lived, that's when the bells started ringing six o'clock, so by the time we got down it was coming on for seven o'clock. And just
 had time to change and get Mrs - McJerrow's hot water and in to work. And the worst of it was this was a - Saturday morning, Friday night the dance had been, and Jessie was going away the weekend, I was left with everything to do. In the afternoon -

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You would be tired by bedtime?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Four o'clock. Four o'clock. I was sitting in the basket chair at the fire thinking about what a happy night and I was - half - I think I was nearly a half weeping because it was over, when the door opened and Mrs McJerr
ow come in. She said, now - you're overtired, you're not going back to any country dances, I'll let you to them all in the town that you want to go to but not to come walking back at that time of the morning. It would have been all right if Jessie had bee
n there to do her work, but I had her work to do too. So I don't think we were ever back again after that. We went to the ones in the town.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Was Mrs McJerrow interested in your boyfriends and what you were doing and so on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh she was interested, yes. Aye, she was interested.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 She was the sort of person that you could speak to quite freely about that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Certainly, oh she told you everything didn't she? She told you all her affairs. She had. Aye. Oh they were very friendly. Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 How did you get on with Mr McJerrow?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Very well. He was very fair. He was very fair. I remember - once night - they had visitors, and I always remember him for this - they had visitors staying in the house, there was somebody in the spare bedroom, it was Mr a
nd Mrs - the minister and his wife from Brydekirk, that was who - it was, and - here he brought that Colonel down for billiards. And instead of being just a supper he wanted dinner, now fancy phoning down that. Aye. So - he wanted the billiard room fire g
oing, the dining room fire and the drawing room fire was all on for the - minister and his wife was there. And I was rushing here, there and everywhere, and he - he says - how are you managing? I said, oh all right, sir, but, I said, the bill}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8941568\charrsid2967080 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 ard fire hadna
e been on for a while and it wasnae drawing. And he says, when I - when I phoned down - that there's - extra, you ought to get someone in to help. He was taking my side because I had too much to do. She was quite off. She says, well I - do what I can. She
 was there. Oh he was fair enough that way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 So he entertained separately from his wife sometimes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Well - having Colonel Byrne in, no they would all have their food together, but they were playing billiards you see, and he had to have the fire -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 And Mrs McJerrow was left to entertain the minister?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
She would be left to - entertain the minister and his wife in the drawing room, and I don't know if the minister played or no, but you see there was the - there was the governess and that - an
d the children too at that time and there was a lot to do, you know, when there was anybody in. And three -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 The children wouldn't eat with their parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh no, they did. At dinner time, through the day, but not in the evening. No, they had supp
er before. Of course when Miss Norah got older - they had - they dined at night.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did the children eat separately at Highfield?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 No. They ate all together in the dining room. Aye. They had their dinner through the day. Like I mean it wasna like di
nner, just a supper. They had their dinner at one o'clock. Mr McJerrow used to come down from the office in time, he was always punctual - for dinner, and they had all dinner in the dining room. The governess, Mr and Mrs McJerrow, two children when I went
,
 but Miss Norah was going away to boarding school so she wasn't long at home. It was just the young one. Then of course - when war broke out - this Belgian lady and her wee girl that was the same age - they were all in the dining room and all had their fo
od together, wouldna bother with two tables or anything like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What about if they had visitors?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh well - it was just the same.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Marjorie wouldn't have her food separate?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 No. Always had it - had it together. It was mostly aunties an
d uncles and - used to be granny, the granny I think and grandpa was only once there from Watford, they came up - from the South, and it was mostly aunties and uncles.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 That was different from the Grove?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes, that's right, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 How was the cooking done in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
They had a - big range, you know, an old fashioned range, and - an electric cooker. Aye. Electric cooker. They had - so there was - I mean - they had good meals, good food they always had.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 And you got the same food as they did?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Just got the same, whatever came out from the dining room we got just the same.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 How about breakfast time, did they all have breakfast together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes, they all had breakfast together, they were all up for breakfast, eight o'clock I
 think wasn't it, eight o'clock breakfast I think so, eight o'clock.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did they have a big breakfast, did they go in for cooked ones?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Always had cooked breakfast, bacon and eggs or sausage or sometimes it was fish, they always had something cooked
. There wasnae - well they didnae bother with cereals in those days so much.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 No porridge?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 No, I don't think I had porridge. No. Just a - breakfast.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What about your breakfast?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh, just the same, yes, cooked breakfast if we wanted it, i
f we didna want it we didna need to take it. That was when Madam Oast used to come out and ask for }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8941568\charrsid2967080 comfiture}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
 if I'd forgotten the marmalade. The first - the first day I didna know and I - and I thought - what - what have I forgotten, I remembered what it was. Aye. Aye. So - that was -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Then they all had their dinner together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Was that about one o'clock?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 One o'clock for dinner, yes. And - and - as I told you before we took up Mr McJerrow's tea, if he didn't bring his thermos with hi
m. When he had - he used to lay his thermos on the hall table. And - I used to - prepare it between times you see and I put him his - whatever he wanted to eat, he was very fond of cake, and a scone, something like that, big slice of fruit cake, that's wh
a
t he liked, he'd a very sweet tooth. And - they had just tea in the dining room, if it wasnae an at home day. Wednesday was Mrs McJerrow's at home day and she often had ladies in. Just the Lockerbie people. And they had their tea, they had their tea in th
e
 - drawing room, and maybe Marjorie and Miss Sadler had theirs in the dining room, just at the end of the dining room table. Unless it was people that they knew. If it was - anybody in the town they just had it all together. Marjorie used to like to get i
n with us for our tea.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Into the kitchen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Aye. Oh she didna mind.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 The governess was sort of accepted as one of the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh yes. Yes. Oh she was. Yes. They were all - they were all nice, Miss Bell had been with them, the first one, s
he'd been with them for years and years hadn't she. Ting they called her. She never got anything but Ting. Miss McJerrow - would be calling up the stair, Ting, are you there, and Mr McJerrow too. Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What sort of supper did they have, they had another cooked meal then had they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Yes, a cooked meal at supper time, not so much at supper time but they - they'd always something cooked. Of course Marjorite didnae have much, she had hers on a tray, because she'd got to go to bed and the - the grown ups
 had supper together, but they always had something cooked for supper. Unless maybe there was anything cold, such as the summertime, if there was cold salmon or anything like that they'd have sal - salmon and salad. Aye. And - Mrs McJerrow had a glass of 
h
ot water last thing at night, nobody else took any - thing else, but she took a glass of hot water, last thing at night, first thing in the morning I had to take her up hot water - to drink. Never did I know her to take medicine all the time I was there, 
remember one day she was very sick, she couldnae get up in the morning, and I said to her, you should take a good dose of medicine, once your stomach's - oh I never take medicine, she said, never. Just a drink of hot water.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you ever make jam or anything like that in that house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh yes, I made lots of jam because there was a lot of fruit in the garden you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Was that up to the cook?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Well that was the cook, aye, she did that. Strawberries and - and rhubarb and apple jam and - whatev
er there was. And - aye - And I know one thing I used to go with Mrs McJerrow to pull you know cranberries in the woods. Oh dear me, what a woman she was for these wee tiny cranberries and we used to go with her, she used to take me with her to help her t
o
 pull them up, I fair hated the job. She had - glayberries, aye, she called them cranberries, but - you know she fair loved it and then they used it along with - cranberry jelly with turkey and like that you see. She never got that much that it lasted so 
long I don't think. Unless she -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Did Mrs McJerrow organise this sort of thing herself or did she just leave it up like to Mr Shearer and the cook, if he was to say the strawberries are ready will bring some up?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh aye, he just brought them in.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Or did she keep an eye on these things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 No, she didna bother, she would just tell you likely - that - they want some strawberries.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did they ever pickle anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes, they used to pickle things too. Oh beetroot, they used to do a lot o
f beet root and - different things, she used to - go a lot to the market at Carlisle you mind, you used to take her, and she used to bring different things home to pickles, chives and all like that you know, and wee onions. That sort of thing. They had lo
ts of that in the cupboard. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did the cook make your own bread there or was the bread bought in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh the bread was bought in. Not - not so much - bread, scones - a lot of baking of scones, tarts, you know, and - and - when we used to get aroun
d to it used to - we used to make wee fairy cakes, I remember one day - she'd gone out to tea, and - to Mrs Geoffrey, oh I'll never forget that day, and - Jessie Byers, she was busy in the back kitchen and she says, there's not a bit of cake in the house,
 
she says. And her brother was coming to see her that night, she says, will you make some wee fairy cakes. And I was finished like my work then. So I got them going when the door opened and in she came. She hadna been feeling very well and she just knocked
 at the door and come in, she says, I'm deaf but I have a good sense of smell. Oh dear, she didna get them, we didna give her them because they were four ourselves, she'd plenty in her tins you see, but we had nothing. Ours had - well, we'd used them up.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You kept separate tins did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh yes, they had tins in a cupboard, because - I suppose she would often give Marjorie a cake or that if she asked for it, you know, she spoiled her. She spoiled her, but you couldna help it, she was a nice wee girl
, and - sometimes she would say - she bought a - nice piece of - perhaps that brides cake like when she was down - Carlisle, she would say, I'll give Mr McJerrow a piece of this today, she would give me a - piece to put in his tea parcel for a surprise fo
r
 him. Oh he loved sweet things. My husband's known him - come and ask for a - section of honey, and it was finished at teatime, and - he said, to Miss Norah, how did you like the honey? She said, honey, we never got any, daddy's eaten it all. Aye. Such a 
sweet tooth he had. It's true, honey just fresh off the hive.
\par <subject2>Mr. S. And once I was away - golfing with him, I took him up to Moffat - to play golf. And - he was playing with his brother who was home from Africa, and it came on a shower, and he sa
ys - we were near the club house, and he says, come on, we'll go in and shelter. And - his brother Tom said, oh, he said, we'll just have our tea when we are in. And I just sat down at the table along with the two of them you see and - Tom - his brother T
o
m poured out the tea and sugared it, put three lumps in each cup. And when he got his handed to him he pulled the sugar and put - other five in. I said, it's already sugared. It's what? Aye, I was looking for it dropping over the top of the tea.</subject2
>
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Mrs. S. Isn't it funny to be so sweet toothed. Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 So that would mean plenty of jam and things for the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes. That's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did they keep any hens or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 No. Oh no, we'd no hens, no. Nothing like - like - that. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did they have meat every day in the week?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh yes, every day. Either meat or fish. Thursday - was a busy day, market day in Lockerbie and we used to clean the dining room that day, and they were in the breakfast room, which was a much smaller ro
om. So - we used to turn out the dining room every Thursday, and - always on a Thursday it was shepherds pie. The cook helped me you see to do the - the dining room, and it was shepherds pie - made from what remained of the cold roast beef. We'd have had 
that on - Sunday, cold on Monday, and then it was left over for Thursday for a shepherds pie and it was good. Aye. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did they ever use any tinned meat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Any what? Not much at all, no, it was all fresh meat - beef steak pie, and - fowls and phe
asants in season. They were very fond of salmon when it was in season too. They used to have that, oh they always had - good food. Always good food. Sometimes it was three course, soup and meat and pudding, but always two course - it - I mean it was never
 
just the one course, there was always pudding, and - one kind of pudding Mr McJerrow did not like was railway pudding, you know, what railway pudding is. Railway pudding. Now I don't know why they called it that. But - it's just a sponge mixture, you know
,
 in a flat tin and - and you spread it with jam, and - and turn other half - away, he used to - look daggers when I come in, and Mrs McJerrow used to say - you'll have to think out some other kind of pudding, because he didn't care for milk puddings, it w
a
s all fancy. Aye. All fancy puddings. We used to have floating island, I can remember. Floating island, well it was just a - something - sponge at the bottom, custard on the top, egg custard like, not the - the - the tin, and then on the top - stiffly whi
p
ped - white of egg. He liked that. That would be sweet, plenty of sugar in the custard. And steam puddings, lots of steamed puddings, he was fond of them, apple pie or - like apple dumpling, I mean, oh he liked apple pie too but he liked apple dumpling. T
here was always - something like that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did Mrs McJerrow say what you were to have, or was it just up to the cook?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh yes, she used to come through and suggest things. The cook - we had a - a girl - after Jessie Byers left there was a girl Alice 
- what was Alice's other name - it doesnae matter, she came from Richmond, Surrey. Richmond. And - she used to do a lot of suggesting to her, and - sometimes Mrs McJerrow - didnae just want what she proposed but she just let her - you know, make it, then 
she used to say to me, I don't think Mr McJerrow liked that. But she did what Alice wanted.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What about the messages?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh we - we wrote out a list, a list - used to tell her what was getting done, I used to tell her if I needed anything, and Alice 
used to tell her, and Jessie, and then - she took it up or sent it up to Mr Ewart, he - his brother was the grocer you see, and it came down with the boys brought it down.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You say that you took Marjorie out for walks sometimes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 I had - used to t
ake her, oh I took her always up the street - she liked going in especially with this pram with the doll in it but - I don't know - the cat in it, she used to go with her doll, she'd a lot of dolls, I didna mind that, but when she took the cat I was fair 
in terror the whole time, especially when this dog's sniffing the cat. I thought we would never see it again, it bolted right over you field you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you ever take Marjorie to your house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Canna remember that now. Did I ever take Marjorie to my house? Oh like to my own house.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 When you went home to visit your mother and father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Aye. That was too far, I don't think so, I cannae remember - my mother used to come in of course, she knew them fine. She used to always to take her through a
nd so did your step-mother too, she used to always have - if you had your mother's in she used to tell them to come through to the dining room and talked to them, and - any place I ever was they were always nice with mother, never at the Grove, but all th
e other places.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 The Grove seems to have been on its own.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh the Grove. Oh - I would never go back to yon, you know, back. No, it - it was unfortunate you see, no many places, even in these days - kept you down like what they did, I mean not allo
wed to speak at the table and that - that was terrible. And - they used to tell us about Terregles, they were as free and easy as anything, they never made any difference although there was - head servants and lower, and - you were all working for them.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 It wasn't just the size of the place at the Grove?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 No. No. No, it was the atmosphere.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you ever go away for the day with Mrs McJerrow or Marjorie?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh they were often away, they used to go down to Rockcliffe for the day, Mrs -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you ever go with them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
No, I don't think so. I used to go drives with them certainly when they were - just round about, going round about for a drive but I don't remember ever going way, picnics or anything like that. We'd always something to do wh
en they were going away. Maybe turning out a room or something like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What about the church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh well -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did they go to church regularly?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 We never got out to church there in the morning, because - Mr Ewart, that's the brother, and i
f the sisters were there they were always down for lunch on a Sunday you see, so couldna get out. We always went at night, except the time I told you about going to - oh we just went - in these days, there was just the one church in the evening, Trinity o
f St Cuthberts or the parish church, and we just used to go round them, whatever one it was we went to. They didn't all have a service. Just one at a time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Which church did the McJerrow's go to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Mr.S. The English church. But Mr McJerrow went to - Trinity.
\par <subject2>Mrs.S. Aye, I think Mr - Trinity, aye. But - I mean they went together, they didnae - I mean - Mrs McJerrow would go to Trinity, and Mr McJerrow would go to the English church with her, I mean, but they really belonged to the - English 
church Mrs McJerrow, and the girls went there along with her.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did they go to a Sunday school?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 No, they didna go to Sunday school, No. Didnae. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did they say grace at meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh - I don't think so, no. No, I was in the din
ing room, no they didna say grace at meals, except the minister was in. And of course he was in he said grace, they had to ask him, but they didna say grace. No. If - if there was visiting minister or a - any of the ministers were in seeing them, Mr - Geo
r
geson used to come visiting, and - that's the parish church minister, and - the English church minister used to come, who was at Trinity, Mr - Mr Whitefoot, yes, they used to all to come, and the - and the - the minister of St Cuthbert's just lived two or
 three doors off so he used to pop in too.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 He would be a friend rather than a calling minister?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes, quite friendly with them, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 When you first started working in the Manse you had prayers there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you have anything like that in any of the other places you worked?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
We had - we didnae have prayers at Highfield. We didnae have - no. No, just the manse and at Mrs Thompsons. That's the last place I was at Inveresk, we had prayers. Castle Street, we'd prayers every evenin
g. If it was our day matter, no matter if it rained - heavens hard, they should wait 'til you changed yourself. I used to say to - to Polly the cook, say that I'm soaked through, and coming on the bike, I'm not coming tonight. Tell her we'll wait on her. 
Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Was Mr McJerrow interested in politics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh, I don't think - the business was his one aim and end on life. Business.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 He was a solicitor was he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Solicitor. Fine looking man he was. Handsome - man, wasn't he, fine looking man.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You said he went to golf?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did he do any other sport?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 He did, he'd go - he went to bowls. Aye. He did, he was interested in that. But -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did he ever go in for shooting or that sort of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 He had guns. Aye. Not when we were there I don't think, he was getting on then you see. He had guns, there was plenty of guns about.
\par <subject2>Mr. S. I went several times to shoots with him, and he would just say, oh you carry my gun Robert, and I used to shoot instead of him. He - he just went for the walk he wasn't interested.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Mrs. S. I remember one thing they had in the - in that breakfast room, they had a framed letter from David Livingstone, I used to read it often, from Samoa, you know, when he was out there in Africa, aye, I used to often read it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh just - he must have written - aye. Aye, it was business. Maybe he'd been sending funds you see, of course I didn't ask but I used to often read it because it was there for anybody to see. And I use
d to think, fancy having a letter from him, you know, it was interesting.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did he ever go out to any clubs? Were there clubs in Lockerbie that men would go to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 I don't think so. No. Mostly - just - the meetings - in connection with the town business and that, he was often out in the evenings.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 The council meetings and things like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Aye, council meetings he'd always that.
\par <subject2>Mr.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2644963\charrsid2967080  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 S. And he only played golf for exercise.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Mrs. S. I think so, he sat such a lot you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 He wasn't really keen on sport as such?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 No. Not - not in our time, he might have been when he was younger, I don't know. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What did Mrs McJerrow find to do with herself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh she was always working. I'll tell you what she used 
to find to do, when it was cleaning time - she used to say, I'll come and give you girls a hands, and there she would come with a wee - tiny brush, nail brush, and she would be scrubbing, she would take hours, and she would say, oh I know fine I'm just in
 
the way, but I'm enjoying myself, we used to wish she was further. That's what she used to do. She was so pernickety wasn't she, and she says, I know fine what you're thinking she used to say, you're wishing I was out of that door. Well I'll go now and le
ave you to it. She was good you know. She used to -
\par 
\par <subject2>Mr. S. I used to tidy up the front Wednesdays and Saturdays, and on the Wednesdays I used to cut the grass, edge all the flower beds. And - tidy up the flower beds. And -</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did she go on any committees and do any charity work and that sort of thing?
\par <subject2>I don't think so, I don't think - she was very deaf you see. She - that would be - was a drawback. But - she - sewed a lot, she used to - and I tell you one thing she did. She 
had a Turkish carpet - in the dining room, big thick carpet, and - she went to Carlisle and she bought canvas and wool and she set to, you remember, and she made a hall carpet, taking the patterns off the dining room carpet, and it was most beautiful, gre
a
t big rug, and you took it to the shows for her and she got first prize at every show. She'd taken it - she taken it to some show and they were so delighted with it people seeing it, that they wrote and asked her for Moffat show, like the Dumfries show, I
 
don't remember. Eaglesfield show, just for the sake of seeing it. She was very good at taking patterns off you know, and sew - and she was always sewing, a beautiful sewer, both plain sewing and fancy sewing, tea cosies and - cushion covers and - she used
 
to sit in the dining room window and you go in and she would be going at it, she was always doing something. And it was just yesterday I was saying to my husband, I remember her - she used to say, oh I must get at that man's garments, this was - he - he w
ore wool and that - fine wool}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2644963\charrsid2967080 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
en underwear, and you know how quick it tears, and she was always nibbling at that, and it - she wouldna have it unless she lifted every stitch. And it wouldnae do just in a hurry, she had to - oh dear, me no, she sat for hours
 at that. Oh she was very pernickety.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 She did her own mending?
\par <subject2>Mending, she did the mending, aye. She did.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did they go out together much?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh when they were asked about, but - it was mainly with - the governes
s and - and the children, because he was - always had somewhere to go on business. Very very little time to go anywhere. They used to go their holidays together, but half the time - they went away one year to the Continent and he only stayed a fortnight a
nd wired to say he was coming home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 He didna like it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Well - he - he'd business to attend to so he said, but I think he couldnae stay away from the desk making money.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 How did you get on with the Belgian lady that came?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh she was very
 nice. Very nice indeed she was, and - Mrs McJerrow went away for a holiday down to Watford, and Alice the cook asked for her holidays at the same time. And - she said to me would I - well I'd to - do what I could like, in Alice's place, I said - oh I'll 
d
o what I could - I can, but I said how long's she going to be away for? So - she said, two weeks. And - Madame Oast knew and she says, never mind, Martha, I'll help you. I'll help you all I can, she was a good soul. But oh dear me, we didna care much for 
h
er cooking, for it was very greasy. One day - that was when you were away and Ritchie had come in your place, his younger brother - she'd made - salad cream, and you could have cut it with a knife, I never seen her - how she made it, but - I just had one 
t
aste and I - I just left it, and - Ritchie - I put some on his plate, we were having our dinner, and - he says, what's this? I says, that's Madame Oast's salad cream. So he says, oh no thanks, so - he cut up what meat he had left, he says, even the bloomi
ng cat ignored it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 So you didn't like the Belgian cooking very much?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh no. Everything was very - you know, they work with lots of fat in everything. Mr McJerrow never said anything but - I don't know whether he liked it or not but she was very g
ood at helping, you know, swept the - floor and did the sweeping, and did what she could to help me. Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What about other visitors that they had to stay, did you get on well with them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 With the governess?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 With any visitors that they had?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh yes. Yes. Got on very well, they were all very nice. And - after about a year - they'd been with us a year, well - the priest - used to come and see her, and in the town - there was one or two Belgian families, we hadna much to do with any of them 
except Madame - and Mrs Poulhart, and her daughter, they were working class people, and Madame Poulhart used to come down and help when we }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2644963\charrsid2967080 need}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2644963\charrsid2967080 d}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
 it, and - the husband took to coming down at night, I don't know what he come down for, he just used to sit in
 the kitchen and get his supper and go away again. Isador. Isador. Isidore, do you mind him? So Mrs McJerrow said one days, she says, what's - Madame Poulhart's husband coming down for, and I said I don't know. She says, unless he has a fancy for one of y
ou girls, this was what she said. Well, the cook says, he needna bother himself, there's not one - but Madame Poulhart had been jealous. We didna know but Madame Oast told us, she says, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2644963\charrsid2967080 M}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 ark - don't encourage him. I says, we don't encourage him, Madame Oast
, I said, he just comes down of his own accord and, I said, we don't ask him to come back. So we got him stopped, the cook made an excuse that we were going out or something, and to make him think so we put the shutters on the back kitchen window so that 
i
t was all dark. Well - Madame Poulhart and these other people used to come - ringing the bell and both - and Madame Oast to sort out their difficulties, they'd difficulties with language - and - shopping and that, and in the finish I think Mrs McJerrow go
t
 a bit fed up, and - honestly before they went back to Belgium, Madame Oast used to be crying, and I used to go up and do her room, I used to be sorry for her. And she said, oh - don't say anything Martha, but I wish I was away back to Belgium. And I said
,
 well, Madame, I said, it's all these people coming out I said, and Mrs McJerrow not hearing, and I says, having to go out of the room when you're interviewing them, you know, it made a big upheaval in her life. So in the finish she got away to somewhere 
e
lse, but I never told, you know, anything about her being unhappy or anything, and - after they went back to Belgium they - they kept writing, because they really were good to them mind, but they just got fed up. And she began to be fair miserable, Mrs Mc
J
errow, wishing they were away. So - for a wee while, and nobody else in the town offered to take them, or - for a week or two, wasn't it a shame. I used to think it was a shame in - my own mind, that no other family offered to take them even for a fortnig
h
t or a month, it would have relieved them. And the priest used to come so often you know, and - the first time he came - he must have thought I was a Belgian, I don't know what - what he thought or whether he thought Madame Oast - had a house you see, and
 
he said, oh - well I didn't know what he said, but - Madame at home? I thought - took that's what he said, so Madame Oast come out of the dining room and she said, oh it's all right, it's Father somebody, I don't know what she called him, so I said - what
 
did he say to me when he came to the door Madame? Oh nothing Martha. I said, oh he said something. He says, you little Belgian darling, to me. Oh - she didna want to tell me. That's - the first time - oh, he says, you are English, in his own - in their ow
n language.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 How did Mrs McJerrow get to know them in the first place?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 They just had put their name down - to take a Belgian family, you know, that were - that - just like these - people -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Like evacuees in the last war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes. And -
\par <subject2>Mr S. Being town clerk he come in for all these things.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Mrs. S. So - they got the schoolroom, what was the schoolroom, it was a great big room that ran all the length - of the house, the side of the house, and they had each singles b
eds, and a nice fire and a guard round for the wee girl, it was a lovely room and they were quite happy, and she brought her own - great big bed with her, a single bed Madam - Oast, but it was feathers, you know, puffed up like an eiderdown but three or f
o
ur times - and they didn't like on that, it lay on the top of you, it must have been nice and warm. And Julia was a nice wee girl and she turned out a famous painter, and they sent Mrs McJerrow a beautiful picture, this was what I was going to tell you, a
nd - two beautiful - copper things made out of shells for the drawing room fireplace. After they went back, they were quite -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Do you think Madame Oast was the same sort of person, the same sort of class?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 He was a Consul. Yes. He was a Consul you
 see. Aye, he was kept there but he was well looked after by the Germans you know, he couldn't get out. Smith was her name you know, Oaster Smith, she told me, Smith in your language, she got quite proficient in - in English, aye, and so did Julia.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Do you think the McJerrow's were quite happy with their life as it was?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh I -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Or do you think they would liked to have been higher up the scale a bit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh I don't think so, no, I think they were quite happy. I think so. Think they were quite happy.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 After you had four years there you went to Mrs Thompson in Dumfries?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Went to Mrs Thompsons, yes. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Why did you leave Highfield?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Well - the cook - Alice, she was so much away, you see, and - she was out to communion Sunday 
morning, there were a lot put on to me, not that I resented it mind you, I didn't resent it but - it got just a bit - too much, I didna mind it for a wee while, but it kept on and on, and it meant that I - did the dining room, fried the breakfast, set the
 
breakfast on a Sunday morning, and it used to be a rush you know, because we werena supposed to come down stairs to seven but I used to get up before - sooner than seven because you could never have managed it. Alice was out early you know to go to commun
i
on, and it was a good walk, it was about twenty minutes walk up to the town. There was no buses or anything, she had to walk there and back. So that our breakfast was ready by the time she come back, I'd had to make two you see. And - it just got a bit to
o much, and I thought, well - I think I'll get away from here now, and - look for something else, so I got - to - Inveresk, now -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Was it advertised in the paper or something?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Aye, it was in - well it didna say where it was for, but house table ma
id wanted. Housemaid, and I thought I'll have a go at this and see where it is, so here - she wrote tome and I went in to see them, and she seemed a nice old lady, which she was she was eighty four then, and - very - I was very happy there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Was she all on her own in that big house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
No, she had Miss Lane - her companion from Forres, and she was nice too, great big tall lady she was about six feet, and they were very homely, they just made you feel at home, just as if you were - on a footing with them. And -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What other staff was there there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
The cook too, there was a cook, yes, and myself. And a man used to come in do the wee bit garden, it wasnae much you know. And he used to potter away amongst the flowers themselves. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 It was quite a big house to keep?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh it's a big house, yes. But - they - mostly - kept to the dining room, it was on the - the - street level, cos she was an old lady to climb the stairs, her bedroom's up the stairs and so was Miss Lane, and they had two d
rawing rooms and the small drawing room wasna much used, except in the summertime. She had - at home days too, but they just used to - if it was people she knew - just had them in the dining room, to save - climbing the stairs, it was nicely furnished. An
d -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What sort of people came to the at homes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
The - do you know, I've often tried to think, there was a man used to come - I can't re - it's funny how that name's gone out of my memory. But he came from Catherine Street, he was staying with someb
ody there, I could go to the house yet where he lived, and he used to always to say when he came and rung the bell, any gingerbread on the go? That's what he - can't remember his name, see well this gingerbread was homemade. Aye. And - ladies that they kn
e
w from about the town just, somebody from Newall Terrace, that first house, Mrs Mc something they called her - coming from the station. Yes, Newall Terrace, they used to go up in there with the British Israel Bible Notes you know, that - she believed that
 
Britain was Israel, you see, that was her idea. And according to the - the teaching she used to teach us you know it could have been, she thought we - we were one of the lost tribes, the ten tribes you know, that Britain was. That was what her belief was.
 
She went to Greyfriars church mind you, and I used to go with them, but I used to go to St Mary's and -St Michael's, just - any of them. Just - just - I just went to - and - the cook was a Salvation Army - girl, and I used to go with her and she used to c
ome - with me to the church when we were out together.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You had a very religious life?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Aye, we had, yes. Very.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You say that you had prayers there too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Every night, yes, half past nine, every night we had prayers.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Where did you sleep in the house, where were your living quarters?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Well - we were underground really, down the area steps. The kitchen was to the back, and - and we had a wee sitting room to the front. That was - with a gas fire in it. And we could sit in there. Now 
- our bedroom was right at the top of the house, one - two, three stairs up really. And it looked right onto the Nith. Aye, it was nice, we used to sit up there when we knew - well the - finished with the tea, we could go up there, because you knew they w
o
uldn't - we could hear the bell, and Miss Lane would have called up, we used to say to her, we're going upstairs, we used to have the window way up and watch the boats going up and down on the Nith, it was nice, it looked over into Barrie's garden too you
 
know, the Moat Brae, aye. And - it was quite nice up there. We just had our - own bed up there, a bed, we used to come downstairs, we used to put our dressing gown on and come downstairs and we kept all our clothes downstairs, so - if the place had gone o
n fire during the night we had - we'd have been going out in our night attire, that's what we used to say. Oh we had great times there. And then -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Would you like to tell us your story about your man in the area?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh, it was an awful night. Polly h
ad gone to Hacks, that was where here home was, Racks Road and - her mother worked at Brocklehurst, that's the big house, but her father died, and the mother was left on her own. And - on a summer night we used to - when we were doing the spring cleaning,
 
like - maybe about May or June, they usually went away on their own. And - we used to get - work all day to six o'clock but as soon as we heard six o'clock we downed tools, and got ready, got our bikes out and away to the Racks, and sometimes we used to t
o
 go away to Templand, biking up to Torthor walk, but we'd to get away a bit earlier if we went there, to my home. And this night it was Polly's night out. And - she was away home. Well afternoon, we got away about one o'clock, as soon as the lunch was pas
t
, the quicker we got washed up and that. So off she went, and - when she come home - I knew about the time she would be coming home you see for prayers always. And - I heard the front door bell, and I thought, good gracious, who's this at this time of nig
h
t, and it was always locked after dark you see. So - when I opened it here's Polly, she looked frightened, and I said, what are you doing here, and she had her bike. She says, oh there's something white lying down the area steps. I darenae look over, I ne
v
er looked over. I says, isn't that terrible. I said, what'll it be, a paper, oh no, I don't think it's paper. She'd her bike turned down the step you see and bicycle lamp showed it. So - Doctor Gouldestcourt lived just across, that was Mrs Thompson's - do
c
tor, and - I thought to myself, I wonder if I should - but by this time the old lady was out of bedroom to see - who was at the door. And she says, dear me, Mary, they called her Mary, I always called her Polly, whatever's happened? And she says, oh I got
 
a fright Mrs Thompson, there's something - white lying down the area steps. She says, well phone for Doctore Goldescourt, so they - he wasnae long 'til he come over, and we never went out to see what it was, but here it was this naked man, he hadn't a sti
t
ch oh him. He must have been used to going to bed, you know, and - and - his boots and everything was - was on the first step, and he had all his clothes neatly folded, he wasnae that drunk but you ken he was near, and Doctor Goldescourt got the police an
d they got him away to police station, I don't know whether they took him to the infirmary or whether he was just put into the - police station for the night, but you ken -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did they put his clothes on first before they moved him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh I dinna ken 
what they did. And when we heard it was a - a man, naked, I said, you'd have got a bigger fright if you'd been right down. So we never - we never went out like to be late again. We always - tried to get away so that we'd get home before dark. We didna go 
out in the blackout because it was the blackout after that, we never were out again. We'd no inclination to go.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Was there a black out in the first world war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh yes, there was a blackout, yes, there was a blackout. Aye. That - oh there was a blac
k out. Aye. There was. There's a cut - there's a cutting in there yet that was - you know, up in one of the windows like, a blackout curtain, aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you have to provide your own uniforms for the jobs that you were in or did you get uniforms provided?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh, you had to provide your own.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Evan at the Grove, a big place like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
A big place like that, yes. Just provide your own, take your frocks with you for the morning and frocks for the afternoon, black for the afternoon you know that w
as. And any kind of print in the morning, it didna matter. And - you - usually - in these big places they have uniforms you know, because this place - where we lived, Halleaths - when I was quite young at the manse these Halleaths - maids and the butler a
n
d them all used to come to morning service at this same church at Lochmaben, they had a pew up in the gallery and they used to look up at them and wonder what they were doing with these wee - bonnets on, this was the uniform you see. Well it's rather like
 - smaller of course but rather like - Salvation Army bonnets, and tied - with strings, and this was the uniform for the - place. But the Grove didn't, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You had to provide your own?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Had to provide our own. Yes. That's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Can you remember how much money you got?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Do you know, that's a - a - do you know, money - money must never have bothered me much, because - we - I seemed to have enough - Margaret was just asking me when she was here, she says, can you remember about your pay? I 
says, that's a thing I can't except the first - when I was at the manse. I know it was more because I would never have gone for - for less. But it was always more. Pay.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Even when you were older did you still give your mother some of it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh well
, mother didn't - we gave her what we liked when we got older, she said, now - don't give me your pay now, you're old enough to - buy your own things, she - look - if you said well you wanted this, that or the other, she would say, well buy something sens
i
ble, and she always approved of what you bought because we'd been taught - what to buy, but we used to always give them something because our pay would be bigger and - and we got our food in - and lodging, you know what I mean, we hadnae that to pay for, 
i
t was just our - frocks and shoes and - things like that. But we seemed to have plenty - and - we just used to maybe if we had two pound over or something like that used to take it home and - mother kept it, she was always giving us, it wasn't that we - w
e needed to give her but you tried to pay her back a little for - her kindness, you know what I mean. She made us all alike. The whole family, she never gave to one - but she gave to the others.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 How often did you get paid when you were at Mrs Thompsons?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Well - at the - at the - at the Grove - we just got paid once a month. Once a month. And - I think at - at - Highfield we were paid every week, I think so. But you were on monthly - basis like. If you wanted to leave you had to give a month's notic
e, you couldnae just go in a week, you'd to give a month's notice. It would be so much a month, and - if you wanted your pay - if you wanted it early - you cold get it, I mean if you needed it for something. For shoes or slippers or something like that yo
u could get it, but things were so cheap then you know. It wouldnae be so easy to cater now. They're such a price.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Can you tell me a little bit about what it was like at Mrs Thompsons? What sort of jobs did you do, what was the routine in the house?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh well, in the morning - Polly, that was the - cook, she did the dining room grate, she had the grate to do. And sweeping the dining room floor, and I did the dusting. Because I had the - morning room to do, they didn't use it often but you had to dus
t it and keep it tidy, and then - if they had had anyone in, the drawing room would be in use, it had a - lot of stuff in it you know, more than what they would have nowadays and - it was a big room to do, it was right down the next flat over the dining r
o
om, we had that to do, and - the rest of the - rooms, I kept. Polly - Mary was her name but we called her - I called her Polly, did the front hall, and I did the inner hall. There was like the hall at the front door, she did that. It was that not polished
 
for the sake of the old lady, just wiped clean, scrubbed and - wiped clean. And then I had the stairs from top to bottom to do. And there was a spare bedroom, and a bathroom - behind the dining room, I mean on the same flat and the morning room. Now this 
m
orning room went out - over a - a week bridge, you see, the - area - was at the back too, and you could get into the garden, so sometimes - you know, their dirty feet coming in off the garden, you had always to go over it and keep it tidy. And - there was
 
two drawing rooms, there was the big drawing room and the small drawing room. It was mostly the big one that was used, two bedrooms in that flat, and then - on the top, very top, another stair up - there was a - what they called the red bedroom and a bath
r
oom on that flat too. But the bathroom - was on the same flat as the dining room for the sake of the old - I expect all these houses are the same, and our bedroom was right up - as I told you, at the top of the house. And there was lots of - you know, dow
n
 the area steps and in at the back door there were lots of - there was a place where you cleaned the knives, there was a knife machine for cleaning the knives. And - lots of cupboards where they kept - cases, travelling cases and that. There was two or th
ree, I think these houses will all be the same but these didna}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2644963\charrsid2967080  need anything but I suppose P}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
olly did these two, down on her - my pantry was downstairs, and then I had a small one - on the dining room flat too where I kept the - spoons and you know, tea ware and everything like that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did the old lady get her breakfast in bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Not often. No. Not often. Was quite spry. She come downstairs, of course - she'd - she'd - bouts of asthma, and if she was - no very well with asthma well she stayed in her r
oom for her - breakfast but - took it up on a tray to her, and she was always down by dinner time again. There was only once I remember her being - really ill, and - Miss Lane, that was the - companion, she slept in a bedroom next and she'd been in - ther
e
 was a little - bed put up in the corner of her room, and it was right at the gas fire, you know, there was a gas fire. And - Miss Lane hadnae got much sleep for a night or two you know, and oh dear me, she said, now I don't like asking you to do this but
 
I wonder if you'd come for a night or two and - and - sleep in my room to let Miss Lane get a rest. I didna fancy it then, as this gas fire was the thing, the heat was - it was a big fire, kept a bowl of water there, but - all night long I never shut an e
y
e. She'd a repeater watch, a gold repeater watch and - she wasnae sleeping you see, she was sitting up you know, pillowed up, and she was always putting on this watch and - even if I did want to fall over this new noise - wakened me, I wasna deaf in these
 
days. So she knew fine that I wasnae sleeping, so after two nights I got up to my own room, and Polly come down and - slept with her and by that time she was getting better. She didnae impose on you, she didna like - to think that you werena sleeping or a
nything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 She wasn't the kind to tell you to do things, she would ask you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh no, she just left you to your own devices. They never bothered you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did they go away much?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 They went away - in the summertime they took a house - down at Auc
hencairn, you know, at the shore. I went to see it two years ago when we were round - and - it was there, just the same, but - just across from the cot - it was a cottage, now wait a minute 'til I tell you the story about that cottage. It was the cottage 
w
here the man - that writes all the stories down there had lived, now I should remember his name - he writes all these stories about Heston and Auchencairn, isn't it funny, it's gone out of my mind, but I'll maybe mind it. But he had lived here in former y
e
ars. And - the lady that owned the cottage was a Miss McGuire, and - she usually went away at holiday, and - look - allowed anyone to take the cottage, I don't know how they heard about it, but they told me they were going here. And for two weeks I went. 
And then - after that - I went home and had my holiday. My summer holiday. And Polly came down.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 How long did you get for that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Two weeks. Yes. And - we had a parrot, and it - it was a funny bird, they had a canary too, and this little canary used
 to get out and fly about in the dining room, and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2644963\charrsid2967080 P}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
olly was jealous of it and one day it landed on its cage and it broke its leg, with its beak. Yes it did. So it liked me, that was the funny thing. Always at tea time - four o'clock, took the tea up to the
 dining room and - you - you know what Indian corn's like, that yellow stuff that - well - you had to boil that, the cook had to do that of course, boil this Indian corn 'til it was soft. And - it was a funny bird, it used to go to it and say, scratch }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2644963\charrsid2967080 P}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 oll
y. And it would put down it's head. Only at tea time. It learnt that. Scratch. And then - I put in its corn, and this day - this special day that I'm going to tell you about, Polly had forgot to put on the corn, it wasnae very soft. So she told me, and I 
s
ays, by jove, I'll need to get out of the dining room in a hurry today, because it could talk you know. So - I pushed in - I filled up its dish and pushed it in and - and was hurrying out of the dining room, and she went - hard, hard, hard, you could hear
 it. And she says, oh is it hard }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2644963\charrsid2967080 P}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
olly, it hasn't been boiled long enough, and it wouldn't eat it. And - in the morning - at - in the evening I should say to being with you covered it up with a cloth and it said goodnight. Goodnight darling, it'd say to me.
 And - in the morning - the cook was frightened for it, and I think it knew that, she had to clean it out, it was her job to clean it out, and she used to be terrified, it could nip you know if you didna watch it, and instead of - putting in her hand to g
et out the stick she used to turn the cage quick and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2644963\charrsid2967080 Po}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
lly would float down into the top of the case and she got out the sticks, it didna like this. And she was never at home with it. But - when you came in in the morning and opened it up it would say, good
 morning darling, it could talk you know, it was quite a good talker, they were very fond indeed of it. So }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2644963\charrsid2967080 P}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
olly was to go for holidays to Auchencairn, and it wasn't very well when it went away, I must say, I don't know what was wrong with it, but it wasna
e very grand at all. And - its cage went, in the train, and it went in a - in a basket with cover over and air got in, so when we got home it was to come to me - it was to be in the kitchen because there was a fire in there always, it was the summertime a
n
d they didnae have a fire every day. So - Polly settled down, but - it wasnae eating very well. And - I tried to do the best I could for it but it stopped talking, it never bothered. Mrs Thompson was in an awful state, so she said to me one day, do you kn
o
w what I think I'll do? I said, no. She said, I think when the doctor comes to me today I'll ask him to come through and look at Polly. So - the doctor came, an Auchencairn doctor - the doctor at Dumfries would write to this one you see and he used to com
e
 up and just see that she was all right and give her her pills for he asthma. So the doctor came through, he seemed a very nice man, he said, what's wrong with the bird? I said, I don't know doctor, I said, it's no - bright as it usually is. So he asked a
bout its age and that and he says, you know it's getting on to be an old bird. And - he says, we'll leave it for a day or two, and, he says, if it doesn't get better - it was sitting, you know, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2644963\charrsid2967080 moping}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 , and - that was all right, so in the finish - the doctor
 said that he thought it should be put to sleep, and it hadna been talking for days. And do you know, when that man came in to put it to sleep, it says, will you walk. Oh doctor, she says, I couldn't have anything done to it, it's getting better. And do y
o
u know, it did get a bit better and got bright. So - the first thing - first thing Polly - the maid said to me at the station at Dumfries, how's that bird? I said, oh it's no been well at all but it's a bit better now. She says, I was hoping, she was hopi
n
g it would die for she was frightened for it, but of course they didna know that. So I said, well it's getting better. So I went and I had my fortnights holidays and I got word to come back - early in the morning so that I would have the fire on and the h
o
use opened up, the windows opened, so I was there, and when I met them at the steps, the bird was here because the basket was here. So - I said, how's it been keeping? Polly said, oh it's no very grand, it does - I think it's missed you, she said, I bet i
t
 would because Polly had no time for it. So - the very night they came back home they went along to Mr Bier the vet, he lived in Castle Street, and asked to come along. And he came to look at the bird. He said - I think the bird's had a chill. He said, it
'
s eyes are bright, but I think it's recovering from a chill. Well, I said, it's bound to have had it a long time, he said, maybe the shifting about wouldnae help it any. He said, who usually works with it? Well, I said, I feed it and that. So he said, wel
l
 tonight - he said, I want you - it was in the dining room there of course - I want you to take it down where you can have the fire on all night, that was the kitchen. We stocked it up you see. And - give it a tablespoonful of brandy. You ever know anythi
n
g like that, I don't know whether he knew what it would do or not, and he said, wrap it well up with - blankets or something warm, and he said, I think that'll sweat it out. Well do you know before we went to bed the bird was staggering about in the cage,
 
it was drunk. It was drunk. And I was always up first and when I come down in the morning, you know, it had got its head through the bars and it got hanged. But I never told the old lady. I said Polly had died. And - she just thought it - you know, that i
t
 - natural. I took its head out of the - so - then the funeral took place, and they had a box lined with green satin, the pair of them, and invited me to the funeral. Polly wouldna go, she says, oh I'm no hypocrite, I'm not going to its funeral. And they 
b
uried it in the garden you know, the - the - the nephew had brought that bird home from Africa to them when it was young, and they had taught it all that it knew you know. And it could sing, and it said - Polly put the kettle on, you know, and all these t
hings, it was just - something for the old lady you know. And -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 It would be just like a child to her.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
It was, yes, she was very fond of it. So Polly died, and - that was the end of Polly. But - one day - it - it used to go out in the garden with
 them in its cage when they were sitting out in the garden and this day - they called down - Miss Lane came in, called down to - just to put the tea in the dining room, just to take their tea outside - as it - a cold wind had got up and she thought Mrs Th
o
mpson should come in, so of course it wasnae time for the Parrot to come in, and do you know what it did? The only time it ever bit me, it was fair angry, because the sun was out, but it was a cold wind. And I went to lift the cage and it just got me like
 that and took the bit right out. Oh, she says, Polly, whatever have - are you doing, she was ve}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2644963\charrsid2967080 x}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
ed with it. I had to go about with a - a thing on my finger for long enough. It didna mean it you know, I don't think it would have done to me but - it was angry at being taken in before its time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 It seems to have had a mind of its own?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Aye. Oh dear. So that was - that was the end of Polly.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 How long did you stay with Mrs Thompson?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Four years. Four.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 And then of course you were married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh aye, the time I was there though I was married. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you work after that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Yes. When - I remember my - my mother coming in to see me and she - my mother happened to see her in the dining room as she always did, and she said she wonde
red if I would come back to her because she says, I don't think I'll let her away if she won't come back - to get married you see. So I went back to her, and - you didna come home 'til 1919, during the - 1919, so - in the March, I said to her, I think you
 
should really be looking for someone else because - my husband'll be home any time now and I'll want to get home. I didna know just exactly the time. So funny thing - she'd written to Mrs McJerrow for my reference - when I went to her, and a girl that had
 
been there applied for - the - to come - no, but she didna get it, she let me read the latter, and she said unfortunately she couldn't recommended this girl like she had recommended me. So - there'd been something they didna like her 'cos they didna take 
her. But they got another girl, and -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you work at all after Mr Shearer came home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh no. They wrote to me - the - the - I forget what they were going - they kept in touch with me, and - they were coming - coming through Lockerbie, and they w
rote and asked me to meet them - at the station to see them, they were sorry when I left you know, and - then - they called Inveresk after the place where Mrs - Thompson had been brought up, that was Inveresk, Musselbourgh, and went away back there. And M
r
s - they both died and - oh of course that's years ago. I forget who it was, I think it was Polly - sent me a cutting out of a paper - to - I have it somewhere - that Mrs Thompson had died I think in her eighty-eighth year, Craigen - Craigengar, Musselbur
gh that was the name of the place. Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You liked working for her did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Aye. But - when - once while we were there - she was forgetful you know, and - if they had been there - like I mean at Dumfries she was leaving Polly and I furniture, we s
aw this writing out in the - werenae spying or anything, when we were - when I went into the dining room her writing desk was open and papers all scattered all over the place, and it was lifting them up off the floor, she must just have gone off to bed ma
ybe meaning to come back and tidy up and forgotten. And - I think it must have been the time when Miss Lane was ill because I couldn't help seeing my name and here this was all what - what they were leaving us, and I says to Polly, by }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2644963\charrsid2967080 J}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 ove, if we're here we
'll get our houses furnished. She says, how do you ken? I said, because I've been reading - the papers that she had left, I couldnae help but see it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you get anything though?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 No, you see, I went away. Everything had been sold they'd only tak
en what was - necessary with them. And - and she had that old lady, Miss Bell, staying with her, she was her sister, and she wrote this British Israel Bible Notes in her seventieth year, I have a copy of that, and - she went a wee bit funny you know. Well
 
- she thought it was my house, she thought Inveresk was my house, I used to do her - her grate and that in the morning before she was up and she used to talk to me, she was a nice old lady, and she had a - a companion too, Miss Scott. Just a wee wee soul 
she was, and - Miss Bell was a great big tall lady, and - she says to me - Fordyce, that was Mrs - Thompson, wants me to go away from here and I don't want to go. It's getting too be to much for her having me here, so -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Here sister was put in a home was she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
No, not in a home. So Miss Scott said to me she said, just talk away to her as if she was going to be here, she says, you know, she forgets, however - they arranged with this - these people up in Musselburgh to - give Miss Scott and her rooms 
each and the used of the dining room. And it was a June day and they asked me to go with Miss Scott for company. Well - it was Miller, a motor hirer on the Sands that did the - don't know whether they're still there, don't think they're thr}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2644963\charrsid2967080 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 e now but it wa
s the son that came to take us. And at Moffat - it got very very warm in the car so she wanted to get out and walk about a little bit, and Miss Scott let her out and could hardly get her in again, way up in the moors. Well - eventually - we got her - and 
w
e arrived at this place, and from the very start I didna think that it would be a very suitable place for her, because the bedrooms were upstairs, and Miss - Bell wansa very good at climbing stairs, and - they stayed there about a year and then - they wen
t
 somewhere else, and eventually Miss Bell died. Died like - I heard about her death, told me Miss Bell had passed away. But Miss Scott was never happy up there. They were happy with us, but - it got too - much for the old lady, she was older than - you kn
o
w, she - they were never at peace, she was always imagining things, and Miss Scott used to take her out walks and sometimes he couldnae get her in. One day she went into the vet's, she said this was where she lived. You know, the people about there all kn
ew her, and she started to take off her coat and things and this was where she'd come to - so it was a - rather a burden for the old lady. But she was a nice old person, Miss Bell. Yes, she was.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Can you tell me how long you had known Mr Shearer when you got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh, I'd known him - all the time - he was there do you see. When - when - when he came there, four years, he cannae hear us now, if I tell - if I'm telling anything wrong he canna hear us, he's deaf. About four years. And of course - 
oh more than that because it was - at - Inveresk about two years you see before I got married. 1917.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Your homes were quite near each other weren't they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 My home, yes, quite near.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 But working in the same place you had quite an advantage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes, yes. That's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you write a lot to him when he was in the forces?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh yes. I wrote - I wrote a lot to him and - and - he wrote to me when he could. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 I wouldn't always be convenient to get letters posted back to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Aye. Well - I just used to write every week, and - sometimes he didna get the letters - be a great bundle come at once - in the end - a chum that he met in - down at Bullford I think it was had given him the address of somebody in Africa to call on, a cha
p coming home, coming this way to - service into the forces and these people wrote tome and said that - he hadnae called but that they'd had a letter. Nice people they seemed to be, they'd had a letter from him apologising, instead of going Africa they we
n
t over to France and down through Italy, down the Suez canal, so - oh I got one or two scares the time he was away there. I got a cable came one day to say he was in hospital dangerously ill. And - hepatitis was on the cablegram, I didn't - no idea what t
hat was. So Mrs Thompson said for Doctor Gordon Scott to find out and he said had he ever had }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2644963\charrsid2967080 dysentery}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
, well he had after he went, a bad climate it was, and he said it might have been an }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2644963\charrsid2967080 abscess}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
 left on the liver from this, and it would just depend - if it
 was deep seated they couldnae do anything, so - for about six weeks I'd - I wouldn't answer the door in case I got - another cable from him but he said I might have known when there was no word that it was better news, but of co}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2644963\charrsid2967080 urse you always - think the wor}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
st, and it turned out it wasnae that at all. They had him on the table to operate and it was double pneumonia he had. No that hepatitis at all, he told me all this when he come home. So -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Can you remember the very first time that you went to meet Mr Shearer's parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Parents? Well - I'd met them you see, I'll tell you how. The day that they came they had a wee pony and trap and they brought him over, you see, and of course I met his father and mother then so I really knew them. Aye. Oh they
 were very good while he was away. They used to come and see me - in that time and of course they went to see my parents too, and - and they had a - they had a wedding in the family - the time he was away and invited my father and mother to the wedding, t
hey were very nice, and I was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Were they much the same sort of people as your own folk?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Yes, very nice, homely people. Very nice. She was always very nice with me for she fought with all her other daughters-in-laws I must say. But I must have kep
t the right side of her. She'd her funny ways you know, she was very pernickety over things and she sometimes said things in a manner that you could take offence at but - I just bit my tongue and didna say anything and - I helped them all I could when his
 
mother was very ill before he died - I went for three months and helped - granny had to stay upstairs with him you see, she was never out of the bedroom, except someone was - came up and Nellie had the Post Office to do so she'd to be there so they needed
 somebody. And - he used to say to me, when - if I'm spared to get better I'll buy you the best fur coat at the shop. But he wasnae spared, it was cancer. So -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Before you were married and Mr Shearer was away in the Army did you go and visit them then too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh yes, I used to go and visit them, I had my bicycle, I had a bicycle, used to bicycle from Dumfries and sometimes instead of going to my own home I used to go to them, yes, they were very kind.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You really got on well with them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Got on very well.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What did you call them before you were married? Did you call them Mr and Mrs Shearer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes, uh-huh.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What about after you were married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh, grandpa - grandpa and grandma, because that's what they got at home with the other grandchildren you see. Aye. Yes. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Can you remember the first time you took him home to meet your parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh - I don't - oh well - I think - you see, with mother coming in - I don't know that my father had been, but mother used to come i
n often and see us so she would meet him then. Like they knew him fine you see. At least mother did. And - they quite approved of - us getting married.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you have any other boyfriends before that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh aye, I had boyfriends before that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 The kind that you took home to your folk?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Yes. The one - the first one I had, I think I would just be about fourteen year old, and - well I didna care for this man at all. He - he worked on the farm, nice fellow mind he was looking back. He seemed - he 
was a nice decent sort, and - mother used to say that - my youngest sister you see was ten years younger than me, she was just a child when I was there, just a wee girl, and he used to bring her toys and - always when he went away maybe for a weekend he u
s
ed to always bring her something back, that was, mother used to say, that was just the way - for him to get up, you know, to bring something for Joan, and - then he asked - asked if he could see me home when I used to go to the bank. And - I never took hi
m
 in because we wasnae allowed, and he just used to turn on his bike, he seemed quite pleased to have seen me home and - and through the week he used to - write and oh I used to be - wonder how I could get off with him because I didna care for him in that 
m
anner, I was too young, and - in the finish he changed his job and I told him then that I didna want him to write anymore. So it was a funny thing - he married in later years and - one night we went to the pictures, my sister and I in Lockerbie. This was 
a
fter we were married. And - she said, this is Mrs Deacon. Deacon was his name. And I said - where does your husband work, I was wondering if it was him. And she says - he works at Southfield, near Lockerbie, she said, I've biked here tonight. I said, I us
ed to know a lot of Deacons, I said, what was his - it was him, Tom. And my sister says, eeh, he used to be a lad of Martha's.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 She spilt the beans did she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Aye. Right out you know. She's just like that. Oh that was in the days of long ago.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did your parents ever warn you off any boys, did they ever tell you not to go with certain boys?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
No. No, they were - they seemed very decent boys, I had another boy - well it was - my father and - and his people were very friendly, and - my father wa
s a great fiddler, you know, violin and - both his - father and his brother, and they used to come a lot to our house you know and have nights with the violin, three of them, and the - the - this younger one came and I was on with him a long time, in fact
 I just stopped going with him when I got on with Bob.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 How did you start going out with Mr Shearer, how long had he been at Highfields before you got friendly?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh - oh a good while. A good while, because I'd got another boy up in Lockerbie then, 
and he used to come down and see me. Not going serious, just friendly you know, he would have liked to have been serious this one but - he was killed at the war. And he turned out to be a great friend of my husband's in the Army and this lad, he worked in
 
Mr McJerrow's office, and how I met him was just going up with Mr. McJerrow's sea you see. And - he asked me out and I used to go out with him and go to the pictures with him and that but just friendly you know. And - then I started going out with - with 
Bob. And that's the way of it. Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You said you went to pictures with boyfriends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
It was silent pictures in the Town Hall. And there used to be another thing come, they called it the geggie, I don't know how it got that name, but it was a - in a
 hut up in - football field, it was a big hut and they rented this for - a week or a fortnight and - they had variety turns on this. Acting and - pictures too, they had it fixed up for pictures as well, and - it wasnae dear I think only sixpence a night, 
a
nd there used to be a change three times a week. And - used to go - there was always something to do. And there was plenty of nice walks about Lockerbie, used to you could go a walk it was three miles away around by the cemetery and up the Dumfries Road, 
that was a - usual walk for - young folk in these days. Yes. That's right.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 And you used to go to dances?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Aye. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 How often would you do that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh well, they didna have them as often as what they have them now but they used to have th
em - maybe once a month or something, I didn't go to them every time you know, but quite frequently. Used to like the country dances but - put a stop to that after we walked back and - I was - oh aye, I was ill and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 When you started going out together how often would you be able to see each other and go out at night?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
To go out like? Oh well, we - we were off every - I had my - afternoon off and evening, but we usually went home, my sister and I, my sister was in Lockerbie, went home, Sundays. On
 Sunday, Sunday evening, instead of going to church we used to go away for a walk. And the cook had a - young man too, so we were both the same, she couldna tell on me because she was doing the same.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You didn't all go out together though?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh no, no. Just the two of us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You didn't go on any holidays together when you were courting did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
No. No, not when we were courting, no. No. You see the - in the holiday time I - at Highfield - we usually had to have our holidays when they were on
 holiday, and then they needed someone there to look after the house. Well I would maybe get away a fortnight and then - the cook would get away a fortnight. That's the way of it - they worked.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did he actually propose to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Properly?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh yes. That was when it was at - we - we were going together a long time, but we got engaged about a year before we got married. Maybe a year and a half I think.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 That was when he was away in the Army you got engaged?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes. Yes, -that w
as when the war started, and - he - we were down the Dock Park, that's where we were sitting in a seat, that was when he asked me to marry him.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did he have to go and ask your parents permission first?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh yes, he went and told them anyway. And they were quite pleased. Because we - we were going together for quite a while.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Then did you go and see him folk and tell them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Ah well, he did that, and invited me over.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you get an engagement ring?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes, I'll show you it, I cannae wear it now. Went together and chose it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You didn't give Mr Shearer a ring did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 That wasn't the fashion?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 No, it wasnae the fashion, I gave him a cigarette case. I think he lost it in Ireland didn't he. Didn't you lost the ciga
rette case I gave you in the Army? Aye. Aye, he said he lost it. I got it -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 When you got engaged was it in the paper?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh no, no. No, I didnae need to be in the papers it's not long in a village -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you have a party when you got engaged?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
No. No party, no. We had no party. And - when it came to the - fourteenth of November, 1917 was when we were married, well - our own minister, he only got leave for - what leave had you when we got married, just for two days or something. Aye. Our own
 minister couldnae marry us you see because he had a previous engagement, and he was very sorry about that, so - Mr Lane of the Barras manse came and married us. We were just married at home, and we had a party that night.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Supposing it had been normal circumstances and you had both been living at home would you have been married in the church do you think?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
It was quite normal in these days to be married at home or in the village hall, or in the school, as the weddings were held - in my time, but 
- for some reason we couldnae even get the school that night. The following year, 1918, my sister got married, she was engaged at the time, and she got married in - wait a minute, July, July the fifth, she was married on - my father and mother's silver we
dding day. The date like. And - it was in the school. It was held in the school and we had all the celebrations there.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 To go back to your wedding, did you have time to arrange it all beforehand or didn you just get short notice?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Well, they did i
t at short notice, we'd a wedding cake but it was a wartime wedding cake, and - they made it very nice, it was - wasna much fruit in it, it was more sponge because you couldna get it, and it was decorated with - flag - you know - you know what - aye, and 
t
hey really made a good job of it, the short time they had, McMichael - the same McMichael that's there yet, they did it, and - at - in occasions like these everybody helps in the village you know, just like the golden wedding that was there, the village p
eople all helped, baking - everybody helps. So - we had a party, it was very nice.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 How many people would there be there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Nearly - don't know, about - between fifty and sixty anyway, because most of the village was asked and all - the relatives we
re mostly near at hand you see. My brother - that was to be best man, he was the only one that was - far away, he was at Ramsgate, he was just in at the end of the war, he was a young - fellow then, and he was just eighteen and in - to service, and in the
 finish he couldna get - so - my sisters - young man stood in for best man. And - and my sister -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you have a bridesmaid?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes, my sister was bridesmaid, she laughed all the time. She - you know, she's a - she's so cheery, she laughed all the t
ime she was getting married I may tell you that, because the minister's wife, Mrs McCall, she asked - Mr McCall, this was our own minister asked if he could come to - bring Mrs McCall for she'd never seen a Scots wedding, she was English. And - mother sai
d
, certainly, so - she happened to be sitting next to me, we didn't know her because they were just newly come there to Lochmaben, we hadnae got to know her, so she says - my isn't she happy? She was laughing all the time. Do you know what she was laughing
 about? Wally had been put - she'd held out two fingers and he was putting the ring - and she couldn't - and she couldn't \{BLANK\}
 for laughing, we found out afterwards that's what the laughing was for. And she says, well if that's an augury of her married l
ife it's going to be a good one. So she says, you'd another sister married hadn't you just a wee while ago? I said, it was me. Oh, she says, you, I thought you were about sixteen. See she must have thought I was younger. Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 It all went well for your wedding did it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes, oh yes, everything went well.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You would have a rush to get a wedding ring and things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 I had no wedding dress, I had just as it happened - I had just got a new nigger brown costume. Nigger brown, and - wasn't it funny
, I had never even worn it, and - that stood in for my - my wedding.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What was it like?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 It was nice, and - and Miss Lane, that - lady I was with.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 The companion?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 I had a white - blouse just and she gave me a beautiful collar, it's in th
e house somewhere, of Maltese lace. I had that on, it was very nice. It's - sort of creamy, it was more creamy than white, and - I had a brown hat, velvet hat, big hat. And that was - that was what I had for - both for my wedding and for going away in. On
l
y went down to my husband's people, you see, he - he should really have been back but he stayed one night, and - I went right back to my place, I never went home again because I knew I'd be fair homesick. So I went right back to work. And it was a lovely 
sunshiney day. Polly had sent me a telegram, that was the - the - and she says, well, you got the sun anyway even if it was November, lovely sunshiney day.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did people send telegrams to weddings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes. Yes. Aye. She sent me a telegram.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What about your wedding ring, did you have to rush away and buy one just before the wedding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh - yes, we went to Dumfries and bought it at - now what was the name of the man, it was near - you know where - no, wait, it's not Youngs. Where - yes, it is Youn
gs. Youngs is right on Buccleugh Street, no, I'm wrong. Do you know where the - the fish shop is - wait 'til I think, you know the street where Woolworth's is on the High Street, well further down - there was a fish shop, Turners shop, is Turner still the
re I'm wondering. I've nae been in Dumfries for ages, then next to that there was a jewellers, Anderson, and that was it. Aye. Went there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You had enough money saved up to buy it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh had enough money, oh - we'd been saving up you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you save up for quite a while?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh yes. Yes, whenever we started - going together we started saving up for the - great day.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you have a bottom drawer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh aey. Lot's of things, yes. I remember - the girl that went away from Highfield, Jes
sie Byers, she went to a place at Moffat after she left, she was away before me and I remember the first thing I got, I have it still, was a teacloth, I saw a teacloth she sent me, she says, you know what that's for, that's for your bottom drawer, and I w
as always getting things from friends and - anything I saw myself that I fancied I - I'd quite a good - gather up by the time I got married.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did your mother save things for you as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes. Yes, oh mother was always giving us things. She was. An
d in those days - there was - rugs made, you know, not rag rugs, I don't mean rag rugs, but mother used to do them with a pin. Pinned rugs. I have a wee - mat in the lobby, I could show you what I mean - mean by that, and she made beautiful rugs. This gir
l
 at Inveresk could - when she seen them - she was making one once - when she went and she said - if I ever get married Halliday will you make me a rug. Poor Polly, she never got married. And - mother had one or two rugs made for me you know. And - used to
 \endash  save up rags and you know, wash them - and dye them, you could dye them all colours, and they lasted for years, these rag - what they called them rag rugs but - these done with the pin were what they called crocheted rugs. Aye, crocheted.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you have any special goings on when you left your work to get married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Beg pardon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You know sometimes nowadays if there's a girl leaving to get married.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you have a party the night before or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh no. I know they do 
that now but no. No, there - there wasnae anything like that then. They used to - in those days I can remember they used to do terrible things to the bridegroom in the villages like. But - of course they couldna do anything to Bob because he wasna there y
ou see. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What sort of things did they do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh, they used to tar and feather them you know, the way do, oh they used to do terrible things, and - keel - they'd to put on - on - they used to sometimes do them all with this and -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Was this like sheep dip or something?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Aye, that - oh the things they - and it would be sore mind you. Oh dear. They used to do it in these days, just the village boys you know. Full of mischief. I remember once - the bridegroom arriving in a cab, and he could
na get out, they had - they had the - the door handles, I don't know how they did it, but they had them all tied and he got quite angry in the finish, and the minister there waiting on him to go into the hall, in the hall then, and he couldna get out - oh
 
and they were laughing, just the folk were as bad as them that had done it - because they were just laughing. But he got quite angry in the finish. And I even remember - when - we lived up at - Wallbut, that's - Cross Michael - the tablemaid got married, 
w
ell we were there and we were invited down to the church to the wedding, and - Mary was there, this was the bride like, and was in the ante-room and Jim was twenty minutes late, and this was what had happened to him. They had tarred him, and he couldna ge
t
 it off, and - and - no only that - they had tarred his face and he had done it with lard and everything, and he come in quite flustered and - and - they had - tied up his cab, his motor, they had it tied up too, and - and he - that was Mr Fisher and he w
a
s a very strait laced man, and he was very angry about it. He said fun was fun but that was going a bit too far, Mary could hardly stand. She thought he wasnae turning up. That's what it was. They're still alive and live at - eeh now wait a minute now, wh
ere was that lady that died? Oh dear me, what a memory - Buchan, I've just remembered the name of the writer, Buchan was the name of the writer. Aye. And - what do you call the -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 How did you get people invited to your wedding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh well -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you just have to go and ask them yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes, that was just what happened, just had to go and ask them, and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 How much warning did you get that he was coming home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 No - well - we knew that he was coming home but we wasna sure when, that 
was the thing that - that was getting a leave but we werena sure when but we knew it would be about that time. And - that's maybe the stickman Bob. He'll no hear us. Think of it now - both my brothers had bicycles, of course the one was away in the Army, 
b
ut - I had another brother, and my young sister, maybe they would go on bikes, I expect that was what it was, my father had a bicycle too, we had his - his chum there, so - that's - my father's chum so that's how he would go, he'd just bike up and ask the
m, it was only - about a day or two's warning we could give them. But I got lots of presents. You know, we got them - if I didna get them at the time - I got them afterwards you know. Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you have showing of presents in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh I had
nae - they used to, my sister had a show of her presents, she got a lot of nice presents too, but - we didna make such a fuss about it as what they do now. In those days, when you went to see the presents - mother would just say, come up and see the prese
nt, you know, there werena anything put in the papers or anything and - it was always a cup of tea, a home-baked cakes and scones and - cup of tea.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 I suppose Mr Shearer would just have to wear his uniform?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 That's right, it was a war wedding and f
unny thing was - the next day when we went down - we went down to Lochmaben, we got a hire to Lochmaben and his father was to meet us there, they had a wee pony and trap and - we read our own banns out in the church. Wasn't that funny. They were put out i
n
 the church door you see. Because there was no time to do anything else. And we were married then but we read them before his father came to - to get us. And it was only like the night and then - the next day I went to Lockerbie with him and that was him.
 So -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You had your sister as a bridesmaid?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What did she do about something to wear?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Well - she had something handy, yes, she'd just wear something like what I had on myself, I think she'd a navy costume, I think that was to - not exactly navy, it was more - a sax blue. Oh we'd not time to get anything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you get flowers or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 I had - orange blossom, it was real orange blossom, we had a tree. Aye, we'd a tree.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 How many people did you have in the house for the actual wedding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh there were - they were all there, they were crowded - they were crowded in, it was a - fairly big living room. Fairly big. They were all crowded in, some of them werenae sitting, they were just standing. Aye. Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you get any photographs taken?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 No, not then. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you get one taken afterwards?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Later, yes, larger on. Aye. Not then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What about confetti and things like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh yes, they had confetti and rice too, rice was a great thing, they t
hrew at you in those days. And - before - before I went in - we were still looking for my brother - come you see, and - here - my father disappeared, he was to take me in and - couldna see him and Jean says, I wonder where my father's gone, he's not to be
 
seen, and she went outside to see if he'd gone outside, and here he is opening a telegram - by the light of the - car lamp, there was somebody there with a car, and she says, what on earth are you doing father, they're waiting on us going in. And he says,
 oh - it's just a wire to say Tom canna come, that was my brother, just at the last minute. Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What about the food, did your mother have to do most of it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh she had. Aye she had. As I tell you the villagers always very good, we had - a tea, li
ke it was just tea, and - cooked - cooked - I think grandma had boiled - boiled the ham, must have got a fairly big ham, and - mother had roast roast meat. You know, at a time like that - the butchers stretched a point and did what they could for you. Aye
. Yes. That's right, yes. And that's what we had.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Was there room for everybody to sit down?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh there was plenty -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Or was it just a hand round?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 No, it was - we all sat down. Great big - two tables there was - in the - the big bedroom, t
he bed was taken down, you see, I don't know where they were or anything, I mean - they must have been in somebody else's house probably, and we had two big long - boards from the hall.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Trestles?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Aye, trestles. That's right. Oh dear.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did anybody make speeches?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh they made speeches and wished you all the - luck in the world, oh they always made speeches, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Would your father make a speech and then Mr Shearer have to make one?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 I know my father - he never did say much my fat
her, it would be very - just a few words saying that he - he hoped the - bride - the best man of course - did the toast, and - and - I heard somebody shouting did he not - did he no wish he'd been in his shoes, because I used to go with him. That's as sur
e as I'm - sitting in this chair. I thought it was bad taste though, it's a shame. Yes. Aye. That's true.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Then did you have dancing after that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes, they had dancing, they cleared all the - the - things away and we had dancing for a while. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you have singing as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Yes, dancing and singing, there was plenty of good singers amongst them, my father was a nice singer and so was my mother, and grandpa - every time there was anything like that or a concert or anything he always go
t my - my mother to sing - come on now Jeannie I think I hear - Neannie was my mother's name, sing us the Grand Wedding. It was a sort of comedy and she used to sing it for him, aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 How did long did the jollity's go on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Right on to the morning. Right on 'til about four o'clock in the morning.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you stay as long as that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes. We stayed as long as that. Oh dear.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 I thought you would be more anxious to leave when you'd just a short time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Well - there wasnae anything else you 
could do because I mean we werena going away anywhere do you see, we were just going to - Bob's people for the night. Aye. They had a wee party for us that same night down at them, and - auntie from the Moss was up and - and some of her relatives to meet 
u
s supposed to be. Just a nice cup of tea you know and they didnae stop long but it was more just to meet up. Very nice, and then - the following day we'd to go away, get off at Lockerbie and I just got the train, I don't remember if I had much time to wai
t, I don't think so. Mother said, now I'll look for you back. And I said, no, don't be surprised if I just go back right to my work, because I think that 'll be the best place for me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You would be tired likely?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Aye, I would be tired likely. I wou
ldnae do any - no, that's - that's right, I just went right back and wouldnae be much to do that day because it was afternoon you see and I wouldna have anything to do, I wouldnae start work 'til the next day. Because they didna know when I was coming bac
k, they were quite glad to have me - anytime. Polly was quite pleased to see me back.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 She would be wanting to hear all about it I suppose?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh aye. Aye, she was a nice -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you get a present from Mrs Thompson?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes, I got that - silver
 teapot, where is it, oh in the - it's there somewhere, and after that, birthdays we always give each other presents, Polly and I at birthdays. It was always something, you know, for the house, aye, for the bottom drawer. She was a nice soul. She died a f
ew years ago. While we were at - Carlton Churchbridge she died. We just got word in the morning from her sister to say - she'd passed away and we went to the funeral that afternoon. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Do you remember going to any other weddings when you were wee that were different from yours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes, there was my aunt's wedding.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 The one that was just a wee bit older than you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Just ten years, she was married - when we were just - I wasna left the school when she was married. She - married a - grandma
 and grandpa - in their old age - they'd a family of eight, and - the boys as she called them, this was the men - wanted them to go to Paisley, wasn't that an awful move from living in the country? And - they got them a house I remember, eight Caledonia S
t
reet, Paisley. And - it was up one flight of stairs, there was three - living on this flat. And - beautiful house it was inside and furnished all the sitting room beautiful for them, and - Aunt Martha was a very nice looking - I have a photo of her somewh
e
re but I don't just exactly know where, she was a nice looking young woman, and - she'd lots of young - lads you know, but - she went away from Templand and - went to Paisley, and grandpa got a job - with a contractor - Gray his name was, and he used to g
o
 out at four in the morning, get his horse and - lorry, and - do contracting you see. Well, this - man of course came - to the house - Uncle Ken or some of the boys brought him and he fell in love with my aunt, and he was about twice her age, and - it was
 him she married. And - one - girl, Marty they called her too - and - they lived -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Was she married up in Paisley then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 She was married at Corncockle - come back - they didna like the town at all. Aye, they didna like the town and they come back a
nd lived next door to us up at Corncockle cottage and she was married from there, and it was in the wintertime, for I remember the snow was falling, and there was two or three young - children - of families coming to the wedding, I mean they got plenty of
 
time to prepare for it. And we - no, and we were left in there sitting with the kiddies you know - strange they were, in mother's house - while the - tea was going on in the other - place, after the wedding, and then - some of the mothers come in and let 
u
s in to get something, but we didn't actually get it along with them you see - owing to that. And they went away - went away in the morning - to catch the mail at Lockerbie, and when they got to Newcastle, where they were going for their honeymoon - it wa
s
 snowing heavy there, and when they went to put up their umbrellas going out of the station all the confetti - the - the firm gave them each beautiful umbrellas, I have a bit of the handle of my aunt's umbrella - in one of their - one of their presents an
d
 of course the porter looked and then the smiles got over their face, they were fair embraced. And when they got - the cabbie took them up to their own place, I canna mind, Cavendish Road or something and he took them to some other road and they woke up t
wo or three families before they got their - own folk. Uncle Tom was fair angry. That was where they were going to spend their honeymoon, with - a - brother.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did girls that were in trouble get married in the church in your days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh no. They didna in the - no, our minister was dead against it, oh no, he would hardly marry them at all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What did they do in a case like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Well - they used to - they used to - I remember once there was two daughters of the same family both expecting, and 
- the minister was fair furious and he preached about it from the the pulpit, that - that - father's - Elders of the church - should - be - set their daughters on a proper road and - got up and marched out of the church. That was rather hard you know. I m
ean, he can't watch them all the time. So -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Was there a lot of that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
There was a lot of that, yes, there was, oh there's always been that trouble. Always. But I think - it's worse now here. Aye. They - they look at it in a different way now you see that's what it is. They look at it in a different way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Were girls looked down on if they -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh they were, yes. And they wouldna let them back into the church you know, unless they stood -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Even after they got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 No. Unless they
 stood the session. That was they'd to go and in front of the Elders and minister and - I don't know what he did, but - he'd get up and tell them to repent of their sins. And like - like what Robbies Burns was - he was doing the same. But - allow me to te
ll you, a lot of these men that were Elders were no better than them, that's what - that's what sickened a lot of the people, and it was do away with. There's none of that now.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did people wear white dresses for getting married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh usually, yes, that was the traditional - style.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 If you'd had more time you would have had a white dress?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Aye, quite likely, yes, my sister had. She'd plenty of time you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Would a girl that was pregnant be able to wear white?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Well - now they're n
ot - not these days but now the - lots of them aye. I know, they never, no. But they're not supposed to of course but in these days they were stricter. Aye. Far -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Do you ever remember your father or your mother being interested in politics at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh they were interested, yes, it was just about the time, you see, that my husband's father was interested, were always Liberals. Both of them, both Liberal - in politics, yes. Oh they talked about - politics you know, took an interest you know the men 
- used to congregate, there was a seat outside - not exactly our house but the next door the men used to come there - at night and have a talk you know. I think the village - on the whole was mostly Liberal. There would be a few - Tories, but - they didna
 come to listen to the - to the other people you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Most of the working people were Liberals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 No, the - they were Liberals.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Who were the Tories then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Well - the man in the farm, the farmer, you know, he was one of them, oh he was - 
in fact I think - there was three farms about - near, like, and I think they were mostly - Tories, they werenae - cheeky or anything about it you know, but they no - they were no coming to listen to you sort of style.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 They wouldn't come and argue their own view?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
No. No. They used to go to the meetings you know when they held - political meetings, it was mostly in the school, I mean - when there was to be an election there was always someone - like - they sent like from the Tory, the Liberal and L
abour, if there was Labour, I don't know if there was in these days but - I remember always the Tories and the Liberals because I used to hear them talking about them. And they used to go, my father used to go, mother didn't mind you, but my father used t
o always to go and - my brothers, when they got - up a bit you know, of course that was getting, years were getting on them, but they used to go too and listen to them and listen what they had to say then come out and - and -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did they get a chance to ask questions?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh yes, they could ask questions. And always remember one man, he was a farmer too, and - the Labour had been in for a long time, was it Labour, no, wait 'til I think - no, the Tories had been in, can't remember which one it would be. 
I can remember that his - his name began with C but what his name was I don't remember. But anyway, they'd made some money, this farmer, and he - he shouted out in the hall he says, now - the Tories has allowed us to make - make some money so lets get in 
the Labour know so as you can keep it.
\par <subject2>Mr. S. It was the other way about.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Mrs. S. Was that what it was? Was that what it was?
\par <subject2>Mr. S. Aye, they said the Labour had helped them to make a fortune so he says let us put the Tories in to help us to keep it.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Mrs. S. And where was the Tory then?
\par <subject2>Mr. S. I don't remember who the Tory was but it was - the man from Bridgenewer, at Beattie that was the farmer that said that.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Then all the men round about were quite interested in what was going on then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes, they were, they were quite interested.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 How about you when you were older?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh well, I - I suppose just hearing my father and mother - talking, you know, in Liberal ways in - 
myself, you know, over the years, I've been more Liberal minded than - than - if - with the Tories, and - I mean to say - if it came to the crutch we've got a - a very good MP in just now from here, Mr - what's that - he's very good indeed. I said if they
 
were all like him I would vote Tory, but unfortunately they're not. He's been very good for the country, and he's done lots of things to help - people in all walks of life. If a person'll - Mrs Munro came one afternoon to our Evergreen meeting and told us
 
- she's a great friend of Mrs Bowetts, that's her President, and she brought her to tell us what it was like being an MP's wife, and it was very interesting. So - but - they - they asked me to give the vote of thanks that day, and - I said, that I hoped t
hat she would tell Mr Munro that we appreciated all that he was doing for the county because he had done a lot of good.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Going back to the old days, did you ever see your MP then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Well - I mean when - when they went to vote for the - the MP they w
ould see him then because it was always their custom to come out in the Standard office you know. To - to make an appearance, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 But did he ever come round after he was elected?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh - he came round like before the election, not after the election, because he was supposed to go to Dumfries and see him there you see.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 If you had a problem?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Aye. That's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Some places at that men had to vote the way that their bosses voted otherwise they were liable to lose their job.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh, they had. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you ever hear of that kind of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Yes. I can tell you tales about that, they went in their boss's car but they didna vote for the boss's I can tell you. No, they didnae. They went - you know, Colonel Kerr for one - he's ther
e now in - in Templand House and he wouldnae take anybody that wasnae Tory if he knew of it. And my brother used -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 He wouldn't employ them in the first place you mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Well, I mean he wouldna take them to the polling booths. Oh he would employ t
hem, and my brother worked for him for a long time you know, and in the garden and he told him I'll be out for you - such a like day, because he would be talking to him likely and putting the case forward and - I remember my brother saying, I didna vote f
or his man all the same. Oh there was a lot of that done, but if it had been known they would likely have sacked them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 It was as bad as that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Aye. Oh they were - they - really wanted - the man in. Funny, I canna remember that man's name that was 
on - Major McPherson's before him. Aye. It began with C you know, I canna remember that yet, I canna - canna remember his name.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Was it just when there was an election coming up that they were interested in talking about politics or did they do it all the time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh - often - on about it if there was anything took place like - in the year, through the year they often talked politics.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 They'd read their newspapers and keep up to date that way?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes. Always the newspapers.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Can you remember what happened whenever any of your younger brothers or sisters were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 When any what?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Any of your younger brothers or sisters were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh I can remember - I don't remember my sister, she's - she's - just a year and ten months - yo
unger than me, but I can remember when - when my - brothers were born and when Joanne was born. I remember grandma used - she used to come, of course grandma lived in the village too you know. But she used to always act as nurse, there was no - nursing ho
mes in those days like what they have now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Was there a midwife that came round?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Well - well, the midwife in the village was a Mrs Arnold, you know, that was the golden wedding that we were at, her mother, she went to all the - arrivals of the bab
ies you know. Aye. She was there when - when Margaret was born because I was just at home when Margaret was born, aye. Aye, a nice motherly - body she was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What happened when they baby was coming, were you kept out of the way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh aye, we were ne
ver there, you see - there was - up at grandma's house there was an aunt - aunt that was just ten years younger than me, and it was Uncle Sam at home, we were never - we werena kept at home, we were sent up to grandma's house and grandma come down, and th
en when - when we come down here there's a wee boy arrived since you went away, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You didn't know beforehand that there was a baby coming?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 No. I didn't even know when my sister - my youngest sister was born, and - I would be ten or eleven
. 'Til one day I was coming up the road and past out with my friend and she said, there'll be a baby coming to your house some of these days, and I fair stared at her you know. You know, honestly, it's hardly believable now seeing the way the children - g
o about things now, but - I didn't know - oh they know everything now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Mind you the dresses they wore when your mother was expecting these babies, I mean they had full skirts and probably an apron on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Aye. An apron, you see, one of these loose aprons, aye. That would be it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 We've talked about the difference between the Liberals and the Tories.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Did you find that there were differences in class in the village where you lived?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 In the what?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Differences in class where you lived?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Well - I mean - they didna treat you differently you know except at election times. They were going about at election times all being very - nice to you hoping that you would be voting, you know, with them, they used to - try to get us to s
ay but we never did you know, we never told them what we were going to do because - being - like my husband's folk - four miles off the voting booths you see, had to go to Lochmaben to vote, and that was like - four miles down and four miles back, that wa
s eight miles when we lived at the cottage, the Corncockle Cottage, it was a wee bit further out than the village, but - they never made any difference to you - between voting times I mean. They were quite nice to you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 What about the landowners, were they different again?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Well - I don't know, they seemed - they were very friendly too because - they - my brother - this was my eldest brother, he was once very ill - he worked at Raehills, you've heard of Raehills, old Johnson's place, well - one day 
- he - he came down, Mr Johnson, and - brought him four bottles of brandy. They were kind you know, if there was anything - and he said, now when that's finished - he says, just let us know and we'll have - some more, but he didna need more and that was p
lenty. And - they were really kind - kind enough to us I must say.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Were you conscious that they were different from you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh well - you looked up to them, I mean to say, you knew they had - they were in a different position than you but - I mean t
o say - except for the money we didna think they were any different, they'd just their feelings the same as - as working people haven't they.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 In your village who were considered the most important people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh well - the - round about Templand the
re was the - the people from - Miss Seaton Whitemans of Cournace, they used to go about in a phaeton, you know what a phaeton is?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 A wee carriage thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Aye and then men - men with cockades in their - big hats you know, and I always remember one 
day - my brother told me, he was just a wee boy and he heard this talk and quickly ran in to my mother and he said, oh mummy, here's the Lord coming. This was the - the laird he meant you know, he said, the Lord's coming. I could never forget that. And - 
t
hat was the Miss Seaton Whiteman, it was these two men you know with the big - big - with funeral hats they wear, and cockades - at the side, driving them, the old lady sitting very sedate but I believe they were very kind people, I never had anything to 
do with them.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 When they drove through the village did you all run out to watch?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh well, used to watch that because it was grand to see this carriage coming with the horses. We didna just go right on the road but we used to stand just in - where
 we could see them going past, they never took any notice of you. But at Courance I suppose they were very good, that's a wee village, and - they used to go and - and listen to the children when they had their Sunday school parties and that you see, our v
i
llage was too far off, these were gentry, what were called the gentry, and then - the Raehills ones on the other side, and the Jardine Hall people, Jardine's of Jardine Hall. Not Lady Jardine, they were out of - Spedlands Tower you see, even when we were 
c
hildren they were out. And - that Lady Jardine's - Sir Alexander Jardine that lives in Denbie, that's the real - the real - the Jardine's that got Jardine Hall - were the Jardine Mattheson - Company, from out in China, with their money out in China and he
'd plenty of money - when they had their boat. But the titled people were poor you see. They had very much to live with. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 So it didn't really depend on what money you had?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 If you were born -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Aye, that's it, yes, if you were bo
rn into the title. Aye. But we used to - we used to go to Jardine Hall on our - school - maybe a school picnic. They used to - the Jardine Hall ones were the ones that came in - give us our school prizes when we got prizes at the school, and she used to a
s
k us back for - a picnic tea, well it was - it wasna a very nice day the day we went for the picnic tea so they'd be marquees up and it was a lovely tea they gave us. Aye, we used to get that. And we used to go - were asked when we got bigger - we were al
lowed in the bigger classes to go on a conducted tour of Spedlands old tower, you know, that was their home. That was their home but it was -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 It's falling down now isn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 It's no falling down, we go to it every year, it's - it's got no top on 
it, and you canna get inside it now, but that's - been always a favourite place where we went for picnics as children and - there used to be an old man living in the lodge there. Garningham was his name. He was and Englishman, but he never got anything el
s
e but Billy Pond. That was his name. And - mother and father and my uncle, he wet to be a policeman in the finish but he worked for a wee while in his young days at the quarry, and this old man used to work too, at the top end. They called - that's what t
h
ey tipped all the - the rubble, it's still there yet, and - they used to take us maybe for a walk on a Sunday and we used to sit to listen to them tell the tales about the hunting. Hunting at Sepdlands. It was supposed to be - and Sir Alexander Jardine's 
t
ime - time of the horse - horses only, and he'd gone way, put this man Porteus who had a mill - down into the dungeon, he was supposed to have set fire to his mill, I don't know whether he did or not, but that was the tale, and he went away on horseback t
o
 Edinborgh, forgot all about the man. And when - when he come back the man had - eaten his fingers and his toes I suppose with hunger, and - the place started to be haunted then. And - I remember Miss Landale coming, and Miss Landale from Browmoor, Ecclef
echan when I was at - Mrs Thompsons and it was an aunt - sister of hers that was a minister, she talked about this too, and - he went there and went down in the dungeon and prayed and - they left a Bible down and - all the thing went quiet.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 That chased the ghost away?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Aye, it's supposed to but - that's what they had to leave Spedlands for so they said and they built Jardine Hall just across the water, but it was supposed to - to go - follow them there, I don't know whether it was true or not, thi
s old man - Mr S. Burns said that a - a - a spook wouldna cross the water.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Was that why they built their other house on the other side of the water?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Well I thought it was witches that'll not cross water. Aye, Jardine Hall, that's right. So - so 
when this - Scott the gardener the man that used to take us on this conducted tour you see, and when we were going in - oh funny place, it's just wee wee windows you know, just what they had in the olden days - for - shooting, through, aye, just - just on
e
 of these things like Threave Castle and all these, Torthorwalk Castle, the same style as that, and - when we were going across - this place we opened this - what a monstrous key there was, and when he opened the door and took us in you know, walking acro
ss this hall, just stone you know, he says, that's where Dante lives, Dante, that's what they called the ghost and he opened this trap door and it was a - oh down there, a spiral -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You didn't go down to look?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 We didna go down, no. Aye, but that was the witches.
\par <subject2>Mr S. The evil spirit.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Mrs. S. Aye. Oh maybe the man wasnae evil, he had died in agony.
\par <subject2>Mr. S. No, but he left the evil spirit, the evil spirit was there.</subject2>
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Would you say that most of the 
people in the village had much the same standard of living, or were there some of them better off than others?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh, much the same standard of living because they all worked in the quarry these days. Of course some jobs there were better paid than othe
rs you know. Just depended what you were - cranemen for instance, they would have more than a man that - that drove the wee engine from the quarry to Nethercluegh he would have more but - working like that, but the men that were working on the stone face 
- and the tip end, they would just have the same. The men at the source have more money I know that, but it would only be a few shillings.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Was there much distinction made between craftsmen and labourers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes. No, no, they were all friendly, seeme
d all friendly. There never was anything else to work at in my young days for the men except that and for long years after.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Do you think it was possible at that time for people to move from one class to another?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 One class?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 One social class to another?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Oh well, I don't know, I - I couldnae say about that, I don't remember anybody - moving up the scale at all, I don't think so. Just - no, just - ordinary village life. Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You don't know of any cases of people that came down the social scale?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Oh no. They were all much the same I think. Aye. Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Do you think your parents ever had to struggle to make ends meet?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Well - it was just - mother seemed always to make do, I don't know how she did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You never had the feeling they were going short?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
No. No. And when anything - came such as - at the school there was a man used to come, a Mr Meikle I remember his name was, and he used to do - to teach singing. He used to come, and - he came for about three months and it w
as tuppence a night to go to - the singing class and my sister and I both went. And - then at the end of that - the three months they had a concert. It must have been a good teacher of course we were young, we'd pick up things - and - they had two nights 
o
f the concert, folk used to come, it was in the school of course, there was no hall in that - in that - early days, and - filled the school for two nights, the people around about so that would kind of repay him for his work you see. And we all got - well
, that could do it, got part.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You would say that was a luxury, that if there was money in the house for that sort of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You weren't really -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Aye. Of course mind you - in the - in the days I'm speaking about, the - quarry was 
extra busy. There was lots of people came from far and near to work there, and it was hardly a house in the village but had one or two men staying with them. Like my mother had - two - I remember when she had three but - that was - be a lot of work for he
r you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 It would always be a wee bit of extra money?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Aye, it would be a help.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 When you were living with the Raes, when you went to work there first.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 You mentioned that they went for their holidays to Worthing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16673035 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 How often they go and how long did they stay for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6835572 MS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7146469\charrsid2967080 
Fortnight. And they went - they went yearly, they - you know, the minister always put about a fortnights holidays, and Worthing seemed to be the place where they seemed to like to go, and they used to go for a fortnight..
\par }}