{\rtf1\adeflang1025\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\adeff0\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang2057\deflangfe2057{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f2\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Courier New;}{\f38\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f39\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f41\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f42\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f43\fbidi \froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}
{\f44\fbidi \froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f45\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f46\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f58\fmodern\fcharset238\fprq1 Courier New CE;}
{\f59\fmodern\fcharset204\fprq1 Courier New Cyr;}{\f61\fmodern\fcharset161\fprq1 Courier New Greek;}{\f62\fmodern\fcharset162\fprq1 Courier New Tur;}{\f63\fbidi \fmodern\fcharset177\fprq1 Courier New (Hebrew);}
{\f64\fbidi \fmodern\fcharset178\fprq1 Courier New (Arabic);}{\f65\fmodern\fcharset186\fprq1 Courier New Baltic;}{\f66\fmodern\fcharset163\fprq1 Courier New (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 
\snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}{\*
\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs20 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{
\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af2\afs20\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \f2\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext15 \styrsid917675 Plain Text;}}
{\*\latentstyles\lsdstimax156\lsdlockeddef0}{\*\revtbl {Unknown;}}{\*\pgptbl {\pgp\ipgp2\itap3\li0\ri0\sb0\sa0}{\pgp\ipgp0\itap0\li0\ri0\sb0\sa0}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid1956\rsid11474\rsid76057\rsid80391\rsid95387\rsid97443\rsid150180\rsid345855\rsid351199\rsid415217\rsid423966
\rsid461008\rsid462709\rsid463763\rsid524956\rsid533485\rsid534890\rsid536933\rsid610797\rsid656777\rsid666007\rsid735094\rsid801764\rsid917675\rsid937471\rsid995885\rsid1051290\rsid1054619\rsid1180934\rsid1206028\rsid1251186\rsid1252314\rsid1258448
\rsid1310866\rsid1316065\rsid1321857\rsid1450326\rsid1471075\rsid1584575\rsid1587993\rsid1600140\rsid1640758\rsid1668492\rsid1726504\rsid1780512\rsid1785832\rsid1793901\rsid1864947\rsid1901287\rsid1904601\rsid1906564\rsid1915557\rsid1928298\rsid1991119
\rsid2035218\rsid2055249\rsid2062548\rsid2103139\rsid2163617\rsid2191632\rsid2252060\rsid2299546\rsid2304636\rsid2370592\rsid2375016\rsid2379911\rsid2456776\rsid2517504\rsid2560123\rsid2562159\rsid2581908\rsid2626053\rsid2626777\rsid2647971\rsid2693628
\rsid2694171\rsid2700819\rsid2711744\rsid2782540\rsid2827498\rsid2959367\rsid3035757\rsid3150507\rsid3151452\rsid3224016\rsid3279347\rsid3367206\rsid3545868\rsid3548637\rsid3629448\rsid3630172\rsid3686308\rsid3754599\rsid3763763\rsid3763962\rsid3810494
\rsid3810942\rsid3821168\rsid3889208\rsid3949667\rsid4000330\rsid4001583\rsid4028114\rsid4071375\rsid4074283\rsid4129961\rsid4149918\rsid4151183\rsid4330522\rsid4354948\rsid4407055\rsid4407951\rsid4459248\rsid4524260\rsid4592158\rsid4599089\rsid4615551
\rsid4799979\rsid4856745\rsid4988336\rsid4992272\rsid5059890\rsid5072667\rsid5179722\rsid5185008\rsid5189691\rsid5193163\rsid5194595\rsid5311514\rsid5327614\rsid5382320\rsid5383557\rsid5406224\rsid5442818\rsid5444033\rsid5513345\rsid5524586\rsid5535437
\rsid5574733\rsid5587021\rsid5592305\rsid5596744\rsid5649837\rsid5709605\rsid5714786\rsid5854649\rsid5909787\rsid5968027\rsid5989493\rsid6183537\rsid6186955\rsid6232614\rsid6237747\rsid6242094\rsid6304216\rsid6431855\rsid6438489\rsid6441601\rsid6636007
\rsid6640396\rsid6758548\rsid6760014\rsid6760278\rsid6764394\rsid6821875\rsid6843895\rsid6882394\rsid6951807\rsid7013246\rsid7086621\rsid7096196\rsid7105963\rsid7170805\rsid7238126\rsid7275047\rsid7283037\rsid7294734\rsid7303267\rsid7355442\rsid7366802
\rsid7411990\rsid7412229\rsid7476493\rsid7487741\rsid7493667\rsid7564997\rsid7603182\rsid7668113\rsid7697441\rsid7815373\rsid7826968\rsid7827616\rsid7875752\rsid7890137\rsid7934908\rsid7937098\rsid8019549\rsid8152334\rsid8325038\rsid8339547\rsid8350592
\rsid8392770\rsid8412106\rsid8468838\rsid8475296\rsid8542771\rsid8542998\rsid8590831\rsid8678239\rsid8732407\rsid8738534\rsid8738899\rsid8789480\rsid8870214\rsid8878857\rsid8982685\rsid9006238\rsid9007003\rsid9076084\rsid9134128\rsid9140595\rsid9183674
\rsid9187615\rsid9188815\rsid9192944\rsid9196099\rsid9203844\rsid9253722\rsid9267721\rsid9268213\rsid9382199\rsid9441537\rsid9448079\rsid9450143\rsid9509561\rsid9510746\rsid9518485\rsid9651636\rsid9842551\rsid9846844\rsid9857247\rsid9903097\rsid9913105
\rsid9979508\rsid9986272\rsid10048047\rsid10050493\rsid10120831\rsid10226909\rsid10228910\rsid10240162\rsid10255763\rsid10360574\rsid10380601\rsid10384767\rsid10385059\rsid10505561\rsid10573375\rsid10578772\rsid10621268\rsid10642233\rsid10690321
\rsid10702815\rsid10709923\rsid10751035\rsid10775888\rsid10900459\rsid10904470\rsid10906551\rsid10947131\rsid10961506\rsid11076639\rsid11099837\rsid11104261\rsid11152433\rsid11162575\rsid11216182\rsid11293510\rsid11298526\rsid11303237\rsid11337865
\rsid11416673\rsid11418019\rsid11435732\rsid11552622\rsid11606260\rsid11625187\rsid11668571\rsid11693517\rsid11802865\rsid11862470\rsid11883275\rsid11948570\rsid12085274\rsid12090223\rsid12145768\rsid12206519\rsid12208951\rsid12275880\rsid12279107
\rsid12321983\rsid12387926\rsid12474909\rsid12533857\rsid12536315\rsid12549712\rsid12608190\rsid12663912\rsid12674752\rsid12781134\rsid12802454\rsid12912064\rsid12927079\rsid12984391\rsid13073774\rsid13175499\rsid13195137\rsid13244811\rsid13310616
\rsid13312096\rsid13312499\rsid13321940\rsid13392991\rsid13436700\rsid13445189\rsid13447866\rsid13467112\rsid13518608\rsid13583972\rsid13592885\rsid13596466\rsid13702891\rsid13709610\rsid13714410\rsid13775203\rsid13782185\rsid13787412\rsid13792605
\rsid13792662\rsid13834400\rsid13846678\rsid13895171\rsid13896436\rsid13901555\rsid13915924\rsid13923771\rsid13972864\rsid13987794\rsid14043030\rsid14055034\rsid14057352\rsid14098576\rsid14102096\rsid14177109\rsid14178308\rsid14221554\rsid14227686
\rsid14234079\rsid14237448\rsid14239703\rsid14352920\rsid14353714\rsid14376538\rsid14550074\rsid14554743\rsid14562941\rsid14563757\rsid14621052\rsid14621653\rsid14629440\rsid14687330\rsid14697729\rsid14698999\rsid14750448\rsid14766511\rsid14827794
\rsid14834373\rsid14890929\rsid14904949\rsid14942383\rsid14950067\rsid14955727\rsid14962120\rsid15031040\rsid15085213\rsid15087834\rsid15225892\rsid15226625\rsid15230445\rsid15236527\rsid15271156\rsid15287234\rsid15301972\rsid15338406\rsid15345389
\rsid15424433\rsid15428610\rsid15430762\rsid15476965\rsid15542766\rsid15543722\rsid15547322\rsid15562405\rsid15626222\rsid15694488\rsid15746018\rsid15746186\rsid15761194\rsid15801496\rsid15804638\rsid15862029\rsid15875970\rsid15929671\rsid15996795
\rsid16065778\rsid16136864\rsid16146344\rsid16256359\rsid16265563\rsid16274259\rsid16318814\rsid16323713\rsid16327330\rsid16330582\rsid16449679\rsid16516502\rsid16544206\rsid16544218\rsid16588916\rsid16590756\rsid16603365\rsid16672986}{\*\generator Micros
oft Word 11.0.0000;}{\info{\title Information about interviewee}{\author mlzamb}{\operator lhorto}{\creatim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min9}{\revtim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min9}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords16539}{\nofchars94275}{\*\company UKDA}
{\nofcharsws110593}{\vern24613}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 http://schemas.microsoft.com/office/word/2003/wordml}}\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl1152\margr1152\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0\ltrsect 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\donotembedsysfont0\donotembedlingdata0\grfdocevents0\validatexml1\showplaceholdtext0\ignoremixedcontent0\saveinvalidxml0\showxmlerrors1\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace180
\dgvspace180\dghorigin1152\dgvorigin1440\dghshow1\dgvshow1
\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale105\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\splytwnine\ftnlytwnine\htmautsp\nolnhtadjtbl\useltbaln\alntblind\lytcalctblwd\lyttblrtgr\lnbrkrule\nobrkwrptbl\snaptogridincell\allowfieldendsel\wrppunct
\asianbrkrule\rsidroot5989493\newtblstyruls\nogrowautofit \fet0{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}\ilfomacatclnup0\ltrpar \sectd \ltrsect\linex0\headery708\footery708\colsx708\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sectrsid917675\sftnbj {\*\pnseclvl1
\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang 
{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 \rtlch\fcs1 \af2\afs20\alang1025 
\ltrch\fcs0 \f2\fs20\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\ul\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Information about interviewee
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par Date of birth:\tab \tab \tab 1883
\par Gender: \tab \tab \tab Male\tab \tab 
\par Marital status: \tab \tab \tab Married\tab 
\par Occupation: \tab \tab \tab Architect
\par Geographic region: \tab \tab Wales
\par 
\par 
\par I:\tab And when were you married?
\par 
\par CW:\tab 1915, beginning of 1915.
\par 
\par I:\tab When were you born?
\par 
\par CW:\tab 1883, May 28th.
\par 
\par I:\tab Where?
\par 
\par CW:\tab At Gayton, in Northamptonshire.
\par 
\par I:\tab How many years did you live in the house you were born in?
\par 
\par CW:\tab About four.
\par 
\par I:\tab And that was in Gayton?
\par 
\par CW:\tab Gayton, Northamptonshire; a college living to which my father went because he went ... he \tab was tutor of his college, and so on and in those days, if you married you were thrown out \tab 
and you were given a college living, you see. You had to take holy orders in order to be a \tab don, do you see. He wasn't a natural parson at all but he had to. And so we were at Gayton, \tab 
and then they had six children, at Gayton, six little boys and when they'd finished breeding t\tab hey retired to Glasfryd, which is the Ellis home, in Caernarvonshire. That was where I was \tab brought up.
\par 
\par I:\tab You said you had 6 brothers?
\par 
\par CW:\tab Six brothers, alas. I mean my poor mother would have very much liked a daughter.
\par 
\par I:\tab What sort of spacing was there between them, do you remember?
\par 
\par CW:\tab Oh, I think pell-mell, because she wasn't at Gayton very long and' we were all born there. \tab And I'm the last survivor. I was No.4.
\par 
\par I:\tab How old was your father when you were born?
\par 
\par CW:\tab Well, '83. He was born in '33, so he was 50.
\par 
\par I:\tab Where did he come from originally?
\par 
\par CW:\tab Well, Glasfryd, and here. This was the Williams house and that was the Ellis house which \tab was the main place. Where my elder brother succeeded there, and the next brother, who \tab 
should have had this, he was killed in the Boer War, so I succeeded to this.
\par 
\par I:\tab What was your father's occupation?
\par 
\par CW:\tab An academic. He was ... he got every possible prize and scholarship, both at school and at \tab Cambridge and was third wrangler of his year. In some things he was senior wrangler, but \tab 
he just missed it somehow. He was third wrangler, and then tutor and mathematics coach \tab and when he retired to Glasfryd he spent his time partially doing astronomical mathematics \tab 
as a diversion, and chess problems, and reading Greek and Latin, and so forth. And looking \tab after the estate, and shooting, and like ... a quiet, retired life, which is what he liked, after \tab working very, very hard at Cambridge 'till' he married.

\par 
\par I:\tab Presumably he didn't have any sort of casual or part time jobs?
\par 
\par CW:\tab No. Another thing, he was a very keen sailor, amateur sailor. I remember he had a launch \tab when he retired and then ... though generally he was very economical, he suddenly had a \tab 
tremendous splurge and bought a great big 70 ton yacht from Southampton with a crew of 5 \tab \{laughter\} and had to up and have himself built shore quarters for the considerable crew, \tab but then was so poor at the 
cost of it all he gave it up again. And also, she was so big, her \tab draught was so great; she couldn't get into 'any of the local harbours, so that didn't do any... \tab But he was always keen about sailing; he always had a boat of some sort.
\par 
\par I:\tab Presumably he was never out of work? He was never unemployed?
\par 
\par CW:\tab How do you mean?
\par 
\par I:\tab He was never without a job?
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid8738534 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 CW:\tab 
No, doing something. And then he was fairly regular on the Bench at Pwllheli. I remember staying with Lloyd George down at Churt and at dinner, think
ing that ... you know, he knew that my family had been very antagonistic to him because they were Tories and he was not and furthermore, he'd been stumping the country during the Boer War, you see, pro-Boer, lecturing in our own village chapel, and that s
o
rt of thing, just after my brother had been killed and so that didn't go down very well, and he went out of his way to say how much he'd always respected my father for his complete impartiality and wisdom and justice, and all the rest of it. My father was
 he was completely bilingual which I'm afraid ... which had been the family tradition which, alas, ended with him. I picked up what I did as a child and never pursued it.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par I:\tab How old was your mother when you were born?
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid8738534 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 CW:\tab I think she was born in about '51
, lived to be 92, and she had serious thoughts about being professionally an artist. She'd attended the Slade School of Painting and attended John Ruskin's lectures and was very good indeed. She had quite an architectural sense, wonderful sketches, travel
l
ing, of architecture and so on, but was particularly keen on horses and indeed illustrated a book that I had as a child called "Black Beauty" with her drawings. And indeed, I think it is a near thing as to whether my father's declaration was made when she
 was high up on a ladder painting a frieze \{laughter\}, and I think it was quite a near thing as to whether she married or did go on as an artist, in which case I shouldn't have been here, probably.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par I:\tab You can't remember how old she was when you were born?
\par 
\par CW:\tab Well, she was born in '51, I think, and I was born in '83, so you can work it out.
\par 
\par I:\tab After she was married she continued painting, I presume?
\par 
\par CW:\tab Oh, yes, I've got ... In fact, that early part is covered by my first premature autobiography.
\par 
\par I:\tab Did she have anyone in to look after the children while she was working?
\par 
\par CW:\tab Oh, yes, we always had nurses and nursemaids.
\par 
\par I:\tab I'd like to ask you now about life at home when you were a child up to the time you left \tab school.
\par 
\par CW:\tab Well, I practically always \{unclear\} went back gleefully to Glasfyd for holidays, and in the \tab winter it was shooting and ponies.
\par 
\par I:\tab Can you remember about Glasfryd, how many rooms were there in the house?
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid8738534 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 CW:\tab \{Tape slips\}
 "The Archdeacon, from all accounts, was a man of many parts 
with a passion for science, especially chemistry and metallurgy, some of his laboratory equipment surviving at Glasfryd to this day. In 1809 when the, Archdeacon's son had succeeded him, Edmund Hyde Hall describe Glasfryd heirs the seat of the Reverend Th
o
mas Ellis near a small lake of the same name, and this and several rushy islands were haunts of wild duck, and other than this place I scarcely know a spot within the county more susceptible of rural beauty and polish". The Archdeacon's picture, a full le
n
gth picture of him in the dining room, very elegant. "Since his day other Ellises seem to have had their go at the house and pretty wildly, and even after my father's drastic efforts at rationalisation the layout and internal planning showed small regard 
f
or any logical sequence and was, indeed, chaotic. Starting at the extreme south-western end and working northwards round two or three right-angled bends with turns this way and that, the several rooms and offices succeeded one another thus: gunroom, baili
f
f's bothy, laundry, boot room, coalhouse, back entry, scullery, lavatory, larders, back stairs, kitchen, pantry, servants' hall, side entry, main entrance hall, business room, drawing room, entrance hall, front porch, great hall, cloakroom, dining room, s
t
udy, conservatory, schoolroom, third staircase, bathroom with heating chamber under, lavatory, another entry, wine cellar, dairy, storeroom, yet another and final entry , old saddle room and ultimate ,lumber room. The two floors above were neither so exte
n
sive nor so incoherent yet, apart from the dairy and laundry maids and the coachman who, reluctantly, carried coal and cleaned boots, all had to be serviced by an indoor staff that never exceeded five. Yet no one of us at the time, staff, family nor anyon
e
 else, seemed ever to have blamed the haphazard planning for any inconvenience, unnecessary work or needless running around. In the 1950s/'60s amputated at both extremities and twice ingeniously further re-organised first by my elder brother and his wife 
a
nd then by his eldest son and his, the old house still retains its familiar character but none of its former intimidating drawbacks and is well adapted both for family life and entertaining. But even when I was a child my father's ambitious reconstruction
s had greatly improved the place's amenities" ... and so on. That's the sort of\bullet  house it was.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par I:\tab That's really interesting. Did anyone else apart from your parents and brothers and sisters \tab live in the house?
\par 
\par CW:\tab I never had any sisters.
\par 
\par I:\tab Oh, sorry, yes.
\par 
\par I:\tab Did you have other relatives, or lodgers, or anything like that?
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid8738534 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 CW:\tab 
Very few. My father, even when he added to the house and there were new spare bedrooms and so on, you see, central heating and electric light and so on, he hated having what he c
alled 'strangers' in the house, and also greatly deprecated what he called 'gadding about', so that one ached and ached as a boy to see anybody outside the family. And I remember looking forward to and looking back to as a great treat an old archbishop co
m
ing to see us and stay, and his old Cambridge dons, and being disappointed .... Dons: I'd got a sort of quixotic idea of dons. I thought the Cambridge sort inferior to the Spanish, and so old, most of them they seemed almost another species altogether. An
d
 with roads and transport of that day, you see, we were awfully isolated; especially as the range of our ponies as being the sort of limiting radius, and he didn't approve of gadding about, as I say, so we didn't go ... and with the roads and vehicles and
 horses of those days, you see, 12 miles was equivalent to 100 miles today.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par I:\tab What about the servants? You've talked a little bit about the servants in the house. You said \tab you had five, yes?
\par 
\par CW:\tab Yes.
\par 
\par I:\tab What sort of things did they do?
\par 
\par CW:\tab Well, there was the cook and kitchen maid - scullery maid - and parlour maid, and two \tab housemaids, I suppose, they shared things to some extent.
\par 
\par I:\tab And a gardener, probably?
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid8738534 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 CW:\tab 
Whereas in ... I altered the house where the lists of the servants and their duties was up, which ended at the bottom with 'two lamp boys', you see.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par I:\tab To light the lamps?
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid8738534 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 CW:\tab 
They did nothing else but fill and trim and light lamps. Forty of them. And I remember going up at Wentworth Wood House ... I turned Stowe, which is the biggest coun
try house in England into a public school, and just for fun before I started I counted on the survey plan all the rooms, large and small, and there were 400, and one tap which was down in the basement. And I remember going ... After Stowe had become a pub
l
ic school, the next country house in England was Wentworth Woodhouse and I was up there in wartime and Lady Fitzwilliam said 'I expect you'd like to look round the house ,come along'. And we walked and walked for a couple of hours, I suppose, round and sa
w
 part of it. And I said, 'Goodness, gracious, you must have needed quite a staff to run this in peacetime - this was wartime, they were only living in part of the house - and she said, 'Yes, indeed'. And I said, 'Well, what?' She said, 'well, we found we 
couldn't be really comfortable with fewer than 75 indoors'.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par I:\tab Goodness me! \{Laughter\}
\par 
\par CW:\tab Mostly waiting on each other, you see. Steward's room, housekeeper's room, servants' hall.
\par 
\par I:\tab Did they have a servants hall at Glasfryd, then?
\par 
\par CW:\tab Oh, yes.
\par 
\par I:\tab Where did they sleep and eat?
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid8738534 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 CW:\tab 
Oh, in their own rooms. They slept in very nice rooms, and my mother was very good with them and they stayed for years.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid8738534 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 I:\tab 
Did your mother supervise the housework personally, or did she pass orders through senior servants?
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid8738534 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 CW:\tab 
Oh, yes, she did, quite, easily and they were good and knew her ways and she knew theirs. And she took a motherly interest in them.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par I:\tab Did you feel at ease with the servants?
\par 
\par CW:\tab Yes, perfectly.
\par 
\par I:\tab How did the servants and the members of the family address each other?
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid8738534 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 CW:\tab 
I was Master Clough, and the others ... mostly ... the parlour maid was always just her surname, Drage, for most-of the time. Bostock, another one I remember, and the cook always Mrs. Somebody, even if she wasn't married. A courtesy title.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par I:\tab Did you feel that any of the servants were interested in you as a person?
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid8325038 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 CW:\tab 
Certainly the parlour maid always did because she'd originally come as my nurse, you see, and was with us, I suppose for 30 years.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par I:\tab Did your mother give any sort of moral guidance to the servants?
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid8325038 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 CW:\tab 
There were family prayers, which I dodged as often as I could, but they'd all come rustling in, you know, and kneel down and sing a hymn or whatever it was.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par I:\tab Did the servants have any sort of spare time in which they could do what they liked?
\par 
\par CW:\tab Oh, yes. Yes, of course. They had ... I don't know ... their half-days off.
\par 
\par I:\tab And they could go out of the home, presumably?
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid8325038 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 CW:\tab 
Oh, yes. But I remember I had an aunt who had a much larger household, there were 12 servants indoors, and she was outraged and gave them a terrific wigging because some of them dared to wear flowery hats on Sunday, instead of black.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par I:\tab But your mother, presumably, wasn't so strict?
\par 
\par CW:\tab Oh, no.
\par 
\par I:\tab And they could come in and out when they liked, presumably, when it was ... ?
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid8325038 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 CW:\tab 
Yes. It was all very easy-going. They were kept up to doing their jobs properly, whatever they were, dusting, or cleaning, or cooking or whatever it was.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par I:\tab How did the housework go? Presumably that was all done by the servants?
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid8325038 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 CW:\tab 
Oh, I couldn't tell you, I mean, it was done. They started pretty early, I think, you know, about half past seven in the morning. There was a lot done before our breakfast which was half past 8.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par I:\tab Was any washing sent out?
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid8325038 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 CW:\tab No, 
we had the ... Apart from the regular ... the house staff, there were laundry maids, and dairy maids, Katherine \{missing\}
 who ran the ... You see, there was a home farm and the dairy and she made butter and produced cream and soon, from the milk. And all the laundry was done at home, in the washing room and the drying room.
\par 
\par I:\tab Who was responsible, for repairs and improvements to the house?
\par 
\par CW:\tab Well, my father had this great re-building which lasted two years, during which we occupied a house we had ... a 
seaside house at Abersoch, which was very pleasant in a way because of sailing and sea fishing and so on. But I was devastated because all this building was going on and I wasn't there. That was what I was really interested in, passionately interested in 
from when I was about six, rebuilding. And so he looked after the fabric of, the house, so to speak; my mother its adornment, decoration and that sort of thing.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par I:\tab You told me there was a nanny responsible for the children?
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid8325038 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 CW:\tab Oh, yes, until taken over b
y a governess: There was a succession of governesses after nurses, you seep and nursemaids.
\par 
\par I:\tab What exactly were her duties?
\par 
\par CW:\tab Whose duties?
\par 
\par I:\tab The nanny's.
\par 
\par CW:\tab Oh, sort of valeting the child, seeing to its meals and being nice to it and talking to i
t, I suppose. I can't remember much about the ... I remember when I was I suppose about 5 or 6 my nurse, who was being courted by a sea captain, a rather tipsy little man whom my mother, incautiously in my hearing, \{I remember\}
 saying, 'oh, he's little better than a barrel on legs'. I thought this a splendid description and I asked my nurse if she didn't think so, too. This was her beau, you see. She did not! Nor did he and it all ended in lamentations and tears \{laughter\}.

\par 
\par I:\tab Were you allowed to see your parents anywhere in the house or were there specific rooms to which the children were confined?
\par 
\par CW:\tab No, we saw them at ... insofar as our meals were in the dining room. Of course, we met them at meals, and my mother was very much more accessible than my f
ather who rather shut himself up in his study, reading or writing, or doing his chess problems or mathematics, or whatever it was.
\par 
\par I:\tab Did your father take an interest in sort of taking care of your sort of everyday needs at all? Dressing you or undressing you, or anything like that, or was it completely left up to the servants and your mother?
\par 
\par CW:\tab Oh, he did nothing of that sort at all, no.
\par 
\par I:\tab And presumably he didn't take you out for walks and things like that?
\par 
\par CW:\tab Oh, sometimes. And then, when I was a little older, shooting, which I didn't care about, much.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par I:\tab Were there any tasks that you had to do as a child around the house?
\par 
\par CW:\tab No, practically nothing.
\par 
\par I:\tab And presumably none of your brothers did, either?
\par 
\par CW:\tab No. I remember at one period I got a penny an hour for weeding.
\par 
\par I:\tab Did the older children help the younger children with things they found if difficult?
\par 
\par CW:\tab No, not much. We were really all rather independent going our several ways.
\par 
\par I:\tab Were you expected to go to bed at a certain time in your schooldays?
\par 
\par CW:\tab Oh, yes, certainly.
\par 
\par I:\tab What time was that?
\par 
\par CW:\tab I suppose it got gradually later, that's all I can remember.
\par 
\par I:\tab Did your mother or anyone else put you to bed?
\par 
\par CW:\tab I don't remember that. I must have been quite ... from about 5 I'm sure I put myself to bed.
\par 
\par I:\tab Did you share a bedroom or bed with anyone?
\par 
\par CW:\tab No, as far as I can remember I always had my own room.
\par 
\par I:\tab And all your brothers had their own rooms, as well?
\par 
\par CW:\tab They had their own rooms, too.
\par 
\par I:\tab Did you have a bathroom?
\par 
\par CW:\tab Yes.
\par 
\par I:\tab How often did you bath?
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid8325038 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 CW:\tab 
I don't think we bathed more than regularly once a week. And so it was at school, too. Once a week.
\par 
\par I:\tab And did you get clean clothes once a week, or more often than that?
\par 
\par CW:\tab I think once a week. Almost certainly.
\par 
\par I:\tab Where did the family have their meals?
\par 
\par CW:\tab In the dining room.
\par 
\par I:\tab Were there any occasions when they ate in another room?
\par 
\par CW:\tab Tea in the drawing room, sometimes, or the hall, according to whether there was a party or not.
\par 
\par I:\tab Do you remember what sort of cooking arrangements?
\par 
\par CW:\tab Oh, a large range, big old range, I think, that got very hot, like old-fashioned ranges do.
\par 
\par I:\tab When was breakfast eaten, at what time?
\par 
\par CW:\tab I think 8 or half past. And there was a rule, a family rule, that we children had to appear at breakfast in our outdoor boots.
\par 
\par I:\tab Were all the members of the family there at breakfast, normally?
\par 
\par I:\tab What did you usually eat or drink for breakfast?
\par 
\par CW:\tab Oh, always porridge, eaten with salt and milk, and then eggs or bacon or fish, or something of that sort.
\par 
\par I:\tab When was the midday meal?
\par 
\par CW:\tab At 1 o'clock.
\par 
\par I:\tab What sort of things did you have for that?
\par 
\par CW:\tab Generally, I suppose, a joint of some sort, or cold ham, or brawn, or something of that sort, or again, fish or game in due season.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par I:\tab And then the evening meal?
\par 
\par CW:\tab Well, the same sort of thing only more elaborate.
\par 
\par I:\tab And what time was that?
\par 
\par CW:\tab I think in the evening it was half past 7.
\par 
\par I:\tab Did you bake your own bread, make your own jam or anything like that?
\par 
\par CW:\tab Yes, all that.
\par 
\par I:\tab Bottle fruit and vegetables, make pickles, wine and medicines?
\par 
\par CW:\tab And the kitchen garden grew all the vegetables and fruit and things.
\par 
\par I:\tab Did you brew any beer in the family?
\par 
\par CW:\tab No.
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid8325038 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 I:\tab 
Did the kitchen garden supply everything, or did you have to buy any fruit or vegetables at all?
\par 
\par CW:\tab Well, if any, very rarely.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 What sort of livestock did you keep, do you remember?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Oh, well, cows for milking, and pigs, sheep, usual stock, mixed farming.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
My father had a bailiff who looked after all that, you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 I}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038\charrsid8738534 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you eat meat every day?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes, I suppose so.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 I}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038\charrsid8738534 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you ever get extra meat, such as rabbit, from poaching?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 :\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Oh, very well, yes, I mean that was part of the meat; game and hares and rabbits and, of course, poultry, too.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did your father poach, in fact, or did he do it quite legally?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Oh, well, you see, it's quite a big estate, and plenty of shooting on it of all sorts, and he was rather a good shot.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Do you ever remember your mother going without food or less food so that the family could have more?
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Were you allowed to talk during meals?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes, of course.
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid8325038 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you choose what you wanted to eat from what was cooked, or did you have to eat everything?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
No, given a ... we were allowed a certain latitude. If we were too tiresome they, would say 'well, jolly well go without' if we didn't want it. We weren't forced to eat anything.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
If there was something on the table you wanted like the salt could you ask someone to pass it to you or did you have to wait until somebody offered it to you?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Oh, no, certainly ask, or snatch \{laughter\}.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Presumably you could ask for a second helping?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Any time we wanted it, yes.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Were you expected to hold your knife and fork in a certain way and sit in a certain way?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
I suppose so. Well, I mean, one found oneself holding them in the accepted fashion so I suppose at some time one learnt to do it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Could you bring toys and books to the table?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Well, we never did.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 When did you leave the table, when you liked or did you have to wait until everybody else had finished?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
I think until everyone had finished.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you always have the same places?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 At table?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 How was the meal served, presumably by servants?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes, sometimes ..
. I mean, the meal was brought in by servants and I think they sort of started off and then I think we generally ... well, certainly at breakfast and lunch we looked after ourselves. And at dinner I think the parlour maid, you know, cleared the places and
 brought the next course and handed it round.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid1471075 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Do you remember in what order the meals were served out in? Did your father get served first, or the children first, or what?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Well, you see, sometimes he was carving, sometimes my mother was carving and sometimes the thing didn't need carving, it was already served like that. I don't think there was any regular routine about it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Where did your younger brother sit before they could feed themselves?}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid8325038   }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did they sort of eat in the nursery?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Oh, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Where did the servants eat?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 In the servants' hall.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did they have different food?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Partly different, partly the same. It all depended. I mean, if there were special delicacies they probably didn't get 'em \{laughter\}.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Was your mother an easy person to talk to?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Yes. Especially for me because she was interested in visual things very much, and artistic, and so on, and I hadn't much, really, in common with my father who was purely academic, really. Though not ... when I say 'purely', he w
as also interested in sailing and shooting, and so on.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did your mother show affection?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Oh, indeed, yes. Very much so.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8325038 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Could you share sort of personal worries and things like that with your parents?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1471075\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1471075 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
I suppose one did. I can't recall any particular things.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1471075  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 I can't recall having any particular ...
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1471075 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Problems?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1471075\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1471075 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Or complex worries. One was sometimes less happy than at other times, that's all.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1471075 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 How did your parents expect you to behave towards them?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1471075\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1471075 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 I don't know. They didn't seem 
surprised at the way, in fact, we did behave, which was in no particular way, really. I think we were quite a civilised community, not really tightly bound together but going our own ways, as it were, and respecting each other's liberties. We were allowed
 to very much go off on our own. My mother was the very queen of non-fussers. She was fine and she thought that adventures, in reason, were only natural.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1471075 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 How were you expected to behave towards your brothers? Could you hit them hit back if you were hit,
 and things like that?
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid1471075 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1471075\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid1471075 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
I can't remember any fisticuffs at all. In a way I was, for a spell anyhow, somewhat lonely because I was not grand enough for my two elder brothers and too grand for my two younger brothers. I was a sort of sandwich boy.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1471075 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Can you remember what sort of person your parents hoped you'd grow up to be?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1471075\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1471075 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
I've no idea what ... I mean, they hoped I'd have a useful, happy life and that's about all; not disgrace the family.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15562405 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did your parents consider certain things important in life? Did they have a certain outlook on life?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15562405\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15562405 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Yes, I think they were both very high minded. I mean, they would have been desperately unhappy and shocked if any of us had sort of gone off the rails in any way, which fortunately we didn't. My father wa
s always rather disappointed that we weren't more intellectual. He had, as I say, every kind of academic honour and so-forth and hoped- that we might be the same, but we weren't a prize-winning lot at all. I think we ... the main thing was I think we were
 rather late-flowering varieties, so to speak.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15562405 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 What did your parents think of swearing?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15562405\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15562405 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
I don't think they look any line about it. I remember learning the word 'bloody' from one of the workmen who were working on Glasfryd, you see, and I tried it on my governess to her considerable shock, but nothing happened otherwise.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15562405 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 When grownups were talking were you allowed to join in?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15562405\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15562405 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Oh, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15562405 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 If you did something your parents disapproved of what would happen?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15562405\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15562405 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Well, depends what. I remember,
 I think where my father was rather harsh once, they were just going abroad and I borrowed his bicycle I'd just learnt to bicycle without leave, and smashed one of the pedals. I was skidding - a lovely feeling - skidding on the mud, like that and suddenly
 
off went one of the pedals. And he was just going off and instead of leaving me to use it while he was away he said he thought it would be better to be put away and locked up, so I had nothing. That was very sad. But otherwise there was no question of pun
ishments of anything of that- sort. I can't remember any punishments, or being kept in, or anything.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15562405 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 And you weren't beaten or things like that?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15562405\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15562405 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No, no.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15562405 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Would you say that you received the ideas you had about how to behave from your parents?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15562405\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15562405 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes, I suppose so.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15562405 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 And did one or other of them play a more important part?
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid15562405 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15562405\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid15562405 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Oh, yes, my mother, certainly, because I saw much more of her, you see. We were much more akin; and of course, she wasn't ... My father was much older, too, you see, much older than my mother, and more withdrawn.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 When you had a birthday would it be different from any other day?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Oh, yes, well slightly. It was exciting. Of course, one had a few presents and some ... and a birthday cake. One was made much of.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you have a tea party with guests?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Well, we were so far away and so few neighbours at all that parties were very rare, indeed.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Can you remember anything you did with your mother and father together on Christmas Day?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 We always went to church 
in the morning, and we generally had somebody staying. Very often a very charming and amusing maiden aunt who was rather fun; and presents all laid out on a long Elizabethan table in the great hall, which we weren't allowed to look at until after breakfas
t. Having started, of course, with a stocking, which was very exciting.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you have any musical instruments in your home?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Only a piano.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Who played?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
My mother, and we were very unmusical, really.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Nobody sang, then?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No. No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you ever have any sort of musical evening round the piano with your mother?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
No, not really. We were awfully unmusical, really.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did your parents play any games with you?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Played a little very primitive cricket and tennis, and I think that was all.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Were there lots of books in the house?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Yes, lots of books, a great many of them very old books, you know, 17th, 18th, even 16th century. I don't know how they'd accumulated, and then we were given books, amongst our Christmas .presents there 
were always books. There was some old boy who for years always sent me that year's Henty. Did you ever read Henty, G.A. Henty? I suppose he wrote more boys' books than anybody else. Quite good of that sort, semi-historical you know.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you have newspapers and magazines coming into the house regularly?
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid10578772 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid10578772 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Daily newspaper. In fact, two. The Standard and The Daily Graphic, both long dailies. I remember when my father was abroad and the papers hadn't stopped coming and on April 1st the Standard duly arriv
ed through the post and I hid it away until the following year, April 1st, and popped it in instead of the current one. He wrote an angry letter to the editor saying that it may amuse your staff sending me a paper a year old. And then I confessed and then
 he was jolly angry with me. I remember seeing the first photograph that was in The Daily Graphic, otherwise they were a all sketches, you see, pen and ink, reproduced ... a very blurred photograph of a steamer on the rocks.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Presumably your mother and father read a lot?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
My father read quite a lot, largely the classics, and my mother was fairly well ... I mean, she read Jane Austen, and the poets quite a lot. You see, she was born in the house that Shelley had at \{blank\}. I designed the monument to g
o in the garden there in memory of Shelley, and she'd known Emerson, too, my mother had. And Ruskin. And my father was awarded a ... given a commemorative gold watch by his college and the Royal Humane Society's gold medal for a very gallant life-saving a
nd Ruskin designed the wreath to go round this, and I had it with Ruskin's letter, and they were both destroyed in the fire. You see, this place was entirely gutted by fire in '51. Everything went, all books and papers and records.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Do you remember a funeral in the family?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
My father's funeral ... Well, I suppose everybody else had a funeral, but his funeral ... he was buried in a pre-arranged enclosure by the orchard, kitchen garden, with yew hedge round and wrought iron gates and so on and carried d
own the avenue and buried there.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did lots of people come to the funeral?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Well, only ... No, it was a private funeral, just tenants and the household, I think.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did they wear special clothes, mourning clothes?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 You told me a bit abou
t the fact that you didn't have many friends and neighbours. You didn't go visiting much and presumably your father didn't like having people to stay in the house.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
No, and partly our country house neighbours, we had Broom Hall on one side and \{missing\}
 on the other, both very large estates, each with its own pack of hounds, each with its own yacht, stables full of horses, large domestic staffs and that sort of thing and all our neighbours in country houses were rather philistine, like that, and hadn't 
much really in common with my very studious academic father and artistic mother. And I don't think they found exchange of visits very rewarding and I don't think it was the miles of bad roads, so much as the fact that when they did meet they didn't find i
t very rewarding.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10578772 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Were you ever taken out shopping?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13714410\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13714410 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Yes. Sometimes Pwllheli, when my father went down to the Bench there I'd sometimes go with him, but very little. There was a village shop, a minimal village shop in \{missing\} and one in Llangybi a
nd another at Chwilog, which was about the range of our pony rides.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13714410 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Do you remember any outings, sort of Bank Holiday outings, or summer outings?
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid13714410 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13714410\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid13714410 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No. We went, sometimes, expeditions. Like going over to Brynkir from ... Brynkir Hall which is a deso
late place, that was about the limit in distance, or \{missing\} or \{missing\}, but, you know, either taking a picnic or meeting somebody there.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13714410 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you ever go away on holiday?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13714410\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13714410 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Not as a small child, never. Hardly at all until I went abroad on my own, really.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13714410 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Can you remember how you spent Saturdays in those days?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13714410\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13714410 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Well, in the winter if there was a meet anywhere within reach hunting on ponies.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13714410 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 And Sundays?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13714410\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13714410 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Sunday was always clouded by fine raiment and religious observances.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13714410 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you have Sunday clothes?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13714410\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13714410 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
We more or less had to go to church.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13714410 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 In special clothes, I mean, you sort of dressed up?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13714410\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13714410 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Yes, dress up for Sunday. I remember some people still turning up in top hats.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13714410 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Were you allowed to play games or work on Sundays?
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid13714410 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13714410\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid13714410 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
No. Well, we were discouraged from that because it was disapproved of by our neighbours, you see, non-conformist neighbours who didn't like ball games much at any time, especially on Sunday.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13714410 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Presumably your parents went to church, too?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Y
es. And my father, you know, who had really retired, on Easter or on special times would very often preach, and preach very well indeed, too, when he preached in English. When he preached in Welsh, of course, I didn't understand it and the service was adj
usted according to the congregation.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 This was Church of England, wasn't it?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did they go every Sunday?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Not every, but most. Sometimes we walked, sometimes we drove.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid5179722 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you go to Sunday School?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
I don't think there was any within reach.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 So presumably you didn't have Sunday School outings, or anything like that?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
No. We always gave a school treat at Glasfryn to two or three schools, certainly Llangybi, Llannor and Llanaelhaearn. They all came marching up together and they had sports and tea and all the, rest of it, you know.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you take part in any other social activities organised by the church?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you belong to the choir?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
No. Not until I went to school, not because I could sing of had an ear or anything, because ... I don't know how I contrived it. I wangled it somehow because the choir had outings and I wanted to go on one of these outings.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Do you remember if the church had a temperance club?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No \{laughter\}
. I don't think they existed.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Was Grace said at meals?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
I think it was. I think just 'Benedictus bene \{missing\}', a Latin thing, when my father was there. Otherwise I don't think we did.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Were you taught to say prayers at night?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
I think we must have been but it didn't last long.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 And did you ever have family prayers?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Oh, every day, alas, before breakfast.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did your father take an interest in politics?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Not much. He was basically Conservative and so, I think, was my mother. Politics loomed very small at the time.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Do you know why he was Conservative?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
I think his father had been and his grandfather had been \{laughter\}, for no better reason.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Do you remember your father and your mother voting in a general election? Before 19l9?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 I suppose so.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 You don't remember it?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No, I don't remember it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 You just presume that they'd vote Conservative if they did?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes. I don't remember.
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid5179722 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 In some places at that time men felt they risked losing their jobs or their house if they voted differently f
rom their employer. Do you know if your father felt himself under any of that kind of pressure to vote for a particular party?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Well, he wouldn't because he was a local landowner. He never brought pressure on anybody, not like old \{missing\} did, at \{missing\}. No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Your father presumably didn't work the Conservative Party or anything during an election?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No. No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Or your mother?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
No. My uncle, Sir Osmond Williams of \{missing\} Castle, of course, he was Member for Merioneth, a Liberal. 'A red hot Radical ', they called him \{laughter\}
. He ... his father had been there before him, he'd been the first Liberal Member for Merioneth. It had always been Tory before.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did your parents take part in any other political activity, other than at election time?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
When your parents were not doing their work how did they spend their time? You've talked to me about that, actually, about your father sailing.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Well, they occasionally went abroad, and they'd very adventurously on their honeymoon gone right up the Nile which was... when? I don't know what date that was, but quite early. You know, in one of these sailing \{missing\}
 and so on. And at home my mother did a bit of gardening and my father went around the farm, the home farm, and that sort of thing, and did a certain amount of tree-planting, looking after that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did your mother ever go out and enjoy herself on her own?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Well, that was very much discouraged by my father who ... you see, we had a pair of carriage horses but they were a
lso supposed to work on the farm and earn their keep, you see, and he generally said that they couldn't go out because they were wanted for something-or-other, you see. And my mother belonged to a large family, the Graveleys, and sisters around, Lady Will
iams at \{missing\} and Hilda Graves at Tenralth, and Lady Smythe who was a darling, and Aunt Edie Hansard, and so on, and she liked to see them when she could, and did when she could, but it was rather limited by my father's rationing of horsepower \{
laughter\}.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did your father spend most evenings in a week at home, then?
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did your father ever attend clubs or pubs?
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid5179722 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Well, he belonged to the Athenaeum most of his life, in London. That's the only club he ever belonged to.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 And did your mother go along there? Or is it men only?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Men only. Very much so. They've got a women's side now, I believe. I belong. I found myself the Father of the Club and it's by no means a young man's club.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did your father take part in any sport?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No. Wel
l, yes. As a young man he'd been a keen mountaineer, in fact, one of the founders of the Alpine Club and when the Alpine Club had its Jubilee, or whatever it was some years ago I sent them his staff which had got a pewter sort of band going round with the
 summits that he'd been up engraved on it. He was a Bard; his Bardic title was \{missing\}.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did he ever attend the races, or bet?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Never. Nor have I. The only time a friend of mine insisted on taking me to the Derby, hired a bus you know, the open top
ped bus. And during the actual Derby I was asleep on the floor down below and never saw it. He said, 'you must come and see the Derby' and I said, 'well, all right' and I went, but I wasn't much amused.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did your father or mother belong to any savings clubs?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 How did you get on with your brothers and sisters?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
No sisters, again. Oh, perfectly all right in rather a detached way. We all went our several ways, I had my concerns and they had theirs.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Was there one of them that was particularly close to you?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 As a child who did you play with?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
I didn't play much, I was busy constructing things.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 On your own, mainly?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
On my own, and if I could do it secretly, all the better. Either building houses, or boats or water wheels, or whatever.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 And presumably you had the run of the grounds to play in?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Oh, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Were you allowed to get dirty when you played?
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid5179722 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes, as much as we liked. We were very sensibly dressed for those days, like Boy Scouts, sort of thing in 
shorts and what were called then Garibaldi shirts, sort of blouses buttoned here, and generally a red tie tucked in.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Can you remember - apart from constructing things - what sort of games did you play?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Oh, hardly any ... either exploring around climbing trees, shooting with an air gun, or mostly doing something on the lake, sailing or bathing or whatever.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Were you free to play with anyone your pleased if you wanted to? Could you play with any of your neighbours if you wanted to?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Oh, yes, c
ertainly. There were hardly any neighbours except the Welsh-speaking children of tenants, you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Were you discouraged from playing with them?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Oh, yes. They couldn't talk any English and we couldn't talk much Welsh, you see, so it wasn't possible to get very far.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you belong to any youth organisations?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
No, there weren't any. I think if there had been Scouts at that time we should have probably joined them. You see, Baden Powell ... wasn't exactly a cousin but we had a common aunt and he used to come and stay.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you keep any pets?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Yes, I had guinea pigs and rabbits at different times, with no great enthusiasm. In fact, I was cured of keeping pets when I came back from a day's sailing to find my guinea pig hutch overturned and 
all its half dozen inmates lying bloody and dead on the lawn, you know, and I was so upset at this that I resolved never to keep pets again, which I didn't.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 What had happened to them?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Oh, a dog had got in and ...

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you collect anything?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Oh, yes, collected butterflies at one time; eggs, I suppose, yes, in not a very thorough or knowing way, just as small boys do.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you do any gardening, or just the weeding that you did as a penance?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
I did. I had a little garden at one time, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 You went fishing, presumably?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Yes. I hadn't much patience to be a good fisherman.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you go for walks in the country?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Oh, yes. One had to, to get anywhere.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you have a bicycle?
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid2694171 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5179722\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid5179722 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Later, when bicycles came in. You see, I was, pre-bicycle. I remember seeing the first bicycle. Very exciting. On rubber tyres.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you take part in any sports yourself?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Not until school and then very reluctantly because they were compulsory games, and not caring about games very much and still more, disliking compulsion, I thought it all a beastly waste of time when I might be exploring the lovely countryside \'85
 of Northamptonshire where we were at school.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you go to the theatre at all?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Well, just two or three times, having passed through London, but that's all.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 And presumably that was the same with concerts and music hall?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 And cinemas?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Well, the cinema didn't start until I was middle-aged \{laughter\}.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did your parents give you any pocket money?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 How much did you get?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Nothing regular until I went to school. You know, I'd have tips on birthdays from uncles or neighbours, and at school it was sixpence a week to cover my course and then when I became a photographer that was raised to a shilling a week to cover my course.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 What did you spend it on, apart from photography?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Oh, buns and ices, whatever was available. There was nothing at home, you see, that one could spend it on.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 If your mother was ill or confined to bed, how did she manage? Did she have a nurse in?
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid10240162 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 I can't remember her ever being confined ... not until she was very old. She died at 92, I think it was.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Do you remember what happened when one of your younger brothers was born?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did your parents have any relatives nearby?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Well, yes. Uncle Jack - John Graves who built \{missing\} which is just the other side of Cricceath, you know, now a hotel. And he also built \{missing\}. He was Lord Lieutenant and he wanted a place Caernarvon \{Caernarfon\} for officia
l business and he built \{missing\}, a lovely position. And then Uncle Dick of \{missing\}, you know, a big house just the other side of ... between ... where they are making that big new roadway between Portmadoc \{Porthmadog\}
 and ... belongs to my nephew now; Wern, which was very, very up-to-date and elaborate and rather good altogether. And then Micheal Osmond, whom I spoke of who was Member for Merioneth, at Douglas Castle; and Lawrence Kildair at \{missing\} and so on.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you see a lot of them?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Well
, no, because communications were so difficult.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 And if you did you saw them at home, presumably? At their homes?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Wern was very hospitable, we often stayed there for large parties. I mean, they could put up a party of 20 or so there happily.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did your parents share the same friends?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Well, except for my father's old academic friends who were so old as to seem almost a different species to a boy. Some of them ... well, he had his old tutor to stay, old Mr. Kingsey, who must have been over 90. 
My father was born in the reign of William IV, you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did your mother have any friends of her own?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Oh, yes. They were mostly distant cousins, like the Flowers and Steadmonds, and so on.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 She met them in their homes, presumably, rather than meeting them out?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Were friends ever invited into the home?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Oh, yes. But as I say, not much, because my father disliked having people around. And we were allowed to invite friends to stay if we wanted to, school friends, or whatever.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 And presumably when they came they were offered food and 'drink, if they called?}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 
\ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171  \tab Oh, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162\charrsid8738534 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid10240162 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 And they were your Mother's and Father's friends. Did friends ever call casually without an invitation?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Hardly ever, because it meant an expedition for anybody, you see. The drive was about a mile and a half long, apart from anything else.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 So the same applies to neighbours?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 They didn't pop in, no.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Your parents didn't often go out to visit friends and neighbours, then?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No, very seldom.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
People often tell us that in those days they made their own amusements, what do you think your parents did when they got together with their friends? Did they play charades, or ... ?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
No, no, they just talked about whatever interested them, or discussed some subject or other.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Many people divide society into, different social classes or groups. In the time before 1918 did you think that some people belonged to one and some to another?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Class?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Class, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes, certainly.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Could you tell me what the different ones were?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Well, I suppose there were the local land-owning gentry, and then the local professional classes' bank managers and solicitors and so forth - and then the agricultural community. That's about all there was.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Which class do you think you belonged to? It would be the landowning, gentry?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes. Inevitably.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Can you remember being brought up to treat one sort differently from people of another sort?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Never, no.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2694171 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 And presumably ... you weren't ever taught to curtsey, touch your cap or show respect in any way?
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
No. Nor was anybody else, as far as I remember.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 You don't remember people doing it to your parents?
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid10240162 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid10240162 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Oh, I do, yes, but they weren't taught to do it. At least, they may have been taught by their own parents.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 In the district who were considered the most important people?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Well, I suppose the Lord Lieutenant. I had two uncles, both Lord Lieutenants, you see. It was really ridiculous because I was ... I think nepotism still goes on amongst us Welsh quite clearly \{laughter\}
 and it was simply a toss-up as to which of these two uncles one Lord Lieutenant for Merioneth, the other for Caernarvonshire \{I have qualifying property in both\} as to which would be the first to make his young nephew 
a magistrate, and in fact it was the Merioneth one and I was made a magistrate quite young and quite improperly, really, because I was busy as a young architect in London with no prospect of doing my job as a magistrate there. And really, I' felt quite un
fit to do it because I didn't understand Welsh, and so in fact never sat and I was thrown off the Bench as senile, not because I didn't attend but simply because. I was over age, by my younger brother, when he was Chairman of the Bench.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 How did you regard shopkeepers, who did they associate with? In terms of social class I mean.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
I don't know. With other trades people, I suppose, you know. At Pwllheli with such sailors and quarrymen as there were.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 And the clergy, how were they rated?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Well, w
e had a nice old rector \{missing\} who used to occasionally come to see us and we'd drop in at his rectory, sometimes, and given sloe gin after the service.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 How were teachers regarded?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
I suppose on about the same level as ... no, rather below the doctors and clergy.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 And farmers, were they mainly tenant farmers?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Well they were all practically ... they were very few freehold farmers; mostly tenant farmers and quite small.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 What sort of people would you say went to church?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Well, very f
ew of them, anyhow, and ...I don't know, I suppose they just happened to have stuck to the church when the rest of the population flew off to nonconformity. There was no animosity or any great distinction, as far as I know.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 You didn't find that more up
per class people went to church and lower class people went to chapel or anything like that?
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No, I don't think so.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Where you lived did all the people in the working class have the same standard of living?
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid16544206 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid10240162 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No, I suppose some of them lived bett
er than others because perhaps they hadn't got such large families, or perhaps they had rather a better job, you know, they were a foreman instead of a day labourer.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you feel that one group felt themselves superior to the rest? Was there a hierarch
y within the working classes?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
I don't know that groups did, but individuals no doubt did. You know, who was more prosperous and more successful than another.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 And presumably there were some families that were thought of as 'rough' and others as 're
spectable'? Do you remember a distinction made between craftsmen and labourers?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
What sort of distinction? Obviously a labourer would be less skilled and probably less intelligent or he'd be doing something else. But they weren't looked down upon for that reason. I remember a nice old labourer, he was called Shaun \{missing\}
, the name of his cottage, who worked for my father, and he got half a crown a day wages, and had a family to support on it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did your mother and father have the same attitude towards the different classes?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes, I think so.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Do you think your mother saw herself as belonging to a particular social class?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Never. She'd been brought up, you know, fairly elegantly and expensively and well educated, like her brothers and sisters, and her friends and she was very, very good at ... I mean, when she lived at \{missing\}
 'specially, which was close above, you know, the white house above Tremadoc done by William ... Have you read William Maddocks?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 It's very good, isn't 
it? Anyhow, my mother was born there and died there, and she was very much - while she was there, for about 20 years, I think, in her old age she - was very much the mother of Tremadoc and awfully good with all the little societies and old ladies and anyb
ody. And the young people, too, who remember her with great affection.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Was it possible at that time to move from one group to another? To sort of move up the social scale, as it were? Or were classes fairly rigidly defined?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid10240162 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 I don't know how to answ
er that. There was no opposition to anybody who was trying to get on. In fact, helping hands, I think, were always held out.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16544206 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Can you remember anyone specifically who did this, who made good?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16544206\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16544206 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Yes, I can remember my father coaching young men, you kn
ow, who'd come to see him, and he'd coach them for ... in classics, or mathematics for some impending examination. In fact he ... the dear little man, what's his name? Who became Bishop of St. David's, he coached him for ever so long to get his degree at 
Cambridge, and he owed everything to my father, really, becoming a bishop of St. David's.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16544206 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Do you remember seeing a policeman around where you lived as a child?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16544206\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16544206 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
No. I think the nearest policeman was probably Pwllheli. I don't think I ever saw one.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16544206 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 So you don't ... didn't really have any views on policemen?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16544206\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16544206 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16544206 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 You don't know or haven't heard of the way in which people were treated by policemen?
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid8678239 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16544206\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid16544206 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No. I once or twice went with my father and was allowed to sit, you know, on the Bench with him at ... when people were had up at Pwllheli.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16544206 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Was it particularly severe, or ... ?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16544206\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16544206 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
No, it always seemed to be very cosy \{laughter\}.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16544206 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Obviously, your home, wasn't rented. Do you remember feeling that your parents had to struggle to make end
s meet?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16544206\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16544206 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Had to struggle? No, certainly not. My father would ... he had fancies about being very poor at times, after he'd been very extravagant about something and would say "Depend upon it. We shall end in the workhouse". As a little boy I used to ta
ke this quite literally.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16544206 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 But obviously you never did?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16544206\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16544206 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
I remember sticking two ha'pennies I had in the wall at the side of the road going down to Pwllheli. I thought, 'well, when we go down to the workhouse I can pick those ha'pennies up and have something to carry on with' \{laughter\}.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16544206 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Was there someone in the district who people disapproved of very strongly? And was there a special way in which they showed it. Was there somebody who was sort of outcast in the community, do you remember?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16544206\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16544206 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No, I. don't think so.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16544206 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 There were no sort of witches or old ladies, or anything?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16544206\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16544206 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
No, no. Sorry. Nothing. Sorry I can't oblige.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16544206 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 About school and schooling in general: were you given lessons by your parents or tutor or governess?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16544206\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16544206 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 I had a seri
es of governesses and, in fact, a female tutor. She was a graduate of Newnham and good at mathematics, which I wasn't. And I think she'd taken a degree in botany, as well. And of course, I went to school, to Oundle ... Sanderson, who was the coming man, t
h
en, and the coming school, and I think my father was quite right, he was a great man. I helped H.G. Wells write a book about him. He wrote two books on Sanderson, one called "The Undying Flame" and the other "Sanderson of Oundle". You'll find quite a lot 
about it in there.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16544206 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 How did you feel about your governesses?
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid8678239 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16544206\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid16544206 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 The first one I remember, Miss Barker, who was \{missing\}
 sort of thing, suffered from sick headaches now called migraine, I think, and no wonder because we really treated her very badly. S
he was rather feeble, poor thing. Nice. And then we had a very robust little creature, this Newnham girl, who was almost too boisterous. And then, of course, Oundle was ... From there I went on to Trinity, Cambridge.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16544206 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did your governesses get on at you about punctua}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid16544206 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 ity, manners, tidiness, this sort of thing?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16544206\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16544206 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
I suppose they did, a little bit.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16544206 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 But not unduly?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid3889208\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid3889208 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 We weren't bullied by them.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid3889208 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 How old were you when you first went to school?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid3889208\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid3889208 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 I suppose 13.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid3889208 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 When you first started what tim
e of the morning did you go, and what time did you come back? Or was it boarding school?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid3889208\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid3889208 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Boarding school.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid3889208 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 How did you get to school?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid3889208\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid3889208 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 By train.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid3889208 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 How long did it take you?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid3889208\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid3889208 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 I suppose most of the day, from 
\{missing\} to Oundle which is in the middle of Northamptonshire.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid3889208 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 What did you think of school?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid3889208\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid3889208 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
I found it extremely strange to begin with, of course, pitchforked ... I was the only new boy because I went in the summer term straight from a governess to public school, which wasn't 
a very good thing, really because I was THE New Boy. The only one. And everything was strange.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid3889208 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 How did you feel about the teachers?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid3889208\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid3889208 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
I was never very close to anyone of them but they were on the whole. I think, about the average. Good at their jobs.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid3889208 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Do you remember them thinking that certain things were important in life?
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid8678239 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid3889208\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid3889208 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
The headmaster was really my one great influence there, especially later when I got to know him. And, really, also after I left school, too. He was really very great man.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8678239 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 If you did something the teachers disapproved of what happened?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8678239\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8678239 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Oh, you got a jolly good beating.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8678239 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Was it an all boys' school?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8678239\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8678239 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8678239 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did your parents show interest in your school work?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8678239\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8678239 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8678239 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did they visit the school, meet the teachers?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8678239\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8678239 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Well, just ... I suppose my ... My father went to see the headmaster and to see the school, but he never came there while I was there. My mother came, I think, twice in my five years, or whatever it was.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8678239 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did the other children in the school come from similar types of home to your own?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8678239\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8678239 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Some of them.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8678239 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did the teachers single out some children for different treatment from the others?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8678239\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8678239 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Oh, I think they had their favourites, to some extent, not outrageously.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8678239 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Were there gangs or groups in the school, do you remember?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8678239\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8678239 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
No, you see, there were houses. Half a dozen different houses; I was in School House.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8678239 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 But there weren't informal groupings, amongst the children?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8678239\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8678239 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
No, not much. There was a choral society. It's quite different now, they've got every kind of activity, but not in those days. Though at the time it was supposed to be very advanced, and was, really. There was no bullying. It was really rather civilised.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8678239 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 You don't remember, then, certain children being left out of things, you know, isolated?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8678239\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8678239 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Just occasionally. There would be a dead set against somebody for something or other and they would be rather ostracised, but it was rare.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8678239 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Was this the only school you went to before ... ?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8678239\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8678239 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 It was the only sc
hool I went to, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8678239 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 How old were you when you left?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid7487741\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid7487741 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
I suppose 17, 18, when I went to Cambridge.
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid1180934 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid7487741 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Do you have any regrets about your education? Wish you'd worked harder, anything like that?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
There were a good many things which I should have
 liked to have been taught which I wasn't, and other things, you see ... Anyhow, it is rather difficult because obviously, about foreign languages I'm almost feeble-minded because for the whole school there was a monthly French examination, and in the las
t
 one that I took I got 1 percent. I wondered what that 1 was for, but anyhow, I knew what that meant and I was duly sent for by the headmaster, ushered into his school study and instead of leaping at me he roared with laughter and said 'well, by and large
 I know you're a trier and that means, presumably that one percent is as good as you can do and if that is so it's obviously a waste of time your trying to learn French and so in future you will do no French and you will do workshops instead'.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Obviously you didn't have a part time job while you were at school?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Now I should like to ask you about your first full time job. What was it?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
I always wanted to be an architect from the age of about 5. However, that was discouraged as being not a 
proper profession at all, it was all right as a hobby but not really a job, and so I said 'well, then, what?' I'd got to earn my living in some way and it was thought that the ... obviously, as I'd done engineering at school and was good at science, and t
h
at sort of thing, that I'd better join my elder brother who'd started an electrical manufacturing company. And so I went there. And then sort of hard times came for that sort of thing, the electrifying boom was dying down and when I was offered the job of
 
being an experimentalist to an electrical inventor in London, in Westminster, I was advised to take it and did. And went there for a spell and worked away, and it wasn't my cup of tea at all, really, and I went down with 'flu - it was quite a bad go and w
h
ilst my morale was returning after the 'flu I plucked up enough courage to write to my inventor and say that I wasn't coming back. I'd decided I was going to be an architect come what might. And then I wrote off home to say that I'd come to this decision 
a
nd to my surprise they capitulated and said 'well, if that's really what you want to do you'd better try and do it and get on with it'. I didn't know any architects or anything about architecture so I looked up 'Architecture' in the London telephone book 
a
nd found a place called the Architectural Association, went round there, sent in my card with my name Which, being quite unknown to the principal he thought might possibly be important and so he came down and we had a long talk together a charming person.
 
He encouraged me and I joined this outfit. However, in my second term, through family jobbery and luck and things, I got several jobs. And I used to have the contractors or clients or suppliers of this and that in to see me at the school, and even to sit 
i
n at lectures with me which I didn't want to miss. And this was considered very bad ... upsetting for the other students. So I got a personal interview and then a formal letter from the principal saying 'look, you either must cease to use this institution
 
for a private office, or go'. And so I said 'well, I've always understood it's very chancy getting your first shop, but I seem to have got one or two jobs, perhaps I 'd better stick to them' and so left and started up, as an architect, you see. And that w
as the beginning of it all, in a small way, of course.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 And then, from your first job up to 1918, say, did you change your jobs at all?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
No, no, I've been an architect ever since.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 You didn't work for different people?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No, just private client
s, not in a firm or anything.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 How did you get on with other people you worked with?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
I think very well. I must have done or I should be \{illegible\} ... \{laughter\}.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 What jobs have you done since the First World War?
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid1180934 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Well, of course, I was i
n the First World War, in the Welsh Guards and then on the staff of the Tank Corps, and then gradually took up my architectural life again until the Second World War.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Would you have preferred another type of occupation?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No, certainly not. Nothing 
else. I shouldn't have been any good at anything else. I was born to be an architect and nothing else.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Presumably you never belonged to a trade union, but did you belong to a professional organisation?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Not until they said, more or less, 'Hi, what 
are you doing out there'? You'd become come in as a Fellow, you see, and they made me a Fellow. I never took, nor far less, passed any examination of any sort and I got ... they just gave me all the appropriate letters.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Who was this?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 The Royal Ins
titute of British Architects did; Institute of Landscape Architects; The Town Planning Institute, and I got all the letters, you see, but never passed an exam.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Do you feel that in general employers and workers have the same interests, or different?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
I think they have the same interests in having a country worth living in and being able to live in it in reasonable conditions. But economically, of course, there are obvious clashes. The actual workers want as high wages as they can possibly extract, an
d the employers want the highest profits they can make.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
There are just a couple more questions to ask about your home life after you left school. Presumably you didn't continue to live at home?
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 During vacation I did.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 After you left school, this is?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
After I left school, while I was at Cambridge.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did starting work change your relationship with your parents?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 And presumably it didn't change it with your brothers, either?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you spend Sunday any differently? Did you give up going to church?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Yes, I did, yes, gave up going to church. I was in London then, you see, in rooms.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you take an interest in politics?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Very slight.
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid14550074 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 You told me earlier something about how you spent your spare time; did you continue to spend your spare time in the same way or did you do different things?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Well, in London of course I got to know a lot of fresh people, and London was new to me there was a great deal to see there, and I went to theatres and museums and galleries, and so on, parties.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you ever bring the new friends that you met in London, home?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No, very rarely. Occasionally.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you have any special friends at this time?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
A few. I was very busy, you see, starting up my professional work.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did your parents meet these friends at all?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes, when I brought them down.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 What age we're you when you were married?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 I was 32. That was in 1915.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 How long had you known your wife then?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 About a year.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 How did you meet?
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid14550074 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Rather 
oddly, I belonged to a professional thing called The Housing Association or something of that sort, and then sent me a scruffy little postcard saying that the High Sheriff of Surrey, Mr. St. \{missing\} \{illegible\}
 Editor-Proprietor of The Spectator, who is 
very interested in Roll Housing was having a display on Merrowdowns. He'd put up a cheap cottage of his own design and he was challenging any builder or architect to beat it, to do better. After all, 'I'm only a journalist and part time countryman, surely
 
one of your people can do better'. And anyhow, this was inviting me down to this thing. I thought if it's fine and I'm free, I'll go. And I was free and it was fine, I remember, just in time to, catch the designated train and found myself sitting in a mar
q
uee listening to a very good speech urging the necessity of cheap housing for agricultural workers, and so on, in the country, and spotted Amabel who I thought belonged to another party, but it turned out to be his daughter. So immediately the challenge w
a
s formally made, he said 'anybody who will build a cottage, if I like it I'll buy it, if I don't like it I'll give the builder the land it stands on. And so I immediately got up and said 'I'm for this'. And we met over that, and this was down in Surrey an
d
 they also had a charming house in London and met there. And she was interested in architecture from various points of view and we found we had a lot in common and we became engaged. Then the War started and I was at that time in Kitchener's Army Battalio
n
 before the Welsh Guards were formed and she was ... her home was turned into a hospital, her mother was Commandant and she was a V.A.D. which rather complicated things, we didn't see as much of each other as we wanted. However, we were allowed to marry i
n the spring of 1915.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did your parents help you in setting up home, sort of thing?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Well, there wasn't much setting up home. Fortunately, I'd just got this reconditioned enough for it to be satisfactory for a romantic-minded bride and because I was 
at the War, away for 4 years with occasional leaves, and she was at her hospital, and so we didn't have any domestic life until the War was over.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Presumably you've lived here since then?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Well, no, in London. We had a series of houses in London. We bought a house and did it up, very modern, and all that. And then I had my office we came down here for holidays when we could.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Could you describe the wedding?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
We intended it to be very private and intimate and, of course, romantic, and we were m
arried at St. Martha's Chapel, which is a little old chapel on the hilltop on Pilgrim's Way between Guildford and Dorking, unapproachable except on foot. And we also had it very early in the morning, at 8 o'clock, in order that we had time to drive to Lon
d
on and catch a train down to here the same day, you see, to arrive here. However, this was regarded as newsworthy and singular and there were all sorts of reporters and photographers and soon instead of the cosy little wedding we'd intended. However, it w
as all ... went off ... beautiful morning and was fine.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 How old was your wife when you married?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 She was just 21, I think.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1180934 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did your wife have a job when you married?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Well, yes, she was a V.A.D. in a hospital, you see, and for the next 4 years.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Was that the only job she had?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Well, of course, she'd done ... sort of writing which was, of course, her proper job.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074 I:\tab  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 And she continued working after your marriage?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Yes, writing books and reviewing. She's written about 20 books, I think.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 And presumably you feel well disposed towards her doing that?
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid14550074 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid14550074 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Oh, indeed. In fact I remember saying ... She said 'you know, when we're married I do want to go on writing' and I said 'Thank goodness! I really wouldn't know what to do with a full time wife'.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you have any children?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 How many?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
We had three, two girls and a boy.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 When were they born?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
I can't remember the exact dates. The eldest girl was born whilst I was still away at the War, in 1917, I suppose, an
d then another girl and also our son Christopher, who also joined the Welsh Guards and was killed in front of Monte Cassino in the Regiment, in the Second War.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Were the children both at home?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you have any medical help for childbirth?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
I suppose so. Gynaecologist, and so forth.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you help with childbirth?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 How soon was your wife out of bed?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 I couldn't tell you.}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Very soon. It was then, and I think still, the practice.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 How did you manage while she was in bed?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Well, the household, such as it was, carried on.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did any of your relations or neighbours help?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you have a nurse with the babies?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 How much did you have to do with your children when they were babies under one year?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid14550074 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Very little. I was very busy for one thing.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5596744 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you feed them, bath them, change their nappies, anything like that?}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid5596744  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Play with them?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5596744\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5596744 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 I'm afraid not.
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid12927079 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5596744 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 I want to ask you how you and your wife managed the housekeeping in the years before 1919? How much of your earnings would you give your wife at that time?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5596744\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5596744 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 I don't know. What was needed.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5596744 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 How many rooms are there in the house here?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5596744\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid5596744 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Our first house, I suppose half a dozen bedrooms and two bathrooms, and dining room and drawing room 
were one big room on the first floor, and nursery, of course, and the ground floor I had as my office two rooms what had been the dining room and study. And then, we moved to ... ultimately, to a much bigger house up in Hampstead which was George Rumney's
 old studio at his house with a very fine big picture gallery.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Presumably you had servants in the house?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 How many did you have?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
One time we had ... at that house we had butler and cook and a housemaid, I think, and a nurse. And then later I think we had a nurse and nurse, maid, and house parlour maid and cook.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Were the servants in very much the same position as they were in your father's house?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Well, London was rather different, you see, they disappeared and employed themselves as they chose when they were off duty. Very difficult to get anybody satisfactory.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you have laundry staff and things like that in your ...?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Well, laundry went out to a laundry. I suppose they did nursery washing.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did your wife make clothes at all for the children?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
No. She was busy, too, writing, you see. We did several books together.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Clothes, presumably were always new, not second-hand?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Where did you buy them?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
I don't know, the usual place where one would buy children's clothes.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Couldn't tell you more than that. Gorringes, I remember, was, one of them.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you help in the house at all?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did, you ask the children to do anything in the house?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
I think nothing beyond tidying up after their games, that sort of thing.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 What time did the children go to bed?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Well, that depends when, doesn't it and which child.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 They had a regular time?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes, I suppose about 6.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 And when did they put themselves to bed?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Well, they gradually did 
that, I don't suppose 'till they were about 5.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did they share the same bedroom, or did they have their own rooms?
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid12927079 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid12927079 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 I think to begin with all three children were in the night nursery. There was a night nursery and a day nursery.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 How often did the children have clean clothes?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Whenever they were dirty, I think \{laughter\}.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Where were meals eaten?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Nursery when they were quite small, then dining room when they were quite civilised.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 What sort of cooking equipment did you have? Before 1918, this is.
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid12927079 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid12927079\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid12927079 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
I think ... As I say, we'd reconstructed and done over and old Regency house in Belgravia, South Eaton Place, and everything was very modern. I should think almost certainly it was electric cooking.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16672986 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 What time was breakfast eaten?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16672986\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16672986 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Oh, I should think half past 8.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16672986 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Were all the members of the family present?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16672986\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16672986 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
No, I should think not, I think the children ate their breakfast in the nursery.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16672986 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 What did you eat and drink? The same sort of things you ate and drank as a child?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16672986\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16672986 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16672986 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 And were evening meals and midday meals roughly the same as ...?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16672986\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16672986 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16672986 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you make your own bread, jam, pickles and that sort of thing?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16672986\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16672986 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No.
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid13447866 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16672986 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 But presumably the servants made jam, pickles, wine, beer, medicines, bottled fruit and vegetables?
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16672986\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16672986 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
No, they didn't. They were things that were bought.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16672986 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Vegetables and fruit: grown or bought? Presumably they were bought?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16672986\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16672986 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16672986 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you ever have tinned or dried vegetables?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16672986\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16672986 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No, I don't think so.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16672986 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 How many times a week did you eat meat?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16672986\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16672986 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Every day, I think.
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid13447866 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16672986 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Presumably your wife never went short of food so that her husband or children could have more?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16672986\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16672986 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No. \{Laughter\}.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16672986 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Table manners of the children, what were they like? Were they brought up not to talk and
 things like that, at table?
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16672986\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16672986 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
No, we tried to make them not too piggy.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16672986 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 They could choose what they wanted to eat?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16672986\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid16672986 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13447866 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 They weren't sort of told off for not finishing their food, and that sort of thing?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13447866\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13447866 \tab No.
\par 
\par I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you make them hold their cutlery in a particular way?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13447866\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13447866 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
I suppose we did try to make them efficient at their eating if nothing else.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13447866 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you allow them to bring toys and books to the table?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13447866\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13447866 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 I don't think they did.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13447866 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you always leave the table together?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13447866\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13447866 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
When they were eating with us, yes. It would be a matter of clearing up.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13447866 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you have regular places at your table?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13447866\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13447866 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13447866 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Can you remember what age the children were when they joined the family meals?
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid13447866 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13447866\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid13447866 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 I suppose ... well, they wouldn't come to late dinner for a long time, especially as we often had dinner parties.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13447866 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 When your children were young did you feel there was a right way and a wrong way of bringing them up?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13447866\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13447866 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Oh well, my wife was very much in on that sort of thing, you know, and
 especially about grandchildren, you know. Dr. ... what her name? King. Truby King and now Dr. Spock and all that. I mean, she's very interested in that and wrote books about it. And wrote a lot of books for children, instruction on how you began, and tha
t sort of thing.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13447866 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you share her views on bringing up children?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13447866\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13447866 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Yes, I agreed with her views, I didn't contribute much.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13447866 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you discuss it with her though?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13447866\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13447866 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Oh, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13447866 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Was there anyone you could talk to if you were worried about any of the children?
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid15929671 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid13447866\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid13447866 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Well, we had a lot of friends who were doctors' psychoanalysts and teachers and intellectuals of various sorts who also had children.}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15929671\charrsid15929671  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15929671\charrsid8738534 Yes.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid13447866 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15929671 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Was your mother alive when your children were small?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid9979508\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid9979508 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid9979508 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 How often did you see her?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid9979508\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid9979508 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
When we came down to Wales she would always like to see them, of course.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid9979508 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you ask her advice on bringing up children?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No, I don't think we did.}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 She generally approved of what we were doing, and of the results.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 And what about your mother-in-law, was she approving, too?
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid4074283 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 She didn't interfere in any way and she wasn't of a very maternal type, really, she was more, again, an intellectual.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you discuss with the nanny how you wanted the children brought up?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 I don't think in 
general theory, but in practical points yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you ever disagree with the way she was bringing them up?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Well, in minor points, yes, but not in general ...
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Can you tell me some of the things you felt you ought to do for your children? In term
s of affection, safety, food, discipline.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
I don't think I was very good at being a father, really. I was very much absorbed in my own work and my father hadn't meant very much to me, he was rather aloof and I think on the whole I was aloof from the children.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 You didn't want them to share their worries with you?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
I don't think they had many worries. If they did they didn't show them and they went to their mother much more than to me
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 How did you want them to behave towards their nanny?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 O
h, to behave in a civilised way to give her the minimum of trouble and to be reasonably polite.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you let the children join in when the grownups were talking?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
In all depended when, I mean, how serious the discussion and who it was. They had plenty of opportunity of talking to us, really, and shutting up when there was interesting company when we wanted-to discuss things of some moment with.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 What did you bring them up to consider important in life?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
I don't think: that's easy to answer.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No, it's not.
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid1928298 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Just to behave decently to everybody and be good citizens, not to give needless trouble or pain to anybody.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you tell them they should hit back, or not, if another child hurt them?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
We didn't take any action over that. Don't think the occasion arose. They went to}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 day schools.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you discourage them from playing with any children?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
No, they played with anybody they liked.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 If your children did something you disapproved of, what happened? Were they ever hit or anything like that?

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
They were never beaten. They were scolded at times.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 By you or their mother?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Well, either. Mostly for their own good or safety. You know, if they started running across the street, or anything.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 How would you say your childre
n received the ideas they had about how to behave? Would you say your, children received the ideas they had about how to behave from their parents?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Yes, probably more than from anybody else.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 More than from school?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes. They all went to Dartin
gton Hall, which is a sort of free experimental school, good in some ways. Not a very good scholarship. Free development.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 What influence do you think their nanny had on them?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Well, they had several nannies, you see. They were all nice, kind creatures and especially one who was a Norden nurse, you know, very highly trained and had been with ... I think David Garnett; had been his nurse.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 What about family activities in the home, did you celebrate the children's birthdays?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Oh, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 And presumably they had presents, and different things to eat?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did they have guests at all?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes.
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid1928298 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Can you remember anything that you did with your wife and your children on Christmas Day?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Not really, that wasn't usual.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 And musical instruments; were any of the children musical?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
None of the children were musical really. The second daughter played a recorder and was slightly musical.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you play games with the children?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes, a bit.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 And did your wife join in the games?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes, more than I did.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Were there books, newspapers and magazines in the house?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Oh, yes!
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Where did you get them from?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 The books?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes. Presumably they were your own?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Yes. And belonged to a number of libraries. The London Library, Harrods, local libraries.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you read aloud to your children?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 My wife did a bit.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did the nanny read to the children?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Very little.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Were the children taken out visiting to neighbours and friends?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Very little.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did they go out shopping?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes. It wasn't much.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did the children ever visit their nanny's family?
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid1928298 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 I don't think they did. They weren't that accessible. One, I think, was in the Channel Islands, another one the family was dead.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did the children ever go out with just their father?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Very occasionally.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 What did you do on Bank holidays, public holidays, any sort of holidays?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 I don't think we did anything.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 You didn't go away?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
No. we didn't mark them in any way.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 What about Saturdays and Sundays?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Nothing special.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 You didn't go to church? The children didn't go to church?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No. no.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 You didn't wear different clothes, presumably?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 And presumably you don't think it's wrong to enjoy yourself on a Sunday?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Your children didn't go to Sunday School?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
No. Wait a minute. They did when they were young, for a bit.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you say Grace, or any sort of prayers?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 You told me you didn't take very much interest in politics?
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid1928298 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid4074283\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid4074283 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No. I mean, the t
ime came when we were deeply involved, you see, my wife's brother, John Strachey was Member for a long time, and a minister, so he was deeply ... and my wife was politically active, too, on his behalf, mostly.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you or your wife vote in a general election before 1919?
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid1928298 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
No, I don't think ... she was scarcely eligible because of age, you see, she was 21 then and you had to be ... and she only became of age as we were married. And I hadn't, I think, taken any part. And after that we've always voted.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Can you tell me what you voted for?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Labour.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 I}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298\charrsid8738534 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you or your wife ever feel under pressure to vote for a particular party?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Have you ever been a member of a political party?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
My wife's certainly a paid up member of the Labour Party. Quite active still.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 And she takes part in political activity even though it's not election time?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Oh, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
When you weren't working how did you spend your time? Did you go out in the evenings, and if so, where did you go?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Well, we saw
 our friends. We dined out and gave dinner parties. Went to the theatre. My wife for a long time was a theatre critic. We saw a lot of friends, in their houses or in our own.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you take any interest in sport or anything like that?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Less than none
. I was dragged, I remember, by ... who was it? Oh, Evelyn Waugh's brother, you know, Alec Waugh. He said, 'you must attend a soccer match. You don't know what your country's like without it'. He bought and gave me a cloth cap; he let me off a rattle and 
booked a front seat at a cup final, or something, and dragged me along. And I went. And in the same way I was dragged to the Derby and went to sleep during the actual race.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you ever go to pubs or anything like that? Clubs or pubs?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Never to pubs
, or hardly ever. I belonged to various social clubs, Guards Club, The Atheneum and Garrick, and so on, to a couple of night clubs but I didn't often go.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you keep any pets or do gardening, or collect things after you were married?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No. I had a 
darling little dog. In fact, two. One was when we had a fire here and I opened the door he was lying dead inside.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did your wife have interests outside the home? Obviously she did.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Oh, yes. Literary and political, particularly.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 If your wife was ever ill presumably the servants helped out and everything?
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 What about relatives living nearby?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 In London you mean?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes.
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid1928298 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 We had practically none living in London. Her parents had a very beautiful house for some of the time in Queen Anne's Gate.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Friends, did they come around to see you a lot?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Yes. Mostly by arrangement, you know, to dinner or whatever, drinks.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 And what about neighbours, did they call casually? Presumably they didn't.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Well, neighbours.... Somebod
y happening to live next door didn't necessarily mean you knew them at all.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Your home wasn't rented in London, was it?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
No, I bought it. And then bought Rumney's house.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Would you say that there was a difference in people's attitude towards clas
s in London than here? I mean a different one from here?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Oh, I should think so. Well, either ... I mean, here you know a lot of people slightly, and roughly who and what they are and, of course, in London everybody; except your own and definite friend
s who are of your own sort, are complete strangers. You don't know anything about them.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
There's just a couple of extra questions about people who went to boarding school. Was there anything particular about boarding school that you remember?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 I'm a
fraid I'm not clear as to what that question is.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Was there anything particular that you think is worth mentioning about life at boarding school?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
I was very lucky, I think, in my particular school because Sanderson as - you'll find there he was ver
y advanced in his views and regarded citizenship really as more important than scholarship, really. And really rather deprecated athleticism and competition. What he wanted was co-operation and so on and he was very ... well, what we would call very 'left
' in his views, and that came off on me to some extent.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 
\par I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Were you ever homesick, or did you feel resentful about being sent away to school?
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid1928298 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Not resentful. I expected it to be pretty beastly and so it was, to begin with, and I expected it to be beast
ly. It wasn't quite as beastly as I'd expected.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 A typical day at school, was it very different from a typical day at home?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Oh, yes, entirely. I mean, everything was regimented, you worked to a bell.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 And meals were good, or bad?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Very bewil
dering when you've never been to any sort of school before, not even a day school. And to be the only new boy, one felt very strange, indeed. It was in many ways a very good school indeed, and what I resented was these compulsory games. I was reasonably g
ood at them but they didn't interest me. I resented time wasted on games when I might have been exploring that lovely countryside around Northamptonshire.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 There's just one more thing, and that's about the jobs that your children did when they were adult.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Well, my eldest daughter, she was a natural artist and when she'd left Dartington, went back there as an art teacher. And then she was a painter, decorating things, did a certain amount of book illustration, and then got to decorating pottery. And t
hen with her husband Ewan Cooper-Willis started up and now runs the Portmeirion Pottery in Stoke-on-Trent. And the other daughter, she got a double first in biology at Oxford and then went on to Cambridge on an advanced course thing, where she met her hus
band who is also a biologist, a New Zealander, and she lives out in New Zealand and has five children of her own there. And she's carrying on now with ... she's a lecturer at the University there.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 What about your brothers' jobs what are they?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Well,
 my elder brother, he succeeded my father as Glasfryn. And then the second one was killed in South Africa, Boer War. And the third one, Martin, he ultimately ran the family slate quarries, Blaenau Ffestiniog, with the \{missing\}
 Quarries. He died about two 
years ago, and now his son runs them and he lives in Ireland, but Wern belongs to him now and he comes over. And then the youngest one, he was agricultural. He died about 15, 20 years ago I should think and now I'm the only survivor of the original six.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 What about your daughter's husbands? You mentioned the one in New Zealand.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid1928298 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
You know, he's the top biologist. Well, he's really the head of the Government Institute of Agriculture in New Zealand. That's their main industry, you see, and he's very muc
h tops in biology and agriculture and animal husbandry, and all that. And they've got, as I say, five children. One of them's just been staying with us. They've all been to stay here at one time or another.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2062548 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 And then there's your other daughter's husband.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2062548\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2062548 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
There are only the two; Susan, who's pottery and Charlotte who's New Zealand.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2062548 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 I was just wondering about Susan's husband.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2062548\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2062548 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Ewan Cooper-Willis?
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2062548 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes.
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid2062548 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2062548\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid2062548 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Well, he's an economist. He and our son, Christopher, who was killed, shared rooms 
at King's College Cambridge. And he's an economist, stockbroker, financier, that sort of thing. And, you know, Eton and King's College. Scholar, I think.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2062548 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 One of the things we left out was what magazines did your parents read, if any?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2062548\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2062548 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 The Paper, th
e daily paper they took was The Standard, which is long dead, and The Daily Graphic.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2062548 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 They didn't take any magazines, then?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2062548\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2062548 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
I suppose so, but probably over my head, you see, I didn't realise what they had. Probably most of those are dead now, Blackwoods, or whatever they were. I. can't recall any.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2062548 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 When you were at home as a child do you remember being read to aloud by your mother or father?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2062548\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2062548 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Oh, yes. Scott, mostly. Scott and Dickens, the sort of standard nourishment of the young in those days. And Water Babies, Kingley's, and Black Beauty which my mother illustrated. She was a very good artist and especially good at horses.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2062548 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did your parents ever read to each other?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2062548\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2062548 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
No. My father read tremendously the classics, I mean, you know, in Latin and Greek, and did Chess problems and astronomical mathematics, corresponded with various old dons on these subjects.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2062548 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 The other question was: do you have any idea why your mother was Conservative?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2062548\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2062548 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
I wouldn't have said she was... She was awfully non-political, really, like all her family. You see, there was a large ... she was one of 8, or 7, I think. Four girls and 3 boys. My uncle, John Graves of \{missing\}
 Dick Graves of Wern and Uncle Ned who had a Scottish property was left him by an uncle o
f his. And then Mrs. Hansard, Aunt Edie, who married one of the Parliamentary Report, Hansard's, who was rector of Bethnal Green. She didn't like that very much. And then Lady Smyth and Lady Williams, and my maiden Aunt Hilda who was delightful, lived at 
\{missing\}
, you know, Tremadoc, and did it up beautifully. Everything was sort of Recency. If you walked into a room there you might have been one of Jane Austen's characters and found it exactly as she would have expected it. You know, exactly the right fur
niture and pictures, and collected books about the period and so on and so forth. And none of them were political. Well, insofar as they were at\bullet 
all they were Conservative, because they were rather shocked as my uncle, Sir Osmond Williams who was ... his father had been the first ever Liberal Member for Merioneth and then he became the same and they rather looked down their noses at him.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2379911 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
The other thing was you suggested, when you answered the questions before that neither you or your family ever brought pressure to bear on people as to which way they should vote.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2379911\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2379911 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Certainly not.
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid2379911 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2379911 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 But apparently you seemed to suggest that you knew of people who did this, other families, maybe, in the area. Or do you know of any examples of this sort of thing?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2379911\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2379911 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Oh, well, yes, notoriously. Old Sir Hugh Ellis Nanny of \{missing\}
 who stood in opposition to Lloyd George and L.G. only got in by about 20 votes. And how truly I don't know, it was said that he evicted or threatened to evict tenants who didn't vote for him, which was common form.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2379911 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
This is why the people at Essex were interested in this, because they knew it was common form and wondered about this area.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2379911\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2379911 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
And was just becoming a scandal. I mean, had been accepted as normal practice heretofore. I mean, the tenant bloody well voted with his landlord, or out he went. And the same, probably with the household insofar as they had votes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2379911 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes, because it was before the secret ballot and everything?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2379911\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2379911 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2379911 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Do you ever remember anyone being described as a 'real lady' or 'a real gentleman'?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2379911\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2379911 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Oh, yes. As a compliment, certainly.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2379911 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Was it used towards your family ever, did you hear it being ...?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2379911\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid2379911 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Of course, one didn't hear so much of one's own family being discussed as other people. Of course, 
I think what they envisaged as a gentleman was rather different to what one would now. I mean it would be more his outward show and outward behaviour rather than his real nature.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 There was a practice that was fairly common in England in a community, if
 people wanted to show disapproval for the acts of certain individuals in that community they used to stand outside the door and play what was called 'rough music', which was sort of banging on tin cans and making a lot of noise and generally sort of maki
ng public the scandal that was supposed to be going on inside the house.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Ah, yes, well I never encountered that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 I haven't heard about it being done in this area at all.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 No. It's a nice idea, but \{
laughter\}.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes, 'cos they used to do it ..
. very respectable people, apparently, who ... I don't know, wife-beating or something was going on and they would go and make a lot of noise outside. The other thing that was forgotten I think was you said you had 5 brothers.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes.
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid15746018 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 And when we came to talk about what they all did, you know, all their occupations, we only discussed four of them. Could we run over what their occupations were?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Well, my elder brother, he did ... at Cambridge, engineering and that was the beginning of electrificati
on and various things and he, in partnership with a Cambridge friend set up engineering works, electrical switch gear, chiefly, that sort of thing. And it seemed alright and then the electrification boom rather died down a bit, and they were a young firm 
a
nd ... I don't know how well managed or not, I mean they were very enthusiastic and enterprising, but I don't think they knew much about the business, and after a few years the thing had shut up. So that was the end of that as far as he was concerned. And
 
then he did a bit more on that line as manager for a cousin, Trevor Williams, who was chairman of the gramophone company which became an immense and flourishing affair and he had, other interests ... other engineering interests. My brother was manager of 
o
ne of these for a bit and he got, I think, rather fed up with London, and he then took to agriculture and very much for agricultural co-operation. He was a great friend of Sir Horace Plunkett, you know, the Irish Co-Operative man, and of ... oh what's his
 name, of Aberystwyth? The great brass man. I'll remember in a minute probably. Oh, there were a whole group of them. He was very much in with that and ran ... started the \{missing\}
 Agricultural Co-Operative and that sort of thing, and was quite enterprising in his own farm. He grew tobacco which was not a great success \{laughter\}
 and he tried all sorts of things like that. He never made any money, in fact he lost and gave away quite a lot, you know, supporting these things. And my youngest brother, too. In 
fact, at one time they farmed together, they bought in a lot of farms at Glasfryn under one management, you see, this co-operative thing, and lost heavily on that. And then my eldest brother took up forestry and he was more successful at that and which hi
s
 son, Roger, at Glasfryn now, he turned into a very big thing. Until he recently got ill he was very successful. He won all the gold medals this last year for forestry, and so forth. And then Martin, who was next to me, he was engineering, too. And with t
h
e Thorneycroft Company in Cheshire, who made mining machinery and he was quite a good geologist too. And he was sent out by Thorneycroft to erect and supervise their machinery in South Africa, Johannesburg and he was out there for ... oh, I think about 8 
o
r 10 years as their South African representative. And indeed, until the First War when he joined up as a gunner, he ... in fact he'd been a volunteer gunner, territorial gunner. Stayed out there until after the War when my uncles, who were getting old, co
axed him back as manager to the \{missing\}
 Quarries, Blaenau Ffestiniog, where he continued and became ultimately chairman of the ... managing director, I think, and then chairman and so on, until he died. And then his son, John, is now the chairman and of c
ourse, the whole thing has dwindled tremendously. I think at one time they had about 500 employees there, or more, and was the biggest underground working in the world, and it's gradually gone down. You see the Welsh slate trade never really recovered fro
m the great Penrhyn strike which lasted for 3 years. It cast a very long shadow, and foreign slates came in and so on. And then Oakley, which was even bigger than the Quarry, it was shut up altogether.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 So we've had three of them. You've talked about three of your brothers, Martin, the eldest one ...
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Oh yes. Well, there was Richard, who died as a child. You see, my grandfather, who came from England, was an amateur geologist, keen mountaineer walker, that sort of thing and on one of his expeditions, 
pottering about with rock, thought he'd found a good spot up at Blaenau, good slate-making rock and ... The things I have left out of my autobiography, that I thought were interesting to put in. I was talking about my grandmother, my maternal grandmother.
 
"According to my mother, and his portraits, a fine large handsome man, very kind and popular with a prominent nose. He was a keen amateur geologist and on a prospecting ramble through North Wales, thought a spot he lighted on at Blaenau Ffestiniog looked 
p
romising for slate, arrange to lease the site, with a small gang of miners and set about his digging. For months they dug in vain and were on the point of giving up in despair, my grandfather's capital and credit having been almost entirely exhausted, whe
n
 they suddenly struck it rich and uncovered a vein of the very best slate-making rock. My grandfather's faithful and pious old foreman was so moved and impressed by this merciful tarn in their fortunes that he insisted that his master should, immediately 
k
neel down with him and thank God for their deliverance from disaster. Under my grandfather's expert and genial management the quarry flourished and ultimately became really big business, allowing him to indulge in his other non-geological interests, build
ing and hunting. At first he mostly hunted in Cheshire where he was much taken by the half timbered black and while old buildings in the area and unfortunately adopted that style for the two houses he built himself and his large family at \{missing\}
 close to
 his quarry and then, more romantically, at the entry to Aberglaslyn Gorge - what they call Aberglaslyn Hall, now. His lust for both hunting and building still upon him, he moved to Warwickshire there to install himself and his family and horses at Berryc
o
te on the edge of Leamington. No happier, architecturally, than his previous two Welsh houses, but with plenty of mis-applied fine craftsmanship lavished on elaborately carved armourial furniture that ultimately came to Glasfryn, until later dispersed els
e
where, but that there always seemed a little uncomfortable in its polished nouveau richness. Dying at Brighton at 75, he had kept up his hunting almost to the last, despite my grandmother's pleas that he should give it up. To show his continued fitness an
d
 absence of fatigue after a hard day he would sometimes place a couple of her drawing room chairs back to back and clear them in a running jump, still in his top boots. All his seven children had been born at Tanyran, William Maddocks," and so on, I go on
 
about William Maddocks, which I left out of the other thing.".... each. Christened in the church, every other such occasion being marked by the presentation of a new Welsh steeple hat to the nurse." Just why only every other, I don't know, except that he 
h
ad no idea how many children he might end up with and no doubt the development of the quarry still needed all the capital that he could find for it. He was always generous as well as careful and his steadily increasing wealth in no way changed him as a ma
n
, though it did enable him to leave all his children handsomely provided for, especially, of course, his sons who further developed the family quarries became rather grand three rich uncles, each large and handsome and remarkable in his own individual way
, and to me memorable. As to the daughters ... and so on. He rather liked the present Sir Osmond Williams, you know, whom we call Michael Baldwyn.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Could you say briefly about how much you think your governess influenced you?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Not much. The first one
, Miss Barker, who was a gentle, rather nice creature, we rather bullied. She suffered from what we now call migraine, sick headaches, and we always amongst ourselves called her The Carcase \{laughter\}
 and I think we were rather unkind to her because she wa
s very nice. And then she was succeeded by a very robust, bustling little person, Miss Skinner, who was a Newham graduate, a sort of female tutor, really, whose forte was mathematics which interested my father, really, more than it did us, and, I think, b
o
tany, but we didn't have any of that. And she was terribly jolly and rather like a sort of female boy scout, you know, and rather trying to join in our activities and show us the way. And I didn't much like her, really. She was too bustling and jolly and 
a
ll that, rather like a scout master. But well educated and ... I remember vowing at one time, she'd outraged me and I would never, never be friends with her, and it's about the only vow I ever made and kept. Though my mother liked her, and my father liked
 her because of her mathematics. Oh, she was a very ... perfectly good little person.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 I want to go on now and talk about the school, the boarding school.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 About Oundle?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Didn't I talk about Oundle last time?
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid15746018 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Yes. The only thing that they were very interested in, because it seemed to be a sort of atypical school.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Oh, it was.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Progressive?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Very progressive.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Well, they were interested in the comparison between that and what was a sort of typical school of the day. What was different about Oundle?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Well, I gave that, I think fairly clearly in that book. I mean, Sanderson ... In the end he admitted to being a near-communist and all along he was very ... sort of anti-privilege and very much set on what he called produci
ng a good general level rather than an intellectual aristocracy and a ruck of also-rans and he wanted to get a bulk output of good citizens, really, and very much for co-operation as against competition, and all that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 What about the day to day discipline within the school?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Well, as I said there. Outwardly he was a very sort of comfortably habited, quiet person but could either simulate or produce tremendous rages when he thought it politic. I think it was pumped up for a purpose and was ... quite f
requently administered beatings, of which I had my share.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did you have to wear uniforms at school?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Uniform? No. Well, one wore what might be called sort of infant version of City gents' outfit, you know, black coat and striped trousers and black t
ie and school cap. The school cap was compulsory in order that first of all you could be recognised in the town and elsewhere, but also to take it off to masters. A sign of submission.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 I think we could go on to talk about Cambridge now.
\par 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid15746018 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Well Cambridge, I avoided part I of the Little Go \{missing\}
 which was then a compulsory examination and by, I suppose, School Certificate, that sort of thing, but that didn't take in classics for the complete Little Go \{missing\} either had to pass in Paley's Evidenc
es of Christianity, which you've probably never heard of but anyhow was a great thing, or in Latin and Greek which, on the modern side in Oundle I had not done, and so my last school holiday was clouded by the necessity of mugging up Latin and Greek for t
h
is one silly examination. And my father was only too willing to tutor and so I spent a large part of my holiday working away at Latin and Greek and heartily disliking it, as I'd no interest apart from this examination, as it were, and didn't know how I'd 
d
one until I got a telegram from my tailor who lived opposite Senate House where the results were posted up on the door there, you see a telegram saying 'passed Little Go fourth class. Congratulations'. And my father I remember saying it was really rather 
h
umiliating because he'd won every possible prize and scholarship, both at school and Cambridge, tutor of his college, that I should be congratulated on a fourth class in the most elementary examination there was. But anyhow, then I was supposed to be read
i
ng Natural Science and under the best auspices, J. J. Thompson, a famous lecturer, and I forget who the others were - I was at Trinity - and ... But gradually my interest in science was more or less submerged by my growing interest, it had .always been th
e
re, in architecture and I would find my otherwise blank pages - I had notebooks at these lectures - being covered with architectural sketches, colonnades and triumphal arches, and whatnot, instead of with the appropriate notes of the particular lecture. A
n
d so I came to the conclusion after a year, after 3 terms, that I was really wasting my time and my father's money, and that I'd like to drop it all with a view somehow of reaching architecture. And it was then that I ... they said 'well, architecture is 
n
ot really a profession, it's a sort of poor job somewhere between the local art teacher and local auctioneer and surveyor. You make a living somehow and having done that then you can take up architecture as a hobby'. And the nearest route to any sort of a
ffluence seemed to me to go into engineering and join my brother's factory as a laboratory experimentalist, testing things, and so on.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
And then, as I said, when that showed signs of folding up owing to a slump, I removed myself as experimentalist to an
 electrical inventor, who was very able old boy, in Westminster, and was there for the best part of a year. And then I couldn't bear that any longer, it was a very fiddling sort of job, you know, testing new inventions. And I was shut up in a dark attic w
h
ere, you know, you had a reflector and the readings of your instruments were shown on a screen. And anyhow, I was longing for more exciting architecture than Victoria Street offered and I went down with 'flu quite badly and whilst I was away I plucked up 
s
ufficient courage ... when I was recovering, to write to him to say that I wasn't coming back. And I got a rather clinging letter back from him saying 'you mustn't desert me like that' and I knew that if I did go back he was a very nice old boy, very pers
u
asive - that I would probably be argued into staying against my instinct. And so I never went back, even to recover my Aquascutum and notebooks and all the rest of my stuff, for fear of being caught. And this was before I had any ... I didn't know anythin
g
 about architecture, really, I was no architect. I was only by looking up Architecture in the London Telephone book that I found a place called the Architectural Association School, that I made contact and went there a term. But then, by good luck and fam
i
ly jobbery I got one or two small jobs and started on them, which involved contractors and clients and suppliers, of this and that coming to see me at the school and I didn't do a ... Certain lectures I didn't want to miss and so I used to take in whoever
 
have come to see me into the, lecture and talk to them and take notes at the same time, which I thought the height of efficiency, to absorb and emit wisdom at the same time. But it was considered very subversive, and upsetting for the other students, whic
h
 was quite right, and so I was sent for by the principal and said, 'look here, you've, either got to give up using the school as your private office, or go'. I said, 'I quite agree with you, it must be very disturbing'. But I'd always understood it was a 
great hurdle to get your first job and as I seem to be launched I think I'd better stick to it. He said 'I think you're probably quite right.' I went off with his blessing, with just a few small jobs and I was so launched .
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 So you were only at Cambridge for a year, then?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Only a year, under Dr. Montague Butler, where his great nephew is now, Lord Butler.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 How were you taught at Cambridge? Did you have tutors as well as lecturers?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Oh, yes, you have your college tutor. He didn't do much. He was a classicist, mine was, Mr. Duff.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 How did people in general get on with the tutors? What sort of relationship was there between ... ?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Well, it was fairly slight. They didn't take much ... Of course, he was a classicist, anyhow, and he probably didn't really understand what I was doing, or much approve of it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Did You have any friends there who influenced you?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Oh, yes, quite a number. I think they're all dead long since. One character I saw a good deal of then, and in London afterwards, was
 the rather notorious Horace De Vere Cole, you know, who organised the Dreadnought Hoax and, you know, dug up part of Piccadilly, you know, fenced off, pretending to be council workers, and then left the police to sort out the traffic jam and remove these
 obstructions. He was doing all sorts of things like that. An amusing but rather embarrassing friend to have.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 What was the discipline like at Cambridge?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Well, it never impinged on me. I mean, it was all very reasonable, it seemed to me. You weren't
 allowed to be drunk and disorderly in the streets. You had to be in by a certain time, or else contrived to climb in, and I was a perfectly law-abiding undergraduate and I don't remember any scandals while I was up there, or important rows.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 How would you describe the other students there, what sort of people were they?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Well, they were, I suppose, almost exclusively from public schools. Trinity was largely furnished by Eton. I think I was the only Oundle boy there. It was then quite a minor public 
school, you see, it hadn't made its name. And certain colleges had their specialities, like Cains College was partly ... largely medical, Trinity Hall was law; Magdalen, which was a very small college, a very nice old college, you know, where ... it's got
 
the Pepys library and all that, and earlier that had been a sort of waste paper basket for rowdy young noblemen and such who were turned out of Trinity, and they went to and had a very jolly time at this little college down on the river. But now Benson, I
 
think, rather brought it up. That had its ... had been founded by the Braybrooks of Audley End, the great house, you know, near Saffron Walden, who were hereditary masters as part of their patrimony, but that was then reduced to the fact that they could n
o
minate the master, rather like the old thing of advowsons in the church, you know, you were patron of a living and you could choose the parson. And then they could choose the, master. And that still goes on to the extent that the present Lord Braybrook ha
s
 to ... or anyhow, is courteously asked to approve the appointment of a new master. But it is quite a serious intellectual place. Now, Lord Blackett was there and ... when he came out of the Navy. My father had been there at Cambridge, and my grandfather 
a
nd my great-grandfather. And my grandfather and great-grandfather used to ride up to Cambridge on Welsh ponies from here and return by coach and then go up the next day on another Welsh pony, which they'd sell in Cambridge, you see. Whether it was their o
wn particular bright and economical idea, I don't know, or whether it may have been fairly general, but that's what they did.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 Were there any women there when you were there?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
Oh, yes. In fact, my Godmother, Annie Clough, sister of the poet, was the 
first principal of Newnham, and then her niece was principal, Theena Clough, when I was up there, and so I used to go to Newnham a certain amount. And when she retired I thought 'well, that's the end of Newnham'. Not a bit of it, because Annabel's cousin,
 
Colonel Strachey, succeeded her as principal and so we were still persona grata at Newnham. There were relatively few, they were rather rare and ... I mean, there were far more of them, I think, who were purely academic, they weren't such a jolly lot of g
irls as they apparently are now. And you couldn't have them in your rooms, and that sort of thing. There was none of that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid15746018 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
I was just wondering how people, other students, male students, viewed educated women, because it wasn't really the thing for women to have too much education in those days, was it? How did you feel about that?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid423966\charrsid8738534 CW:}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid423966 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
I think at the time I felt it was rather unnecessary, and, you know, the view was - what was it? "Habishad the Ishmaelite, Shabby Hag the Newnhamite" \{laughter\}. They ten
ded to be rather swots, as they were called at school, and they weren't very alluring. Whether they had a special uniform or not I can't remember, I don't think so.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid917675 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid423966 I:\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 \f0\fs24\insrsid8738534\charrsid8738534 I think that's probably enough, thank you very much.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f0\fs24\insrsid917675\charrsid8738534 
\par }}