{\rtf1\adeflang1025\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\adeff0\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang2057\deflangfe2057{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}{\f38\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f39\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f41\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f42\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f43\fbidi \froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}
{\f44\fbidi \froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f45\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f46\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f48\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}
{\f49\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f51\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f52\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f53\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f54\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}
{\f55\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f56\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden 
Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs20 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}}
{\*\latentstyles\lsdstimax156\lsdlockeddef0}{\*\revtbl {Unknown;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid208450\rsid738345\rsid1009002\rsid2580133\rsid2714250\rsid3230341\rsid3499692\rsid3884354\rsid4603364\rsid6165473\rsid6255762\rsid10504500\rsid12200121\rsid16452464}{\*\generator Microsoft Wo
rd 11.0.0000;}{\info{\title Int 273}{\author PRASAD3}{\operator lhorto}{\creatim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min8}{\revtim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min8}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords36786}{\nofchars209681}{\nofcharsws245976}
{\vern24613}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 http://schemas.microsoft.com/office/word/2003/wordml}{\xmlns2 urn:schemas-microsoft-com:office:smarttags}}\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1800\margr1800\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0\ltrsect 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\donotembedsysfont0\donotembedlingdata0\grfdocevents0\validatexml1\showplaceholdtext0\ignoremixedcontent0\saveinvalidxml0\showxmlerrors1\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace180
\dgvspace180\dghorigin1800\dgvorigin1440\dghshow1\dgvshow1\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\splytwnine\ftnlytwnine\htmautsp\nolnhtadjtbl\useltbaln\alntblind\lytcalctblwd\lyttblrtgr\lnbrkrule\nojkernpunct\rsidroot738345 \fet0
{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}\ilfomacatclnup0\ltrpar \sectd \ltrsect\linex0\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ltrpar
\ql \fi-461\li461\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid3230341 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\ul\insrsid3230341\charrsid16072257 Information about interviewee}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid3230341 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid3230341\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\ql \fi-461\li461\ri0\widctlpar\tx2057\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid3230341 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid3230341\charrsid16072257 Date of birth}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid3230341    \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid3230341\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid3230341  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1009002 1891}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid3230341\charrsid16072257 
\par Gender}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid3230341           \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid3230341\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid3230341  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1009002 F}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid3230341 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid3230341\charrsid16072257 Marital status}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid3230341 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid3230341\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid3230341  
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1009002 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid3230341\charrsid16544153 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid3230341\charrsid16072257 Occupation}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid3230341 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid3230341\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid3230341  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1009002 Housework}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid3230341\charrsid16072257 
\par Geographic region}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid3230341 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid3230341\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid3230341  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1009002 
Keighley, Yorkshire}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid3230341\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\qj \fi-461\li461\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid3230341 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Can you remember the house where you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. I was born in Water Lane. R
otherham. And there was only about four houses. I can't tell you number like. It was on the water - on the canal side, you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How many years did you live there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh - well I was born there you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you live there until you were married or did you move?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
I don't remember moving from there from me being a girl, big girl you know. I weren't married, no. And then I got married. I got married in Rotherham.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When you got married were your parents still living at Water Lane?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, I lived in Beryl Street when I got married. Yes. Westgate, Rotherham.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do you remember how old you would be when you moved from Water Lane to Beryl Street? Was it while you were at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes, 'cos I went - we was going to the school from th
ere, I went to Alma Road Board School in Rotherham, and me husband went to the same school and that's where I got to know him, got associated with one another you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Can you remember about how old you would be when you moved from Water Lane to Beryl Street?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Well - I was eighteen when I was married out of Beryl Street. I should be around about - as near as I can tell you about fifteen. And I got married there, at me mother's you see, at bottom of Beryl Street.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do you remember why your parents moved from Water Lane to Beryl Street?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I don't remember 'em moving. Only from - Water Lane to Beryl Street.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do you remember why they moved?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well it was a bigger house. You see. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6165473\charrsid12200121 
This was very small at Waterside, and this one was three bedroom house, it was a new one. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
That was on the river - the canal side. And mother moved right into other one, but she stayed there and me dad died - while he died. Then I got courting - my - my husband and then we got married you see. Register Office at Rotherham.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How many brothers and sisters did you have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Well as far as I know, I had three brothers older than me. And I'd one sister, I think - I think she is living. I can't be sure but I've only seen her twice since I've come to Keighley, and t
hat's forty odd years. But she's been bedridden for a long while. And her daughter lives at Wyeth on Durn and - I keep trying to mention it, you know, I forget you know, I get talking I forget, but I don't think there's anything happened to her. But - she
'
s a daughter and she's a son and - me daughter was - I don't know whether - well it's just outskirts - outskirts of Mexwell where I come from, and I don't there's anything happened to her 'cos I think my daughter'd let me known. I had three brothers and t
wo sisters.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you have any brothers or sisters younger than yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh no, the three brothers were all - brothers were I - me mother had seven boys }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6165473\charrsid12200121 after}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  she'd me. She had eleven. And she'd seven boys afore me. Well the three - there was thre
e of them, one were called - me oldest brother we call him Frederick, we used to call him Fred and then there were Joseph, and then there were Thomas. And then I come next and me sisters next, our Elizabeth. And then there were twins, she had twins at cha
n
ge of life and they both - one lived to be nine month old and the other lived to be fifteen month old. They both died, yes. And there was - before me oldest brother's what's - what was living like - she actually - beside him but they're dead, they died yo
ung, right young - I don't - I don't remember a lot about them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Your mother never told you what they died from?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well - there was one - and our Fred, he was vaccinated but - him - him that died - oldest one - and he died through vaccination. Vacci
nation - you do it - do it after anyone, not like they do now, and used to be four big marks on your arm, I have four. Well - when he were - wasn't much in our William and him, I remember we used to have one of them old fashioned - old fashioned house she
 
lived in and she'd one of them all round - what they call it, with three - three legs on 'em. They put 'em up chimney, on a hook. Like a - a - like a - forget what they call it, like a saucepan you know, it would go up chimney and - you know boil your wat
e
r up. That's right. And - and - of course there were not like there is now then. Well, she took this pan right down - what she's told me like - that he took it - she took it right down to bottom of garden so he wouldn't get scalded. There was something in
 
she wanted. So our Willie, we used to call him Willie - called him William but called him Willie for short, he goes down to play gown bottom of garden and he fell with his - bottom - backside right into pan. Well - oh it pulled the skin up, Willie died sh
ock of it. And that's all I remember then. I can remember my brother dying, my oldest brother dying, I was only a girl.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 That was Fred was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. And he - he was vaccinated after somebody else, I was going to tell you, after somebody else. Well
 that caused him to have epileptic fits. Yes it did. I can remember that as if it were now. And used to have a - he used to have fits up in street, he couldn't work. But they had centres, you understand. And - where have we got now? Oh that was in Rotherh
a
m. And - Mrs Richardson, what laid 'em and washed him out - she put him on a table, they had him on his feet, they never come out of door. And she said, oh he's dead Mrs Burton. So she said, oh he never is. She said, oh he is, I'll have to wash and lay hi
m
 out. Wash and lay him, put him under window. So - me mother won't go to bed that night and I won't go to bed without her, they called me after me mother. And me dad kept shouting down, come on lass, come to bed, he said, it's late, it's twelve o'clock. S
he said, it isn't twelve o'clock. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6165473\charrsid12200121 
She says, go on, we're all right, me and our Alice is all right - and I weren't very old - I can remember it a lot, and - he said, well come on then, he said, you can't make no better on it. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 He said, he's dead and he's gone
. So our - our Bessie says - me mother says, I'll come when that clock strikes twelve, the old parish church in Rotherham, and she did and I did, I stuck with her. Well all at once that - that church bell, we could hear it, all silent at night you know, }
{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3884354\charrsid12200121 quiet,}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
 well we didn't live like over long way off it, and - all at once - the sheet - sheet move. And - went like that, and he lowered himself up and sat onto table. Oh I couldn't tell you about a shock we got. And me mother says, oh Alice, she says, look at
 our Fred. Oh, she said, look at him, he's come to life, he's not been dead. So I said, never mind mother, I said, he'll be all right. So she gets up, goes to him and she gets a blanket and puts blanket round him, wraps him up, sits him on her knee in the
 
rocking chair, they were rocking chairs them days you know, and she were rocking him. Well I was sit there - I was stuck to chair, I couldn't move. So I shouts, dad, come on down, I says, look sharp. He said, I've tell you to come to bed. He couldn't real
i
ze it you know. I said, will you come down? He said - oh - Good God, he said, whatever's the matter with you? She said it's our Fred, he's come to life, look. Well he'd been wasted twenty-four hours, yes. So, she says - mother says to him, go and fetch Mr
s Richardson what laid him out, you know who it is the top road. And - 'course I weren't married like, I was a young - and - she said - oh he went for her and she come back and she }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6165473\charrsid12200121 wait}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 , what's the matter Mrs Burton? Oh, she says, look here Mrs Richardson s
he said, me little lad's come back to life. Well she was took - she didn't know what - what to think. So she says to me dad says, get ready George, she said, and go and fetch doctor. Well he whipped }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6165473\charrsid12200121 up }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 and put his clothes and that on, he comes down the sta
irs, now, he says, I'll go for Doctor - Doctor Corrison. So - anyway - so - me - me mother says to Mrs Richardson, stop with me a bit won't you? She said, oh I will, I won't leave you - while doctor's been. So he went for doctor, doctor brought him back i
n
 his car with being late at night you know to come back, and when he came in - oh I've never seen a doctor turn his face - turn it - I couldn't tell you what he looked like. So - anyway - took blanket off him and examined him, so he say - you're - and a r
i
ght beautiful lad he was - so he says - well, she says, I'm a doctor, he said, I've been to some cases, but - he said, I've never seen a - never seen a thing like this. And he'd been in a trance twenty-four hours. His head was cold and everything. Well he
 
says, I can't - I'll never forget this, he said, no and I won't doctor. I says, I know it upset me and me mother. He said, well it will do. He said - I know it's upset me, he says. But anyway, he says, I'll - I've something too special on, I'll come back.
 
So he came back and he brought us some to stuff to take. Now keep him wrapped up warm, says the - and do what you can for him, he said, and he'll go on all right. It's a - it's a - what they call a - a - he was in a trance for twenty-four hours. And when 
he went in his fit}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3884354\charrsid12200121 ,}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
 he said our Father which art in heaven, he said his prayer. And he always used to say that before he went in 'em, that's why we used to know he was going in his fit you see. Eeh and he were a strapping big young fellow.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did he live then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
He - oh he lived to be twenty-four. He died when he were twenty-four years old. And - it was - it used to - sometimes he - it used to vary, you know, and I could tell, and I used to sleep with him. In me mother's room and me father's room. The
re's only mum - me as he would take to or me mum, and when he were going in 'em he used to get hold of your hand like that, squeezing, Our Father which art in heaven and then drop off. And I could tell in a minute. And then we always used to keep a little
 
glimmer on the gas jet, they were gas jets then, purpose for him so we could watch him. So I said, ooh mum, go to our Fred, I says, I can't loosen me hand. So she says - wait a minute. She got out of bed and - dad got out of bed. So - she says, now Fred, 
come on, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6165473\charrsid12200121 there\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
 a good lad. Come on, she says, you'll get better. Come on, she said to him. All at once he went. And that there lad's hand were on my wrist when he died - when - well, near on it practically. It had when he started be right poorly and I jus
t - you know - I couldn't get me wrist away. That's when he died that. About twenty-four when he died.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How old was he when you thought he died the first time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh no - he died - he were twenty-four when he were died. Only very young when - he had
'em from being vaccinated you see - that started the fits coming on him. I can't - I couldn't very well tell you how old he were }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3884354\charrsid12200121 then}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  - he - he weren't - weren't very - a bit older than me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Just a little boy was he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, he was a boy, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So eventually there were five children who grew up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Five of us living. That's right. There were three brothers and - and two sisters. The sister were youngest and our George older, he were the oldest. But Joe - there were Joseph, George and Thomas in boys. And me sister called Elizabeth. }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6165473\charrsid12200121 Called}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  me Alice Mary after me mother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 It's Elizabeth who's still alive?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes, I've never heard anything. But I will get to know - me daughter'll be coming to see me some time and I will - I'll write on a
 bit of paper and I'll look - 'cos you talk about one thing and another and you forget don't you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do you know how much older than you your brothers were, was there a year or two years between all of you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, I think it was round about that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 There wasn't much difference?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 My - my sister - she's youngest and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6165473\charrsid12200121 she\rquote ll}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  be round about seventy-eight. It's in between two year and a half between us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How much is Tom older than you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 That's the youngest. He's they youngest one, yes. About two and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3884354\charrsid12200121 half}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  years between us, all - all of us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So Tom would be about seventy-six now would he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Who? Oh no, he was older than me. The boys were older than me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So he would be about eighty-two now?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Round two or three, about that, yes love.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 And Joe will be about eighty-four?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 That's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 And Fred would have been about eighty-six?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Would be about eighty-six. Near as I can tell you. I know there wasn't much in us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do you know how old your father would be when you were born, have you any idea?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Well me father had just turned seventy-when he died. He always said he wanted to live 'til old age pension and that was seven - it was seven and six was it or ten shilling, seven and sixpence then, he always said, I d
on't care, he said, I can go, he said, I would love to see old age pension. And he did live - live 'til - just a bit after it, he were died seventy.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How old were you when he died?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well he died in my arms. I was living in M}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6165473\charrsid12200121 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 xworth, I was married 
then. And I went over to see him, well they sent for me, and - the woman that washed and laid him out said, there's one person he wants to see Mrs Burton. She said, who's that? Said, Alice. She's at Mexworth, she said, and don't I know. She says, 'cos he'
l
l not get - but he'd dropsy, all his legs - water running out of his legs, he had to be propped up at side of bed. And - that's him that worked at steel - he worked at steel place. We've all been workers, we've all been a family that worked. And - they co
m
e for me, me sister come for me 'cos she were at home then and she says, you want to come and see me dad Alice, she says, as I've been - mum's sent me for you, said they don't think he'll get better. So I - my boss said, what's the matter? 'Cos of being d
e
af he couldn't hear what she was saying you see. I says, she wants me to go and see me dad, she says it's all over with him. He said, well get there coat on and your hat, get hold of this he said and go and see him. So I come straight away back with her. 
W
ell when I went in - 'cos I - I'd children steps and stairs you know what I mean, somebody stopped and they looked after 'em for me and - when I went to this I stood at side of bed, packed up with pillows and and a bed rest, a bath here put his feet in. O
h
 - I said, mother, I said, what you send for me for now. Well, she said, I didn't like Alice, I don't, 'cos you've all them little kiddies and you've enough on your plate without - tearing around. Well I should have been worse if you hadn't have sent for 
me before he died. So anyway - he - I put me arms round him and he cocked his head up and I said, hello dad. Any better? He shook his head like that, he says, he }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3884354\charrsid12200121 wanted}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  a smoke. Said - so I said - what is the matter, is it his legs mother? She says, yes las
s it is. Doctor says he can't get better, so Mrs Marriot asked me to send for you as the only one turned - being so far - I was seven mile away. And - she sent word back to say would I go and - would I - would me mother go and send for us. So I come back.
 
And - I was sat - sat there and look at him 'til he put his head back like that. And he - he eventually wanted a smoke. So I got hold of his pipe and I lit his pipe for him but he couldn't puff it, it - I put it in - right to his lips, he just went - thre
e times. And he's kicked - kicked the bath nearly over, he'd gone in me arms. Couldn't shift behind back of chair a little bit. And it's all over. Well I seen right when he was in his coffin. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do you know how old you would be then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well I wou
ld - wait a minute I'll tell you - had our Annie, our Elsie, I had four - I four me - four children. How old was I then? Well our Betty's youngest and she's forty-three. She's the youngest - youngest girl.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 And she wasn't born then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. My Annie
 were born and me boy were born, and he's about - me eldest - eldest what's living, she's about fifty-four. And there's our Nellie she's - fifty-two. And then there's our Alice comes in between. 'Cos there's only fourteen months in them two. You'll know h
ow old Alice is then won't you? Well I'd them - I had them four and then I had the others - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So the one who would have been the youngest at that time would now be about fifty-two?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh no, she's forty-three the youngest.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 But the one who would be the youngest when your father died?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Oh - just a - just - wait a - I'll just study. There were Annie, Elsie, Nellie - and Alice. I took them to Mexborough. Our Alice was the youngest then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How old would she be now?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 She's - she's about - as near as I can tell you she's about forty-eight.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So it's about forty-eight years ago that your father died?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well it will be 'cos I've been here forty years.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So would it be about 1923 when he died?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well I know -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Would it be about five years after the first world war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Our Alice - the fourth oldest, she was two year and a half when her dad come home from soldiering. That's Alice, that's the - youngest in the four }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6165473\charrsid12200121 oldest}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 , understand, 'cos Elsie's t'oldest now, then there's our Ellen and - and then there's - no, wait a minute - there's Elsie, Ellen - and then Alice.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well if Alice was two when her grandfather died that would make it about 1925?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well it were in first world war. The war. It must have been because I c
an remember him coming home to see me when he come over on leave, when he come home, and our Elsie were - on't table with me mother like and she were hanging clothes up with bootlaces, he didn't seen her, well you see t'other - our Nellie come afore then.
 Our Nellie's the oldest in them two. There's fourteen month in them two. And then there were - our Elsie and then the oldest that died. My oldest is Elsie now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Your father was seventy when he died?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 He were about seventy - nearly seventy when he died.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do you think he would be about thirty-five when you were born, was it during the '14 - '18 war that he died from dropsy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh he'd been dead a long while. Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 He was seventy when he died?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 And they'd had about six children before you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 It'd be about I think - beg pardon? I - no, not afore they had me. Me mother you mean? No, she had three. Wait a minute.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 But she had three that died?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 She - the first three, well they died. And then comes - our Fred. Th
ere were Willie, I don't remember the two 'cos I was only a girl then, not very old. There was our Willie and there was t'other two, then our Fred, Frederick he come the oldest of all three boys. And then there were George and then there were Thomas, then
 - me mother had four girls. She had seven boys but the youngest, in the first beginning having children, she buried them you see. She buried them others.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So when they had you they'd been married quite a few years?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes, yes. Well I married when I was eighteen so I'll leave you to guess.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So they must have been in their thirties when you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh - no - yes, round about - that'd do I think. As near as I can tell you it is.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Where did he come from, your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Now I coul
dn't tell you but Rotherham man. But me mother come from Worcester. Yes, she were a Worcestershire woman, he were a - he was a Rotherham man. As far as I'm concerned, I never hear mention owt like - about affairs like.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What was his occupation, do you know?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Well - the whole four, no, three, our Joseph, our Fred - our - George and our - they all worked at Steel Peach and Tozers, in steel trade, they were in steel trade, and me dad were. Well I worked in same place where he used to work at. I were t
ipping rings for shells in 1918. Night work. When they bombed Sheffield. I can remember all that. Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Your father worked at Steel Peach and Tozers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, he did, they all - they all worked there - there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did your father always work there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, he never worked at pit. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 He worked there from being a boy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. Yes. As far as I'm concerned he did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do you know what he did in the steelworks?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well like a labourer. Down in this 'ere kind of a lift. It's underground somewhere, just a labourer.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did he ever do any casual or part time jobs in addition to his own work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. No. I never knew. He always worked at foundry, I think.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do you remember your father ever being out of work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. No, but poor wages then. Mother only got half a sovereign of him every week. Golden sovereign - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6165473\charrsid12200121 had}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  a sovereign. Yes, every week. Never got any more. I never had a big wage off my husband.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 She brought five children up on half a sovereign a week.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 She did. Yes. But m
ind you, she were in a biggish house and she used to have men lodgers. Now she - she would - do all for 'em - but keep 'em, she'd fetch what they wanted and she'd cook it and she used to wash for 'em, but she couldn't run a - she got getting older you kno
w, she were eighty-two when she died, and she was just always the same, you never see'd her no different. And they stuck wi' her for years. They did, they thought world - thought the world of my mother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 They were bachelors who lived with her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh 
- do you mean - oh yes. One come from Birmingham. And then a lodger, he were lame, used to go away - with crutches - used to do for soldiers in war time, 1918, he used to go and clean the potatoes and suchlike, do a bit of job like that, bit of spending m
oney you know, and he were good to mother. He were very good to mother, fetching like her coal up and - little bit of jobs like that what were - '}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6165473\charrsid12200121 cos}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  she neither drank nor smoked and she could save. She could.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do you know how old your mother was when you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
When I were born? No, but I got a pram and first time I went out in it I fell out of it. Me brother took me for a walk and - me dad says, if it's a girl, he said, I'll buy her a pram. I never forget it, I think of all them little ditti
es, I can't - and - he said, if it's a little girl, he said, I'll buy her a pram. So I was a little lass, mother'd seven lads afore she'd me. So anyway, it were then be a - with two handles on, one at each side you know, like a twin carrying pram, it stoo
d up like that with big wheels, you know, old fashioned style. Well Joseph, he took me out, oh they were itching to get me out, me mother tell me all this, she said, now Joe goes that way, he says I'm going to bring her back. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6165473\charrsid12200121 She said, don't let nowt happen
 to her, she said, her dad'll kill me. So anyway - he took me out, he took on Camphill Road, and - me sister lived on there, she used to work at a brewery, well I worked at a brewery and all - in me time, and - he took me out and he got nearly to road end
 - and he }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3884354\charrsid12200121 t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6165473\charrsid12200121 
ried to get me down this - bit of a step like cross the edge, he gets me down, poor old Alice come wobbling out. So what me mother tell me, somebody pick me up and put me in me pram and he asked him where I lived. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Said - she lives - we live down 
Water Lane, lives down Water Lane where I were born, so anyway, they pushed pram up to top of lane, her said, you could go steady down there now and don't upset her again. She's all right. So }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6165473\charrsid12200121 he}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  had - he had to tell me mother, so when he got home he says, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6165473\charrsid12200121 Mam}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
, I've had baby out of pram. She says, what you been doing? He said, I catch on across side. He weren't very old but he - could tell tales you know. So anyway she says, didn't I tell you? And me dad comes, what's he been doing now? That's as he talked t
o him. He says, I'll not do it no more dad, he says, he says, I couldn't help it, he says, the wheel twisted onto cross he said, and she come out and a lady picked her up and brought me to top of lane. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6165473\charrsid12200121 He said - he says, I'll kill you - he says. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I'm not going to take her out no more, I get scolded over it. I've laughed many an hour about that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Your mother came from Worcester?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Worcester, yes. She were a chain maker. Yes, she used to work with her own father A chain mill. Chain miller. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6165473\charrsid12200121 Chain}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 A small mill?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Big - well, a biggish 'un. Yes. She come off well to do parents.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 She worked in the mill with him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, she used to carry a board and this 'ere - stuff on her head. On top of her head, yes, it were right }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6165473\charrsid12200121 soft}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 . She used to have to carry what they call }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6165473\charrsid12200121 a hod}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
. Like a bricklayer. Yes. And she used to - go up these steps to kiln, to big chimney you know, and there's a bung hole where you put 'em through and there's a man inside and puts - stacks 'em all up to dry, you see. Well she
 made them, she - all her life she were a chain maker. Well up to her - getting wed.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 She made chains?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Chains, yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 She did that until she was married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, done it ever since she were a girl.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did she do any jobs after she was married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh no. She only more or less had like a boarding house you see. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 She never did any part time jobs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh no, not that I know anything -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You don't know how old she would be when you were born do you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No I don't - I don't know how old. How old what - I was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How old your mother was when she had you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I couldn't tell you, she - she'd had three boys - she'd all them boys - seven boys - before me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So she must have been in her thirties when she had you mustn't she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Round about twenty-eight - or something like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You say she was going through the change when she had those twins?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. And the doctor said she'd had them twins at change of life.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 And you were a few years old then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. I was only a bit of a girl like you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Could you tell me how many rooms there were in the house at Beryl Street?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, there was - sitting room, living room, off - off kitchen and a - three bed - was there three or was there four - four bedr
ooms. Yes, well like - one made into a bedroom. Three biggish bedrooms. There was two at back and one at the front. And then at side - facing the river, it were like a - a box affair. Like a - put a good bed in and - table and things. Well an old gentlema
n used to sleep in there when mother - room like, him that had the sticks, 'cos he - with getting up and down you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3884354\charrsid12200121  upstairs}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  you had three big bedrooms and a little bedroom?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 And down stairs you had a sitting room?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Had a sitting room and a - a biggish kitchen - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Was it a kitchen-cum-dinning room?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. It was a - it was a - no one - practically - well nobody else had lived in it. It was new property - house.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you have a kitchen and a dining room?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 It was cellar kitchen downstairs. With a - to hang us washing out in like a back yard.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You used to have about three lodgers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did your mother ever pay anyone to help in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. Never, no. We had to do that as we got older.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Was the washing done at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. Did all us work at home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did your mother or father mend or make the family's clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Clothes? No. They used to keep theirself in that. All as they had was a breakfast. That - that - she used to give 
bed and breakfast, that's all. Used to buy their own - she used to wash for them, their shirts and like. But didn't keep 'em, she never kept 'em.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 But did your mother used to make your clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. She bought me me clothes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did she used to mend them for you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes. Oh if you got a little hole she'd put a patch on. She - she wouldn't destroy nothing like. Very careful.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you hand your clothes down from one to the other?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh - yes, yes, if they were too little for me pass 'e
m over to my - sister. Well it were just same with boys you see 'cos some of 'em were like our Fred - our Joseph, he were stiff - you know, and next - next to my George, well he died in several - in }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6165473\charrsid12200121 sanatorium}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6165473\charrsid12200121 sanatorium}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
. You know, what they call a bit - went queer, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6165473\charrsid12200121 courting}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
 a young girl, she - he courted her twelve year, and she went away down into Somerset where - on munitions. Somebody telled him next morning she'd died, he went mad, he - oh - couldn't hardly walk, nerves and all the lot went. He was s
ix - over six foot. He come up with mother's shoes on - pair of mother's shoes. A lovely lad, never drank nor nowt. I've got some good - had some good family altogether, we've all - always kept ourselves together, understand.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So your mother would buy new clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 But when they got a bit too small for you your sister would have them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 We had to - we had to do that you know what I mean.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Were you ever given secondhand clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Secondhand clothes? Not as I know on, n
o. Well her's bought 'em. If there's been a good thing she - I'll buy that, you see what I mean, because we couldn't afford to - 'cos me dad only give her ten shilling a week. I told you about half a sovereign. That's all she got and she never got ha'port
h
 more, but made her - the reason, that's why she had to have somebody to help her, the lodger you see, well it used to help her with her rent and her coal and - 'cos it were like - well he'd bring his wages but the wages were practically were nothing then
 you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Do you remember where your mother used to buy your clothes, was there a particular shop that you used to go to buy new dressed and coats and things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well more or less - for boys she used to go to pawn shop. A pawnshop like, they called
 it Whiskers, 'cos they used to sell suits and secondhand suits, they'd been pawned and good suits been - held up and she's had to buy 'em like that you see, for being cheap. But as for me I couldn't tell you what did for me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You don't remember her going to the pawnshop for your dresses or coats or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh no. No. I don't remember, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you used to get new shoes or would they be secondhand?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well tell you the truth used to be glad of anybody giving us a pair then. Yes. Yes. And
 me mother were one of these sorts of you know, she never bothered with anybody, with neighbours, she always kept herself to herself. She weren't - you know - no, she wasn't like - she never went in nobody's house, she wouldn't go in telling tales like an
d
 suchlike that. She never made a - a practice of doing that. And she always used to say, and you won't, and I never did. I says, I won't mother don't you worry. She says, no, she says, you won't want to do. She didn't believe in 'cos she said there's some
body catching out, their calling somebody, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When your shoes became worn would your father repair them for you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Me brother used to do. Me brother Joe, he'd - 'cos me dad were bad with his eyes and all and he used, to, let's look at the sh
oes Alice, do they want mending. And we used to have this foot with two, you know. Come on, take 'em off, I'll mend 'em for }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3884354\charrsid12200121 thee}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 . Oh he was very good our Joe as a lad. They all were good to me mother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 In Rotherham did people have shoes just for weekends and wear clogs in the week?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You never had clogs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
No. Only had clogs when I worked at mill here. I bought a secondhand pair of clogs. Well they were nearly new like and they got too little for her so she says would I have them. So
 I give her something - I just forget what I give her, I said, no I don't want 'em given us, I said, I'll give you something as you wont throw them away.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did your father help your mother with any of the jobs in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. The boys have to do that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You can never remember your father doing any cleaning?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What about cooking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, not - boil some water make himself a drink.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Would he do any washing up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, he never did no housework.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did he make fires for her in the morning before he went to work?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. I don't remember him making a fire.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did he ever do any decorating in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Or repairs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I used to decorate. I can paper wi' anybody. Well I used to help me mother like, used t
o help with odd bits of things like. All me daughters can paper their own home. Never have a decorator in. Paint and lot.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When any repairs needed doing to the house would your father do them? If a handle was coming off a door or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh he might do anything like that. If it were like easy job to do as what he could do he would do.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 But he wouldn't do any improvements, would he ever do anything to improve the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh if he thought he could get it right he would do. Oh he'd have a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6165473\charrsid12200121 try}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 . Yes, oh aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Can you ever remember your father helping look after you when you were children by dressing you or undressing you or bathing you or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did he ever read to you or tell you stories?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. No, just on his own.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did he ever take you out without your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, mother'd take me out but not him. He just used to sit around you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did he ever look after you when she was out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 If she were poorly or anything like that - like - she were
 off colour like he'd say, now - don't go in there, your mother's poorly, not well. She went like that you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Would he ever let her go out and take over, would he ever say, I'll look after the children and you go out?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh well she - she were never one to going out. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6165473\charrsid12200121 
I never known her to have been at pictures - well - silent pictures and all suchlike as that - theatre - never known my mother to go in a music hall, all the time I can remember being a mother. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 She never went out - she worked in her
 own home and she never bothered wi' a neighbour. Speak to 'em, she'd do owt for 'em, but she never made a practice of being neighbours. 'Cos they weren't neighbours them days - art of 'em - part of 'em wasn't. I told you after she got married she keep he
rself to herself and she did do, and she made us do the same. She didn't make us, but she said she didn't believe in it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You told me you had jobs to do in the house even when you were a little girl?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh I used to wash pots up and - and this brothe
r fetch coal in, we all used to help me mother. And making the beds and all like that. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What were your jobs, washing up and making beds, did you have anything else you had to do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, if you see like as bits - of job wants doing - I - I'll do
 that for your mother. You know, we'd go and say, can I do that mother? If she wasn't you know - getting bits of things out way. My husband - back of my cupboard when I lived over in grow, I - had all girls at home you know, only just married - and he got
 
hold of paint one day - I asked Annie it were to wash up. But her forgot. He get's cupboard door wide open, gets a piece of chalk inside, and he put - Elsie so - such a day. Alice such a day. And he fetched coal up, that only lad I had, he had to run erra
n
ds, all - all wrote down, now he says, you'll not fall out next time, look behind that cupboard, he says, it shows you what you've got to do. Your mother's here on her own. She's cooking and doing for all lot of us, there's seven on us, he says, and being
 out, he says, and she's out looking for }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3884354\charrsid12200121 Jo}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
ck, not locked, I didn't - to go shopping all over. And then he'd say, no falling out, there's your job there. Oh he's strict with 'em. Very strict with 'em.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When you left school and started going to work did you still have to help your mother at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh aye, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did your brothers and sister also have to help as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Aye. You'd a job to do at home, yes. Because she'd a lot on you know with men you know, cooking and doing for 'em, they brough
t their stuff and whatnot in, she had to do to make ends meet.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did your elder brothers help the little ones?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 My sister - was only young girl, a bit older, but I can remember her - and that were when we lived down Beryl Street at Mexborough. And 
- no, it wasn't - yes, it were down Beryl - no - Beryl Street at Rotherham, and she weren't very old and she laid thirteen months on her back. She'd typhoid fever. And - she were laid under mother's window - under window like - and she were laid there for
 
thirteen month, and they had feather pillows under her. This is me sister what's living now. Bedridden, and she laid there thirteen months and - we daren't put - tell you the truth we daren't hardly move her, she was like a bag of bones. But them days the
y
 never took 'em away. At hospital, kept 'em at home. Well she laid under window. And she developed pneumonia. There were both of us, I got typhoid at same time. Yes, I had typhoid - no I hadn't, but I had pneumonia. She developed that. We both got it toge
ther, but she were worse than me. And just - she looked like a doll. I never forget that, no. And mother sat up night and day, lads like with her, taking their time with her.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 The boys took their turn?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, to sit up with me dad.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 They all took turns?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. And then we had to have a boil - a steamy kettle, window open }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6165473\charrsid12200121 for}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  u}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6165473\charrsid12200121 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
 to get us breath. Eeh and we had a do that time, I can remember that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do you think this is why you have your bronchial now?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 My bronchial come when I first 
come to Keighley. I developed it then, yes. You see, where we come from - there were no - practically no smoke, no - nor no mills nor nothing like that. As soon as I come here there's all these chimneys going and that - and that's what caused this. }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6165473\charrsid12200121 Sometimes it's worse than others, but doctor's attitude there's no cure for it. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
He says you can get ease, but it turns into asthma. Sometimes I think mine will do and all because - I get sometimes right out of wind, you see, I'm frightened to death - I'm not frightened but sometimes just caches me you know, when I'm walking to shop.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When you were children were you expected to go to bed at a certain time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes. About half past seven at night. Never up - never up late. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did your mother or anyone else put you to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well sometime me mother used to but of course we were getting on we could put ourselves to bed, you know, we used to go to bed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How old would you be when you started putting yourself to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh about - seven year old, something like that - between that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When you were at Beryl Street did you share your bedroom with anyone?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes, with me sister. Me and me sister sleep in a room to ourself. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you have a double bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, we had a bed - a little single bed a piece.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How did the whole family sleep, did the brothers have a room of their own?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, they had a room - of their own, and me and me sister had a little room of us own.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 And your mother and father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Where did the lodgers sleep?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Well - there was - three brothers in one room, me mother and father another room, and the biggest room, that was over 't' - over dining - not dining room - kitchen, in the front - I call them front rooms you know. Well the lodg
er slept in there. And there were three.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What room did you used to bath in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 We had a bathroom downstairs.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You had a bathroom?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, as well, yes. Put up }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6165473\charrsid12200121 in}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  the kitchen, like - say this were house well - here - was a door, that was go into bathroom. Well it was - it was practically new house, nobody else lived in it. We were first to }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid3884354\charrsid12200121 go}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  in, me mother died in there, me father died in there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You must have been quite unusual at that time to have your own bathroom?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. It was a b
athroom. But - it were more like a - a zinc thing. Weren't like one of these what there is now, it were kind of a - shape of one but it like - not aluminum but zinc, like a zinc affair.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 But it had running water, it had taps attached to it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes, there were taps, had tap on, but there were no surroundings on it. So it weren't blocked in, it was just - yes. Yes. Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How often would you have a bath at that time?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh when we wanted one, we used to go and drop in, any warm weather we used to go nearly every night. Me and our Lizzie.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How often would you have clean clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Well - used to always put clean on at Sunday. And then - mother used to wash at Thursday, well sometimes she used to wash at Sunday, and hang 'em out you know
 - you know with only having like her to do lot and then at Thursday we used to change ourself again. Then she'd wash 'em up at Sunday, you see. To leave us clean on again.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Where did the family have their meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh in the living room. In kitchen - in the kitchen - house like, and then there were little room that went through passage. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Were there any occasions when you had your meal in another room?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well it - it - no, we all had it in kitchen what were in home, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Where did your mother cook?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
She had a - she had a - now what do you call it - in't' kitchen - she had like a - a washer boiler, them boilers what they - well she - copper, like a copper but it weren't - not like them, it were }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid3884354\charrsid12200121 built}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  in wall, it were copper and it used }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3884354\charrsid12200121 to}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
 - open the little door open, lid like, and then they used to put coal in it underneath. And then she had a big boiler over top of that. And she used to have a gas ring, big - a two way gas ring. And she used to put - she had oven in fireplace. An
d old fashioned -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 A fire range?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, with a big shelf on top like and a big oven to hold a - oh, eight loaves. Ordinary fire grate you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When you were at school what time would you have breakfast?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do you know what time - in the mo
rning before I went to school? Used to get up early with me mother. Well - we'll say around about half past eight. Before I went to school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Would you be all there for your breakfast, your mother, father and all the children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes, yes, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What about your father and the lodgers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
And me young brothers - youngest brother, used to be always something - always black us shoes before we went to - before we went to bed and black us shoes and put them - he had to do. He used to - father us
ed to say to him, come on Thomas, get down here to this brush. Get your boots clean for school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 That was his job was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Aye, it were his job that. Fetching coal up out of cellar. Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You and the other children would have your breakfast about half past eight in the morning?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What about your father and the lodgers, what time would they have their breakfast?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well me dad, he used to get up when he wanted, you know, him not being well, he never kept well, and he used to get
 up and sometime mother'd take him a mug of tea up. He'd say, I'll g}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2580133\charrsid12200121 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
t up in a bit our Alice, he used to say to her. She never used to bother him much you know. His rheumatics in all legs, his legs you know. But they had to get up early to go to work the l
odgers, two of 'em. But the old gentleman as I told you about, well he couldn't go to work you see. There's one knee, right - oh a right cripple he was. He were - he were with mother about twelve year.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did he have his breakfast with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, the
y send their breakfast - we used to get up and get the lodgers breakfasts ready and he used to get up and he would say sometimes, I don't want nowt to eat this morning ma, I'll have a drink of tea. He weren't a big eater. But t'others'd get up, what they 
w
anted cooking they'd leave it out night afore and then me mother, she used to do it in the morning when she used to call 'em up, she used to have alarum and put alarum on for 'em and then used to get up and then breakfast'd be ready for 'em when they come
 down. Just that and a - and a bed at night. And they had their own - all their own jobs, she couldn't do it. But they weren't much trouble.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 It sounds as if your father was off work quite a bit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh aye. Ever since he left steel works. He fell poorly then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Would that be after you got married that he started to be poorly?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, afore.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Was he working when you were still at school?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So would he get up with the lodgers and have his breakfast early at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Sometimes he would, it just depended how he felt like.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What sort of a breakfast would you have in those days? What would your mother make for you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well it just depends what they brought in you see. They used to bring the stuff in theirselves,
 had their own stuff. And they'd say, ma, will you cook this for breakfast in morning. Might be - a slice of ham or - couple of boiled eggs or something like that. And they'd leave it out for me mother to do it next morning for 'em to get up. She were use
d to a way of her own you know, she were used to having them, 'cos she'd know ropes round you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What would you and your brothers and sister have for breakfast?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well - we never have none of this 'ere Weetabix or nowt like that. We had to have o
ur oat - oat porridge, you know oatmeal porridge. And our grandson, he still has it now. Aye, lives down in Kent. He won't go to school without he got his porridge.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You used to have porridge before you went to school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I used to like - yes, used 
to like me porridge. Sometimes I'll have a slice of toast, sometimes mother'd cook us a bit of something for our breakfast, a bit of bacon, make us a sandwich with that. We never went without jock. Oh no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Would you have anything special on Sunday morning for breakfast? Would you have bacon and egg or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Aye. Yes, yes. At Sunday morning we always had bacon and egg at Sunday morning. Yes. Some had 'em boiled that didn't want 'em fried you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What did you used to call your midday meal, did you call it dinner?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Yes. Well - sometimes - when you feel hungry about - round about half past two or three o'clock, I'd go to me mother, I'd say, have you got a biscuit mum? Can't you wait for your tea? You know. No, I said, I fe
el a bit hungry. Well she give me a couple of biscuits, shut me up while me tea, she won't make me tea for me. I'll have to make that serve.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 At dinner times did you have your dinners at school or did you come home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. They - they - me sister did. And she had to pay five shillings a week for my sister. Yes. Aye, yes. Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 But you used to go home for your dinner did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh - no I used to take - sometimes I'd take a sandwich with me and then - get a - sometimes I'd have it at school, j
ust depends when I feel fit. You could have it any time you wanted you see, not - like they are now like and - we had to pay for it. Yes, so much a day. Just depends what we had, yes. Me - me - me sister - no she didn't pay five shilling - she paid that f
ive shilling to go to this school. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 That was the fee to send your sister to school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. That was in Rotherham. It were Alma Road Board School where I went to. And me husband went there. Me sister.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So you and your brothers went to school and you used to buy sandwiches for your dinner?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Yes. And probably - probably - same as - we went dinner time to have us dinner. It perhaps wouldn't be ready, well it's not ready, you'll have to wait. Well we couldn't wait, we're going back to school
. And she said, wait. I said, no, I it'll be too late by time you get it done, 'cos she were back - she were back late - going shopping and she got it late for it to - to be done. And she'd say, well, come here, she said, and have this sandwich, or have a
 
sandwich then I'll make you a hot tea when you come home. Something like that if she were a bit busy or - especially when she's washing you know, sometimes she'd wash at - well I used to help her - wash at night time, get 'em all right - ready for morning
. Then she'd hang 'em all out to dry. Oh we always helped her, aye, always - all lot of us, we all did a bit for me mother. Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So at dinner time it was what you could catch more or less?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 If your mother had time she'd make your meal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 But if she hadn't you'd have sandwiches?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 That's right. We always had a good tea when - yes, aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What did your father and the lodgers do for their midday meal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh they'd get their dinner but you see they could wait for 
theirs. We had to go back to school you see. Sometimes she wouldn't have it done and - poor old Bobby used to say, oh don't bother about me ma. I'll have it later on. You can't be in and out - to run up and down for it. 'Cos she were getting to age, getti
ng on then you know. Oh she worked hard for us. A good mother. One of the best.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What about on a Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh we had fine dinner at Sunday. Yes, 'cos we were all there to help you see. One of 'em did potatoes and t'other -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What sort of a meal would it be at dinner time on a Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well - sometimes there'd be roast - roast beef and potatoes and cabbage and - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2580133\charrsid12200121 Yorkshire}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  pudding and all like that. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Would you have a sweet as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, if we wanted one, got a bit of rice puddi
ng or - oh she'd have a good meal, we all got a good jock. Good job I did, I think I couldn't have stood what I've stood.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You say your mother often made you a hot tea, what sort of a tea would you have when you got home from school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well sometim
es me mother'd bake some, and she'd say, do you want some - she used to ask us 'cos - were funny at times over us meals - she'd say, do you want some of this Alice? Oh no, I don't fancy none of that mum today. Tell you what, do us two slices of toast. I'd
 }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2580133\charrsid12200121 have}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
 that. And I - I enjoy it. Or I'd have - sometimes she'd make a - and she could bake - sometimes she'd make a big apple pie and a big custard in a - in a big round tin, and the crust were that thick, just a bit of crust on, I used to love that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Wh
en you'd been home at dinner time and she hadn't had time to make you a dinner and she said I'll make you a hot tea, what would it be for a hot tea do you think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well sometimes it'd be a - a jam }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2580133\charrsid12200121 roly}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  pudding boiled, you know, something like that. And
 then potatoes and sometimes it'd be chips and egg. Have what you wanted. You'd get what you wanted, if you didn't fancy it you get what you want. On no, wouldn't let you go without, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Would your father be back from the steelworks at teatime when you had yours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Oh no, we used to have us tea afore they come in. Me and me mother - us two, me sister, we used to have us tea and be done with and the table was all set ready for them coming in for their tea, you see. They all sit down together, make one meal of it.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What did the lodgers do about their dinner and tea, did they have it out somewhere.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Yes, they'd take sandwiches. And then they'd have a - a can of tea or a mug of tea you know when they're out, well like they do now, do the same now on building site you know. Well }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2580133\charrsid12200121 they'd}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
 have a - cut some sandwiches up and then when they get home their wives makes 'em hot dinner. You see, potatoes and - I used to do that for my lad when he worked at Cullingworth. He were not working well - there w
ere nowhere up there he could go for a meal you see. Well they were forced to take sandwiches. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2580133\charrsid12200121 
And then when he come home I used to make him a good potato pie or something like that potato pie, oh aye.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did your mother of father bake their own bread?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. I baked - I baked two stone afore I come here. I did. My husband }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2580133\charrsid12200121 won
\rquote t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  eat a slice of bread - bread from shop. Do you know what he used to say? He used to say, it's idleness of - yes. There used to be a little shop at roadside when I lived up at 
Whitehorse and - she used to make all her buns and bread up, they were lovely, and one time he were poorly with - Victoria with water troubles and she used to bring him - he'd say - about that big - and she used to bring him one about every - see he didn'
t
 - weren't a big bread eater but - he used to love it. He said, I can't eat that shop bread. She always used to bring it up but wouldn't take a ha'penny off me. She said, oh Mrs Scroop, I know how you are she said, it's all right. Oh, I said, I'd sooner p
ay you, I said. I let little things like that play on me mind. It were good of her and she used to always bring him this loaf. They were good to him, the missus at Whitehorse was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did your mother ever make her own jam?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 She once did make some jam. It were plum jam. She didn't make it regular. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did she ever bottle fruit or vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes, aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did she ever make any pickles?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do you remember her ever making wine or medicines?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did she ever brew any beer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Only - only ginger beer. She used to brew her own - make her on beer but - for - boys at work you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did your father or mother grow their own vegetables and fruit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You never had a garden or an allotment?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. No, we never had a garden.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did they buy fruit and vegetables? Would you get fresh fruit and vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do you remember her ever buying any tinned fruit or vegetables or dried fruit or vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, she don't believe in tinned stuff.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Or dried?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 She never had dried apricots or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, fruit, no. She never liked 'em tinned things.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 She never had dried beans or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You never had an allotment or garden?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So you wouldn't have had any hens or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
No. She only had one duck. She had a duck down at backyard. She used to keep it a purpose for me brother George, she used to lay him a duck egg. She used to lay him a duck egg every day and he used to look forward for it. His duck egg.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How many times a week would you have meat do you think when you were at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well we had different every day. Used to have fish one day. And then perhaps we'd have chops another day. Then she might buy
 a little roast, just to put on that day. She never used to buy stuff what will keep warming it up. Like it fresh.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Would she be able to afford meat nearly every day then or would there be some days when you'd have to make do with eggs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 That's right, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So it wouldn't be every day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Oh not every day, no. We're going to get tatoe - potato pie. That were lovely. And sometimes we would have a bit of liver. 'Cos we liked liver at our house - we did - well we did, I don't know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You said your mother didn't believe in tinned things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Didn't believe in it, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So she wouldn't have tinned meat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you ever know anyone who did any poaching, rabbits, anyone who caught rabbits illegally?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do you mean - poached 'em? Have a rabbit - poached rabbit you mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You never knew anyone who did any poaching?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. Not as I know on, no. I've never had a poached - poacher.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do you ever remember seeing your mother having less food so that the family could have more?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Well - I'll tell you what it was with mother, she were a poor eater, you know what I mean. She used to eat - she - she used to eat when she just felt like it. Or perhaps sometimes she wouldn't bother to have her dinner, she'd make herself a cup o
f tea and she might have - a bit of cake or - what - what she felt like. But she was never a big eater. No. And she were a big women that weighed fifteen stone two. I fetched me fifteen stone two. Look at me, I've gone down. But anyway - she just used to 
- used to - we never used to bother her like. 'Cos sometimes I think well she used to do cooking and all that, she gets a bit past it you see, feel like it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did your father used to have more than anyone else?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do what luv? No, he was same. With a 
piece of bread and cheese he'd all go day. He loved his bit of - block of cheese at side of the fireplace with whole pint of tea.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes, you know - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Could you bring toys or a book to the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. We never did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When could you leave the table? Had you to ask or had you to wait until everyone had finished?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, used to say - can I go now mother? I've done. Aye, go on, you can go if you've done.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did all the family sit at the table for the meal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well - ther
e sometimes wasn't 'em all at home you see. You know what I mean, someone'd perhaps be working - and the others might be just going to work. Same as - one'd be coming home at two o'clock, other one'd be happen two 'til ten. Well see they went to work diff
erent turns you see. So actually she were at it nearly all - all the time with - food like and that, mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Sometimes your father wouldn't sit at the table, he'd sit by the fire?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 With cheese and bread and a pint of tea?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 He loved
 his - he used to love his - say, there's stuff on table, he wouldn't, I want my bit of cheese he'll say. Sitting by the fire, he didn't want to move. And they were never without a fire. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2580133\charrsid12200121 
I know her used to say, George, shall I put your chair out front room yonder, front door, get a bit of fresh air. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
No, girl worrying, he said, I'm all right where I am. He said - no you couldn't budge him. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How was the meal served, by whom, did your mother always serve the meal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How did she do it, did
 she get all the food out of the pans and put them onto the plates and give you a plate, or did she used to put it into tureens and put the tureens on the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, that's way she used to - no, she didn't no. She used to empty 'em in - to a - a dis
h, and put 'em in the oven - to store down you know, and then she used to say - now who wants potatoes? You see, I want some mother please. Well you'd ask what wanted and then - do you want some greens or potato - cabbage or - anything like that. Well you
'd all ask for it and I - I'm not going to put it on your plate if you }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2580133\charrsid12200121 won\rquote t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
 eat it. And she'd put what they want on then she gave 'em all their dinner together eat together you see. Mm.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Can you remember your sister or the twins being little, and how 
they managed for their meals? Did they have a high chair at the table, or did they sit on your mother's knee for their meals or would they sit in a pram and have it there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well, tell you the truth she used to have one in a pram and one in a chair, sh
e used to give 'em together. And feed them both together, you know, here for one and then other one. She had a struggle I'll tell you. She had, aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 It was always your mother who fed them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Aye, always. Never had liked to disturb all us meals.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Would you say that your mother was an easy person to talk to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Oh yes, she were right pleasant. Oh she'd sit and she listened, and she'd take - things in, you know what I mean. You'd told it to her and didn't go to anybody else she'd listen to it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did she show affection?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes, she'd out for anybody.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 If you had any worries could you share them with her or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well she practically would tell you. You know because, what's the matter mother? What's the matter now? No }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2580133\charrsid12200121 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2580133\charrsid12200121 nowt luv}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 , I'm all right. She wouldn't tell you. She wouldn't upset you. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 If you had any worried could you tell her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes, I tell her. She said, now if owt was wrong you tell me. Owt goes wrong outside, anybody been talking, calling me or owt like th
at you know. There's a Mrs so and so's been chatting at me. So what did you say owt back to her? I said, no, I didn't say nowt back to her mother. I've come to tell you. She said, well all right, well stop in, don't go away any more. She wouldn't go and f
a
ll our with 'em. She said, well keep away, and if she says any more then I will and I'll go and have a word with her. And that's what she were like. She didn't believe in going out and - showing herself up and her business to everybody. She'd send for her
. To - to the home like, to where were living, and she'd have it out - with here then, just tell her, say, well leave my child alone. If she does anything wrong you just come and tell me, and I'll correct her. But like that, she wouldn't row with nobody.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What about your father, would you say your father was an easy person to talk to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh he were John Bull, he didn't care nowt for nobody me dad were. He were a right jolly fellow.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did he show affection?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, he - no, he used to - everything were - lucky you know, he - he never used to bother. I don't know, happy go lucky.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Would you say that if you had any worries would you tell your father about them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, wouldn't tell me father, I'd tell me mother. Go and tell me mother if owt h
appens, 'cos she would ask you, and she could tell in a minute with you - faces or owt if something were wrong. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How did your parents expect you to behave towards them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well they expected us to be good to them. And we were good to them, we ne
ver give my mother a word back. Nor me dad. We were a family like that. We never used to bother with anybody, we used to keep ourself to ourself. We were independent in anything like that. It were always in mother's wish. She used to say, be like your mot
her. Don't bother with nobody and then you can't fall out over anybody. Now - she used to tell me all sorts of little ditties you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did your parents bring you up to behave towards your brothers and sister in a certain way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh aye. Oh we were a good family, never fell out as I know of. We'd nowt to fall out for though.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did they say you should hit back or not if another child hurt you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh aye, yes, if anybody hit, me she said well then you tap 'em back. Said, stick up for yourself, wh
ich I used to - she used to say, I'll not be here to stick up for you. She used to say, now stick up for yourself, if you get the worst on it. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What kind of people do you think your parents hoped you would grow up to be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well - I can't say much about that but were - all brought up respectable, and we all tried to do for one another.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did your parents bring you up to consider certain things important in life?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes, they never put nothing at front of us, never to be, no. Me mother n
ever ever told me when her was poorly. She didn't know. We were frightened to tell her. I was. And me daughter - my }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2580133\charrsid12200121 lasses}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
 - my girls now - they're the same. Our }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2580133\charrsid12200121 Elsie}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
 say and our Bess is happened to be poorly, what lived across here, she used to say, do y
ou know our Bess is poorly mam? I said, you what? She said, our Bess is poorer. I said, well she's not said nowt to me. She says, I know she hasn't but she's told me. That's - that's the way my - my girls is.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do you think there were certain things tha
t they hoped you would consider important in life, were there certain things about you? Do you think they brought you up to consider certain things in life as important?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well I've never kept nothing back from 'em. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You mean you'd to be honest?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Oh yes. Oh I - if they were here they would tell you, I never - I've never had to thrash 'em nor nothing. Never tapped 'em. I've had a good family and a good lot, have been good to me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What did your parents think about swearing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well
 you hadn't - we hadn't to swear in front of her. If we did any swearing and - it was outside if you got mad you were - run around with somebody else you know sometimes - you know - anybody there, oh I never heard your Alice swear before, you know. She sa
ys, well let me hear her. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When grown ups were talking were you children allowed to join in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Well we did sometimes used to say, no mother. Said, I'm not talking to you, now you talk when you're spoken to. That's what she'd tell, I'll speak to 
you when I've talked to this one. Oh she'd us all weighed up don't you worry. She had. But she tried to put you right whatever you wanted. She wouldn't put you into no trouble - no - want so and so and so and so, oh no, no. One of the best, my mother.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 If you did something that your parents disapproved of what would happen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I did anything wrong and she wouldn't know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 If she got to know about it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 She got to know, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What would she do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh she'd set about you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You'd get smacked would you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
She might tap me, say, what have you been doing? What have you been doing again? And you'd say, well I've only been so and so. And she'd get hold of me hand and she'd give me hand a crack, she'd say, now - take that and don't do it no more.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Would your father ever smack you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Oh no. We were never lathered. I don't remember of any of us being - 'cos we were we had to do it. We know what we had to say and what to do you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Can you remember any particular occasion when she did smack you, and what it was for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
I only remember once this, and I was - I wasn't married, I were getting on, and this brother, what I'm telling you what died - Fred - I once said - it was in Orchard Place, corner of Orchard Place where we live
d then, and - he were a right 'un, he never - he never had nowt to eat and used to go to church every Sunday morning. And he catched me, mother says - wash us them - few - dishes up Alice before you go back to school. Oh I said, let our Lizzie wash 'em up
? I said, you always climb on me. Our Fred come and got hold of back of my neck here, he }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2580133\charrsid12200121 says}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
, you what? He said, don't use to that to your mother no more. He said, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2580133\charrsid12200121 d}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
on't let me hear you so you going away looking. By God I run but I were glad to run down ro
und corner of street. He run after me to crack me. Because I telled him. Yes, oh - but he were a good living lad, he used to go to church every Sunday morning. He did when he was living I know 'cos I - I - I - look I couldn't have had a better father and 
mother. Worked hard all their lives.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When your mother had smacked you how did you feel about it, what did you think afterwards?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well that day I - I thought well I shouldn't have said what I did say. You know, you couldn't tell me it after, but I 
- I were a bit - I can remember it and I were - I were a bit - it seemed to be me, always me, you know, she used to say - Alice, she never said Lizzie. Lizzie go and do so - Alice come and do this, do that. You see, I were oldest and I were biggest, well 
I was stronger than her, a lot. I told her that our Lizzie should have it for a change. She said, what with that - he picked me up in a minute.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Would you say you received the ideas you had about how to behave from both your parents or did one play a mo
re important part than the other?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Well I admit I were rough when I went to school, I were more like a lad. Aye, I was like a tom lad, they used to call 'em tom lad then. And - same as a - if I seed a - a boy - in the school yard - and - they were ri
bbing this little kid, now me I could chide 'em up, I'd have go up, hey, what are you doing that for, leave her alone, you're a lot bigger than her. Take your hands, off her. Then we'd get }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2580133\charrsid12200121 
up to}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  scrapping, 'til you get fetched in school and get caned for i
t. Now then, what have you been - what's - what's the matter now? Miss Fellowes they called her. She come from Sheffield. And she says, toe the line, we toed the line both of us, now - what's been going on? What have you been fighting for? I says, it's ha
d
 hold of a little girl like this, but I says it's head and shoulders bigger than her. Says, who was it, so I told her the name. So she fetched her in. And she says to her - toe the line, to her, she toed the line in front of her desk. She says - now then,
 
what have you been fighting for, in front of the others. She says, so and so, she said - she got behind me and tried to leg me down, she said. So I did do and I got up so I went for him to hit him back. She says - he started leathering me. She says and wh
a
t did you do Alice? I says, well I saw him hitting her so I went to him and telled him to leave off. I says, he were head and shoulders bigger than her, but I said, I never seem him let her down. Outside. Go on back to your place and don't let me get it a
gain.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Do you think that your mother or your father gave you the ideas how you should behave? Who was the one who taught you how to behave? Your mother or your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well practically both on 'em. But they always did - we were always told - were 
taught to do. See mother were that good. So we never used to put no trouble at front on her. If you could help it anyway of course.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When you had a birthday would it be different from any other day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. Sometimes you'd have one, sometimes you wouldn't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Would you ever get a present?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh aye, we used to have a little toy or something like that them days you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Would you have anything special to eat for tea perhaps?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, sometimes she'd make a little cake. A little cake for a little treat for us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Would you have any friends in to tea?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Well - just one or two who we knew, went to school with. You know, perhaps next door neighbours, she lived next door. About half a dozen schoolchildren, make a little }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2580133\charrsid12200121 tea party}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  for us you know what she could afford.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Can you remember anything you did with your mother and father together on Christmas Day? What would you do on Christmas Day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well she used to make us - Christmas cake and mince pies and all such like as that. And my
 brothers used to go and get a drink. Sometimes they'd fetch me dad one, fetch me dad a drink, especially at holiday time like, but me mother wouldn't have nothing. She never drank nor smoked. And - she'd make what she could for us, you know. Aye. She see
d we had a bit of a do. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Would there be any Christmas presents? Would there be a stocking or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well I - I don't think so, I don't remember that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 It would cost a lot for all of you wouldn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 We had a Christmas card come fr
om relations you know, Christmas cards. But I don't remember - only having a present at the - in our stockings. They put all the stockings up. Well they were pillowslips and put what - they could get 'em at sixpence and ninepence a piece than you know. Fi
ll 'em up with oranges and apple and a new penny or something like that, what we could get off with. Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 During Christmas Day do you remember ever singing carols or playing games or anything like that at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well you see - them as is oldest ha
ve been out. And there were only me two - me and me sister, we never used to bother much like you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you ever have any musical instruments in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. No. No, we didn't luv.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Was there anyone in the family who could sing? NO? Did your parents ever play any games with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Oh sometimes at dominoes and draughts and that. You know, at night time. When it were cold like and we didn't want to go out then we used to have a game of - dominoes and - draughts and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Were there books in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Books? No, never no books. No library books, no, nothing like that. Used to get plenty of newspapers. Night papers, Sunday papers and all like that, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What was the paper you used to get, do you remember?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 The Star we used to call it, Star were it then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Was it the Rotherham Star?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. Star.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 That was an evening paper was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, Star at night.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What would you get on a Sunday, can you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 News of the World. Used to have News of the World, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you ever get any magazines?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do you remember your mother or father reading? Can you remember them sitting down reading a newspaper?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well me mother hadn't time. She hadn't time for her to do that you know. But me 
father used to like a night paper. We used to get - that one in the morning, it was mm -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Express?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 That's it. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So you got two newspapers every day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did they ever read aloud to you or to each other, your parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did we what luv?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did they ever read aloud to you or to each other?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, used to read to theirselves, used to go and sit in room and read to theirself.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do you remember a funeral in the family before 1918?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 1918. In my family?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Can you remember perhaps a grandma or a grandpa?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. My Ernest's mother. My husband's mother. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 She died before 1918?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 She'd have been - a hundred if she'd have lived two - St Patrick's Day. Seventeenth of March. She'd have been a hundred. 
She died in Rotherham - what they used to call the work house then. I lived at Mexborough. She lived with me three year, and then she become to be funny, you know, get queer, and she used to smoke, you know, old Irish woman. She used to smoke. She used to
 
go out at nighttime you know, I used to know what time she went out. And - she come over a bit late. It's always been afore seven o'clock, or just turned seven. So I says to me husband, I said, your mother's not come yet. Well nobody'd else-d have her, on
l
y me. So, anyway - she says - he says, she's not in, I says, no. He says, well she - hope nowt happened to her. So - she used to like a gill of beer you know at night time. So I - I said I think I know where she is, she's in Commercial. So I went out, I w
as going to have a look for her as I went out. 'Cos I used to say to her, now look - don't go no far away 'cos I get worried you being out, getting knocked down. But she never did. She were careful. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2580133\charrsid12200121 So, anyway I was look in this public, and it stood back, I can see it now, stood back at top of Hope Street, and there were two steps, and there were a little snicket. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh it weren't as big as this, and there were about four in there. Four old women. I shall never forget. See I just went like that. Looking up. Com
e on, it's bedtime. I said, I've been worried to death over you, I says, I says wondering where you was. But she never stopped out before, she was always in bed for - they were all four having a packet of chips and fish. All of them, all the lot of them h
a
d a packet of fish. Who ever fetched 'em I don't know, 'cos they were all us for a god age. Tell you she were a hundred just in St Patrick's Day. I said, come on. She'd got her glass of beer. She come out, she come out, I gets hold of her arm, says, come 
on we'll walk across the road now. I lived at the back of the Empire. A picture place. I said, do you know you frightened me to death. She said, what's up, I told you were in Commercial, she said. I said, I'm not getting on to you }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2580133\charrsid12200121 Gran}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  I says, I says, but i
t's - you've never stopped out late before, I says, and you made me right uncomfortable, thought something had happened to you. She said, no, she says, so anyway - she says, I've been out a bit, having chips and fish. I said, well you could have some at h
o
me. She said, oh I'd sooner have 'em out like that myself, fancy 'em better. Anyway she got in trouble when I got home. He says, where the hell have - he were right snotty with - I said, don't shout at her. So, he says, where have you been, She says, what
 
- who wants to know? What do you want to know for? She was haughty - right haughty with him you know. So - anyway - he says, well you frightened Alice to death, he says. You never stop out late like this. So she said, well if that wants to know, I've had 
a gill of beer, and me chips and fish.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 She'd had a good night out hadn't she?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I said I didn't mind, I - I said you all live around with pub in back streets and that. Mm. Yes, it told lass.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So I think by the time she died it would be after 1918 would it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 She died while I were at Mexborough, I lived in Mexborough. Oh we left in 1918. Me husband were at home and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Can you remember anyone in your family or in your husband's family dying before the end of the war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Before the end of the war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you have any grandparents? On either side?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh no, I don't - I don't remember - they never talked about 'em. I mean she had one sister in America.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When Fred died, would that be before 1918?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh that would be, that, yes. But I had another brother died, but it wasn't in war time. It was after 19 - 18. Our George.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Can you remember Fred dying? And the funeral afterwards?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. No, I don't remember that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You can't remember whether there was people going to it or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, I've forgot that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 And when your other brother died it would be after the war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Yes, our George. But - me eldest brother died first. Our Fred died first, that were it, and me oldest brother, he died - he's dead. And next to him
, our George, he died in Sheffield hospital. And me youngest brother - still is older than me if you understand. And I've never heard from him - in years and years and years, and he were older than me so I should think he might have passed out, I don't kn
ow. He lost his wife. Lived with his daughter, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So you can't remember a funeral before 1918 can you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 That were the last world war weren't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Before the end of the first world war?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Hang on, the end of the first world war? 1916?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Any time between 1900 and 1918. Any time during that period. I wondered if as a little girl you'd been to a funeral at all? Usually it would stand out in your mind if you had been?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, I've - I've only one - buried one little girl, and she were three week old.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I wondered if when you were a little girl you'd been to a funeral?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Oh yes, I went to a funeral but - I just forget the name now, I were a bearer for a little girl. A bearer when I lived - lived in Orchard Street then, I weren't ver
y old. And me and Annie Aldrid - it just come to me that name, Annie Aldrid and we were right big friends together and we were bearers - used to have little girls for bearers for 'em them days, yes. Well I were a bearer. I can remember that now you come t
o
 talk about it. And - this little girl had died. I can't just think of her name. And - when we come back they give us a drop of port wine. It made me poorly. The first time I'd ever - tasted it. And - oh it upset me. Felt poorly many a day after it. And I
 said I'd never drink no more, and I never have. And she weren't very old.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What was it she died from, do you know?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, I don't know what she died from but they come and asked me mother - if I could be a bearer. And Annie Olden - and - an Irish gi
rl - there were three of us. Remember Annie Olden getting married, she married my husband's mate. But I don't know - whether they could have called him Ted Tuckman.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When you were a bearer at this funeral did you have to wear all black?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes. U
sed to wear a - we used to wear a sash, a black sash round us. Bear - bearer, carry 'em on your shoulders like - yes, she weren't very big. A love - lovely little kiddie. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You said you went back for a drink of port wine, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2580133\charrsid12200121 was there}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  a sort of gathering?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, they - they brought - we come - when we come back - we went into }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2580133\charrsid12200121 
house like}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  you do and sit down you know, they come round with this drop of port wine in a glass. And I says to Annie - I says, what's this? You know, 'cos we didn't know what d
rink were you know, we weren't very old. And I thought this - what's this? I don't know. So, one of the women, I just forget what - who it were - Mrs Marras they call her, Mara, Murray, Murray, and - she says, what are you }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2580133\charrsid12200121 whispering}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  at you two? I says, wh
at is it Mrs Murray? She says, port wine, she says, get it down you, could do you good, it'll warm you. And it happened to have been a cold day and we were very damp. But anyway - it upset me for a day or two. Says it's perhaps with - not having any like 
you know it's just - touched - the tickled spot.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When you were a little girl were you taken out visiting neighbours or friends or relations?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You never were?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Were you ever taken shopping?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh with me mother, used to g
o with me mother at Saturday. Take me to market every Saturday. And me cat. Me cat. Me cat used to follow us to market. Sit on wall side while we come back. Aye. With butchers and all, fresh meat. I can remember that. I weren't very old.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you ever go out with just your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Very rare I went with him luv.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Can you remember doing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
I can remember going to a theatre with him. When he used to come from work he used to go to a certain public, I'll tell you the truth, and he used to like
 his pint of beer, that was when he could work then, and - it were a public called Feathers, Prince of Wales Feathers, and that's where he used to go every Friday night and that's where I used to get me mother's half a sovereign from. And he used to call 
i
n for a pint before he come home. And me mother used to say - go on Alice, go on your - journey else I won't get me half a sovereign. And he used to give me half - half a sovereign for me mother. Mind he was a good fellow in one way, but he never believed
 in giving her a lot of money. It's because she had the lodgers you see. See?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 He knew she could manage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Yes. That's right, yes. So - anyway he'd say, come on, sit down, you could sit down with 'em them days, and you used to have a bottle - bot - bottle what - I used to take to work for him. And - I said, have you took your }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2580133\charrsid12200121 bottle}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  - did it go down all right dad? Says, aye. He says, wait while I sup }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3884354\charrsid12200121 this}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  pint. He says, we're going to theatre. I said, where? Theatre, he says, Lower Road - down by the
 Manchester, picture - plays, olden days you know. Same as the Good Old Days what's on telly, you know. I says, come on then. And - he'd take his bottle and put it in his pocket, be empty you know, and there used to be a public at bottom of road, used to 
c
all it - Monarch, the Monarch, and go up the street, go straight up the side of the hospital, and - anyway we went to see theatre. Come on half time, come on like two turns. They'd go in at half past seven and at eight o'clock change over, it was about ha
l
f past eight when we come out there was different turns on. And anyway he used to say, come on Alice, they pulled sheet down for ten minutes, go and fetch me three gills of beer down at the Monarch. And I used to fetch him three gills of beer. And used to
 
put us a - a slip on top like a - a label, label on top 'cos you weren't old enough, that's how young I was, and they put a label on top. And they said, what do you want? Three gills of dark beer. Go back, run for your life down to bottom, but I enjoyed i
t
 because I were at theatre and got mother's half a quid. So I went down, bring bottle back, do you want a sup of the pint. I says, get off. So I said, well, I said, no I don't want your stinking beer. I said, it stinks to it never forget. We went again. A
n
d they were all looking round, they wondered what he'd got in bottle, you know look round. And we used to watch these theatres does. The old man of Manchester, all such like as that, oh yes. Mind it took a while, nearly ten o'clock when I come out, quarte
r }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2580133\charrsid12200121 to ten}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
 we used to come out. Then we'd come straight home. So - mother says I - poor old mother, she'd say, has he give you me half a sovereign? I said, I have it mother. Aye. But - and that's all she ever got, my mother. I remember it as if it were - I've
 a good memory. Mm. I've a lass like that. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2580133\charrsid12200121 My eldest is like that, taked after me for - good educated, she's never been nowhere. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Just picked it up on her own. Mm. Good lass.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do you remember any outings with your parents, perhaps at Bank Holidays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Have I what luv?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do you remember any outings that you went on with your parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Out - out? Visiting? Outings you mean? Oh yes. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2580133\charrsid12200121 
Oh yes, I've - well I took - me two children - I've two children christened at Arm - at Salvation Army, under flag
, And I were big Army woman meself then, I used to go regular, I used to like Army, and we used to go - what they call across the Ferry, in a boat. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
And it used to be a penny to go across. And it was across then we used to go all the way round like going round lakes you know - in the boat. And I had two were christened under flag there. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2580133\charrsid12200121 
Had our Ena and our Alice.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When you were a little girl yourself did your parents used to take you on this boat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I used to go to Army then. No, no. I went with the Army, used to take us you see. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Can you remember any occasions when your parents took you out?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Oh no. I never went out much myself. No. I always stuck to me mother like to help me mother. We were - all our mother's family if you understand. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you ever go away for a holiday when you were little?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Well - when the - when me brother - our Thomas you know worked at steel trade - and works for it - there used to be tickets - they used to give 'em tickets, and they'd go to - they co
uld take anybody with it, give 'em a free ticket to take anybody with 'em - we did that. I know me dad took me and our Joe. And - and Joe, and we went to New Brighton. And we got to New Brighton, and I went across - across in boat, and we was going, makin
g
 us way to Sunlight Soap Works. Sunlight Soap Works there you know. And we never got - managed to go. Well they'd been and had a drink, they got tired, got sleepy, gets across to the - river, and got sat down onto grass, and they fell fast asleep and left
 
me there with meself. And there's a fellow there coming on with a donkey. Yes. So he bought me some mussels, and I was eating my mussels when they wakened up. So we didn't land - we didn't land to - we didn't land at soap work Sunlight works so - so - mea
n
t to go there, well there were trips from pit. The eldest lad - our Joe, he did a bit in pit, but that were - younger like you know, before he went into steel trade, and they used to give him a free ticket - and - a free ticket for somebody to - related t
o
 him to go with him, so they took me. We - we never had - and this old fellow coming with donkey frightened me to death. So I shook me dad like this, I says, oh waken up, there's a fellow here with a donkey. So he get me a pap - he got me a packet of muss
els. I didn't know where to put }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2580133\charrsid12200121 meself}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You never went away to stay did you when you were little, you never went away for a week or a few days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh no, it were just a trip. I've been away since we were married like.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 But not as a little girl?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh no. No. I think that were as far as I ever went.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Could you tell me how you used to spend Saturdays in those days, when you were still at school, what did you used to do on a Saturday?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well, as far as I know I didn't have much at Saturday. I did at Sunday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What did you used to do on a Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
I used to sell news - Sunday papers, with me brother. And we used to go about twelve mile, this - with a - wagon, two wheeled wagon. Right into country. You know one of these skep
s at mill - they're like that. It used to full of news - be full of newspapers. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2580133\charrsid12200121 Were}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
 out all day. Used to knock about eight or nine pound up a day, paper delivering, and we had to shove that, eight or nine mile, all up where we lived Scolscoffey, I don't k
now whether you've heard of that neighbourhood. Scolscoffey, oh it was a long way. Be out all day. We'd take some sandwiches, and then we'd some good customers that give us a drink of tea you know, give us a cup of tea 'cos we'd be out on a Sunday, in cou
ntry like. Come along and have a cup of tea, you looked tired out. We never had a paper left when we got back home.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 That eight or nine pounds would go to a newsagent?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes, that were hers. And they give us so much }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3884354\charrsid12200121 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  dozen. So much a dozen we sold, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did that go to your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
What - what we got go to me youngest brother. Our Thomas, that's - him. Well me and him used to go together. And we used to go and shove it between us and we'd take 'em round. Sometimes I'd take 'em round - 
because there was such kiddies all used to go round - taking them out your barrow. Anyway - all those miles. We were tired out when we got home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So it took you all day Sunday to do that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. Yes, we used to leave at nine o'clock in the morning. There was wagon all packed up for customers. Farmhouses.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How old would you be when you did that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh about ten year old, nine - ten, nine or ten year old. I've done all sorts }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2580133\charrsid12200121 luv}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 . I have. Jack of all trades.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So on a Sunday you wouldn't have any different clothes would you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did it what luv?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you have any Sunday clothes to put on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh no, only what we'd got on you know, we got clean but still - now while we got home Like we had to - just put something bit rough on.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What time would you get back, would it be in the afternoon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 It were getting dusk. Took a long while.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So you never had any Sunday best clothes to wear?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh I had some at home, but I never could get out of it daytime. You see, I used to wear 'em all the day sometimes. If I wanted 'em on.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So on a Sunday before you started the paper round, did your mother or father allow you to play out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes, we could go and - played with the other children, weren't - stopped that. Well we had to go i
n town at Sunday you see, with being out all day. Oh set off at morning while night time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 But before you got the paper round, when you were about seven or eight?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh used to go and lark out a bit, yes. Oh they allowed us to go out for - with other children.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did your parents think it wrong to work or play on Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, I don't think - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did your parents attend a place of worship or not, any sort of church or chapel?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, only me brother, him what died. He went to - to church.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you ever go to Sunday school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Aye, I used to go the Army. Sunday school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How old were you when you started going to the Salvation Army?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Why - well - I don't know how old I were then - I know I married. And that - our Alice, it was our Alice and our -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You never went to Sunday school when you were a little girl though?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes, I went to Army. I still like to go to Army, yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You went to the Salvation Army Sunday school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So when you started the paper round you would have to finish with that would you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh I'd have to - I did finish, that's when I did finish 'cos I had to go on me round you see, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When you went to the Salvation Army Sunday school did you used to have special clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Oh no. No. Only when you were - something like going - like - going off like, you know, something to do, a do or something like that. Then you used to have - little titled skirts and - a little, you know a - little coat or - mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did the Salvation army at that time, when you were a little girl, ever organise any outings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes, yes, they used to get some outings. They're very good.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Was that when they used to take you across the river?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. Yes. Went up and down on the river, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Would it be a picnic?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, it was something like that, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Were there any other social activities organised by the Army, such as concerts or teas, anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, not - not - only - perhaps at holiday times, you know, they'd have a bit of a do for us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What sort of a do would it be, would it be a tea?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well - same as have little - children singing, little concert and this you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did they have a choir at the Salvation Army?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Not then, not when I were - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did they run a temperance club?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do what luv?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did they run a temperance club at the Army?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well I didn't know - I didn't know much about - owt like that 'cos I were only young, I weren't very old. Takes some going back to.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You never belonged to any other club organised by the Salvation army?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When you were at home did you ever say grace before a meal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Take what?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you ever say grace before a meal when you were at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes, yes, yes. We had to do. Mother and father. Yes. Used to say, now then, get your hands together.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did your father used to say it, or did you all used to say it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Used - well, I don't remember mother and father but me father used to say that, say, come on, you
 know you're going to have your dinner, bless the Lord for it. Used to have to bless the Lord for your dinner.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Were you taught by your parents to say prayers at night before going to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh we didn't want no telling that, we had to do it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you ever have family prayers, when you'd all say a prayer together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, not very often.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did your father take an interest in politics at that time? No? Do you know what his political views were?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well - work, always talking about work.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So you don't know what he thought about politics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You don't know what your mother thought?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do you remember your mother and father voting in a general election before 1919?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You don't remember them going along to the polling station to vote at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, I don't remember that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
In some places at that time men felt they risked losing their job or their house if they voted differently from their employers. Do you know if your father felt himself under that kind of pressure to vote for a particular party?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 He used to vote, but he used to vote for Labour. Mm. I know that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You don't remember your father ever being a member of a political party, he was never a member of the Labour party was he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do you remember him working for one of the parties at an election?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
No. Well - he didn't work with him, it was a - he were a Member of Parliament. They call him Tom Williams, what they call Lower Valley. He voted for him. It were what h
e got him his war pension on. He lost three years pension. And he were Member of Parliament, he come to see him one day. And he told him, he says, now Steven - he says, how's your hearing? He'd lost one ear you know. Drum took out. So he says - through th
e
 war. And he says, now then, I had to go in and talk like that to him you know, he were at Lower Valley for colliery you know, a right grand fellow he was. He says, oh, he said, it won't get no better Tom. He said, don't I He said no. He says - haven't yo
u
 got any pension? He says - no. He says, well you ought to be having army pension. He said, haven't you put in for one? He said I didn't think I'd get one. Well he said, you can but try can't you? He says, I'll see into this. Well he seen into it. And he 
lost three years pension, and he got him his pension on. Thirty-five bob a week. He did, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Was that your husband or your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, me husband that. YES. He did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When your parents were not doing their work, I know they didn't have much spare time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 But if they did have any spare time how would it be spent?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Do you mean when they'd nothing like practically to do? Well - I don't remember me mother ever being still to tell you the truth. Yes, she's always something to do
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 And your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well it ended up to come to his legs like, then he - he couldn't get out much then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Until then he'd enjoyed going to the pub for a glass of beer?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh he - he could get afore then. 'Cos he were working then like, it was his legs that let him down. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So you wouldn't say that your mother had any interests outside the home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 She had a hard life, she had - always had to work like me, you understand what I mean
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You don't remember her ever going out to enjoy herself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. Never. She never was one for that. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When did your father get home from work in the evening?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 About - used to knock off at half past five, but he'd go and have a gill of beer. And be round about half past six, he weren't late
 when he come in. When he was working, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How many evenings a week would be spent at home by him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
He'd go - he'd go - Friday night, he used to go at Friday nights when he used to take me to - theatre like. Aye. And - more or less it'd be Friday and Saturday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Other nights he would be at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 At - at home, he used to come home, well we - beginning of the week. But Friday night that were pay night see and he used to go -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Your mother never went with him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. She wouldn't go i
n a public house, she wouldn't open the door. She wouldn't fetch him one either. I believe if he were dying she wouldn't, no, they couldn't get my mother to. She never begrudged anybody else. Her brothers used to like a gill of beer when they'd been worki
ng hard all week. But she said you can have a barrel - but, she said, as long as you're quiet and you're all right with it. And behaved yourself, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did your father take part in any sport?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh in horse racing, used to back horse now and again. Used to back horse and now and again.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did he actually go to the races?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, not for years and years, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 He would just go to the bookies office to back a horse?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How would he back the horse then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well it'd be either a
s they go and take 'em down to bookie. If you're at home you see, it was Alice - here, take this slip down to bookies, have a bob each way on it, we'd take it for him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did your father or mother belong to any savings clubs, such as a boot club or a sick club or a funeral club?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. No. No. Now whatever.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How did you get on with your brothers and sisters?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh all right, we're - we're - very - they might get a bit naughty sometimes but - be blown over you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Was there one you felt particularly close to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Well happen me bro - youngest brother, Thomas. He was a - he - he was a lovely lad, well they were all three of 'em. And our George were a gentleman, him that died in Sheffield. Wasn't married. And - that youngest - he were - you
 - he were next to our George - our - our Thomas was youngest and - he had a - he had a kind of a stroke in his face and it was - like that, but last time I heard from him it's gone all right, but it's a long while since, it's gone back, grown back, and -
 
he neither drinks nor smokes. They're all - they don't like a lot, just have a - now him that died, this tall one, our George - if you had a - went in and he'd got a bottle of stout he'd make it last an hour. They weren't big drinkers. No. Me dad was a bi
g
 drinker but he liked a drink at night time. But mother never touched. It bothered me mother nothing. She used to say you can have a barrelful as long as you - don't fall out, she didn't like falling out with anybody. She were a good living woman my mothe
r was
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So you say that Tom was the one you felt closest to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, our Thomas, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 He was the nearest in age to you,
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 He were to me anyhow practically.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When you were a little girl who did you play with, was it with your brothers and 
sisters or would it be mainly with the neighbours children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well, it's a long while since I - that were - when I were down Water Lane, Westgate. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid4603364\charrsid12200121 There}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  were no - no children there. There were only four houses. And I think only two had got a child - a child a piece, two chil - children. So -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you used to play mainly with your brothers and sisters then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2580133\charrsid12200121 More}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  or less, yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When you played out}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4603364\charrsid12200121 , would}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  it be in the yard or in the garden or in a street?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, it were like - these 
four houses stood here, and a big piece of ground here, and then there were canal there run across bottom, and more or less we used to play at lane, like a lane you went down. But - we never got out, we used to - didn't bother much of one }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4603364\charrsid12200121 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4603364\charrsid12200121 \lquote cos}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  there were nobody to play with tell you the truth.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What sort of games did you play at, can you remember any?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh - played kick can and - jump over our backs and - that, like tom lads. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Were you allowed to get dirty when you played out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do what luv?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Were you allowed to get dirty when you played out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well we didn't get too dirty. It were a bit rough ground and that but we didn't get too dirty.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Were you free to play with anyone you pleased?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes, and - it just depends who they were you know what I mean.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did your parents discourage you from playing with certain children ever?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Well it just depends who they were you know. You didn't know who - who - they used to come from all over see down that lane, and play at canal side you see. And if I }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2580133\charrsid12200121 happened}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  to say - here you won't go down there you'll get d}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2580133\charrsid12200121 rowned}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
, they'd give me forty words for one. Aye. There was another woman called Mrs Holroyd, she lived next door to me, they kept the fish shop at top of the lane, and she'd two daughters. Very nice woman, they were born down there. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Did you ever belong to any youth organisations? I don't think the girl guides were going then, but I wondered if there was ever anything like that that you were a member of? Any youth club or Band of Hope, anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I should now like to ask you about how you spent your free time when you were at school. Did you have any hobbies then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, not as I know of, I come from school, I never hardly went out after. Only as }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2580133\charrsid12200121 far}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  as - outdoor and - we played round door, that were all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you keep any pets?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Pets?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You said you had a cat at one time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. Not me. Yes, me mother had a cat. My mother, aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 And your mother looked after it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, and duck were - me dad, in a shed }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4603364\charrsid12200121 outside}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  door, down in cellar kitchen but it were right outside. We had to go down that for go to school, down back yard to hang us clothes out you see. You couldn't hang 'em out on front. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You don't remember ever collecting anything, such as cigarette packets or anything like that when you were little?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you ever do any gardening?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You didn't have a garden?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do you remember ever going fishing? With your brothers or anyone else.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I never went fishing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Would you go for walks?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
They would, but they wouldn't take me. They used to say, I'm not taking Our Alice today She'll stop at home with you our mother. She said, take her with you, and see that she goes with you. And then they'd have to take me then when she }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4603364\charrsid12200121 said}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  the word.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you used to enjoy going?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, we used to love to go up in park and round.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you ever have a bicycle?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you ever take part in any sports when you were a girl?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, not when I were a girl, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you ever go to any theatres, you've already told me that you went with your father
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, that's what it is.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 It was a sort of music hall was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 And you also went to concerts?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 It's something like the theatre - Hippodrome here you know. Like this - it was like that. All - yes, varieties.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you ever go to the cinema when you were a little girl?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. Well they were silent pictures then. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did your parents used to give you any pocket money?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Me mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did she ever give you any pocket money?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I don't remember.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did anyone outside the home ever help your mother look after the house and family? She never had a sister or mother who helped?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. She hadn't nobody, only herself. They all died. Died, aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 She never had any relations or friends or neighbours who would help?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. No. No. I couldn't say that honestly.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 If your mother was ever ill or confined to bed how did she manage?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well we used to }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4603364\charrsid12200121 go}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  over and see her, see what we could do for her. You know, I were seven mile away, but me sister were at home you see. And me sister. She used to - you know, one or two of neighbours used to pop in too to see how she wa
s. She - she died with a semi decay you know, she wasted away. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do you remember what happened when the twins were born, how old would you be? Can you remember it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. No, not that. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did your parents have any relatives at all living nearby?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do you mean me mother's or - relatives?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Or your father's, your mother's or father's relatives.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I know me mother, she'd only one }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2580133\charrsid12200121 draught}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  - sister and she was in America. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What about your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 He had - he had two sist
ers but they died. And one kept a public - in Rotherham. I was called after her, no - yes, Alice I were called after her, Elizabeth Anne, and they called me Alice Mary after me dad's youngest sister. And she were called - after his oldest sister. And one 
kept on Cromlyn Bridge in }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2580133\charrsid12200121 Rotherham}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
. She kept a public house. And me Aunt Mary, she lived - in an ordinary house. You wouldn't know where it is in Rotherham. They both lived in Rotherham. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How much did you see of them, did you ever see these aunties?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I did when I were younger.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you used to go and visit them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
I - I seen - I think I went about twice. I were only young. That was me Aunt Lizzie I think, I - ooh - me Aunt Mary, and I could just see her now, she were right fat, big - bi
g woman, very well built and I know me Aunt Mary - more - than what I do me Aunt Lizzie because I visited her more than me Aunt Elizabeth. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you go fairly frequently to see them or was it very occasionally?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, not so often, perhaps about once a month or something like that you know I used to go.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did they ever come and visit you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Not as I know of. Well they were getting on you see in age and all.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did your parents have any friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Mother had nobody.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did your father have any friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Not as I know, I don't - can't tell you anyway. I never see'd him with anybody. Might be just one of his workmen or something like that you know, worked with, but as for anybody else - we never used to have anybody come to see him or nowt like that.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 If he had any friends he must have been them at the pub?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. He'd probably that, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So you don't remember any friends ever being invited into the home do you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did they ever have any friends who would just call in casually, just to call for him to go for a drink or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What about the neighbours, did they ever just pop in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes - the lady next - door to us did. She were a poorly woman, a big woman, but - she'd wh
at they call yellow jaundice, lived next door to mother. But that's the only one as mother ever made a lot of. She used to go and do her bits for her 'cos she were - you know, she couldn't knock about much.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did she used to come in your house occasionally?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. I think she only come time, that were all she come.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
So you don't remember them ever getting together with relatives or friends in an evening to sort of just chat or play games or have music or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. No. No luv, no. We were practically like people that's kept theirself to ourself you understand.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Many people divide society into different social classes or groups. At that time before 1918 did you think of some people belonging to one class and some to another? You didn't think of it like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Say that again luv.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Many people divide society, divide all the people living in a town, into different social classes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. I know what you mean. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 In that time before 1918 did you think of people belonging t
o one and some to another? Did you think of people like this, do you think of some belonging to one class and some to another, or did you see them all as being the same?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh well - you see there were - where I lived were different classes of people. T
here were different people that's come from different towns and all like that. Well you don't know nothing about 'em. You know what I mean? Well you can't make yourself up and try and make meself known to you can you, you see what I mean. If they used to 
s
peak they used to speak. But there was some - just thought they were You see what I mean? And just put - cast you at one side. And if you weren't dressed up and - dolled up, well you're in your - working clothes, you know - knocking about you know - they 
look at you as if you were dirt.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You thought themselves rather better than you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 That's right, yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What class in society would you say you and your family belonged to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I couldn't tell you that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What sort of people had the sam
e sort of life as you? What sort of jobs did they do the people who had the same sort of existence as yourself? What sort of people were they who looked down at you, the ones who thought themselves a bit better then you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What would you say they were, what sort of people, those people who looked down at you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well I should think they were proper ignorant. Yes, they'd be ignorant to me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Would they be any better off than you do you think? Or was it just their attitude?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Might be just the ac
tion. You know, so and so, they might not have got - as much as like what I've got, but they just put it down as - they're better than you. Oh I've had that done many a time, that. Looked at me, said, oh look at her. I've come back and I've took no notice
.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So they were no better off than you?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 The employers at all in Rotherham?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
I - not in steelworks, no. No, not in steelworks no. Only this old man where I worked sweet factory, were right nasty old man, Scotchman. He wanted you to do dirt work underneath if you see and - and - don't let nobody know nowt about it. And I wouldn't.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 But even he wasn't the actual employer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, he was only the - boss lass.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So in Rotherham, either in the sweet factory or in the steelworks the employe
r doesn't seem to have come into contact with very much with the people who worked for him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Mm. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Is that right?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well - they did - I - I found 'em all right. And I didn't know where I worked at steelworks. No. It was only this place wher
e I made sweet - and he wanted me to do a dirty trick and I wouldn't do it. And he lived down the same street as me. And do you know what he wanted me to do? There were a big machine, it's all glass, and you know these }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2580133\charrsid12200121 chloradine}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  - lozenges, Victory V's th
ey call 'em, well - I used to work on that, and every Friday morning, you have to sweep all the room up. Like - it's like - more like flour, sweet stuff that - put onto a paste, it's all done like pastry, you know, dough, put it through a machine, it's al
l
 flattened out and then - all sorts of shapes, chocolates and all that. Anyway - he asked me one morning, he says, come here I want you. I looked at him, I said what do you want me for? He says, look, whatever goes off in this room you never breathe a wor
d
. You weren't supposed to carry tales. Hey here says I, I'm not telling no tales. No, he said, I know you haven't. He said, I'm just giving you warning to tell you not to. Well he had me that morning, swept all that floor up, gospel truth, and put it into
 this }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4603364\charrsid12200121 mixer}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
 where they make the cough spices, and it's a big round thing like that, and it goes round, see, and it all binds it up together, with four big prongs inside, and it's churning it backward and forward and mixed it all up together. Well I did that
 and I put it all - I didn't put paper in, but I just swept up the floor, and - put it into this mixer. And then there's so much liquid of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2580133\charrsid12200121 chloradine}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  in a bottle, and you put so much in that, and so much }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2580133\charrsid12200121 m}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
ucus, well that's what sticks it together, makes it
 into a sweet, and you've got to get it out of bucket with your hands wet, 'cos it'd draw you into a bucket if you didn't. And then put it into your mixer. Well you - then you - turned the thing on and it mixed it all up. But all the sweepings up of the f
loor used to go in them. Yes. Yes. And do you know - I often thought many a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid208450\charrsid12200121 time}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
 after - I used to - I used to buy a lot of them because of me chest you know, and do you know I could bite and feel bits of grit - you - you ever get one, you get a bit of grit
 - I'm not going to say - it's like that now but it were when I were making 'em. No, no. And perhaps not as better off.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Were there any people in Barnsley who were better off, wealthier people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Barnsley?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Not in Barnsley, were there any people in Rotherham who were better off than your family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Oh well - this - Mrs Holroyd, what lived down the lane, they used to have a fish shop It were a little fish shop and they used to do well. In - Westgate, just as the top of the - lane, you turn ro
und to your left, and the fish and chips and they were the two daughters. Her two daughters used to run it and they used to do well and all. Mm. But - never made anything of it like when we lived down at lane, 'cos they were nice people to talk to. Mm.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 And they were rather better off than the steelworkers were they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Yes, oh yes. 'Course they were working people like ourself, they had to work for their living. And it was - daughters were dressed - oh look at - you know, everything were good. They were no better than you, if it come to it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Can you remember being brought up to treat people of one sort different from people of another?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, don't know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Were you ever told to curtsey, or show respect in some way to anyone? Do you remember
 your mother ever telling you to curtsey to anyone? Was there anyone that you had to call sir or madam when you were a girl?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Had to what luv?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Call sir or madam?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Used to call sir or madam? Yes. Your manners, your manners like, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Was there anyone you had to call sir or madam?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh I never got amongst anybody to say it. I never went out a right lot. More at home with me mother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do In the district where you lived in Rotherham who were considered the most important people would 
you say? Were there any teachers or vicars or doctors or anyone who he a bit more money or anything?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh there were a doc - there was a doctor. Doctor Riddle they called him. He were very nice to me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Would you say that the people in the district considered him as being important?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Well he was a - he was a good doctor. Very good doctor. And there - there were two on 'em, Doctor - mm - Doctor - oh - is Currier, there were two doctors. Mm. They were both good doctors. My doctor, Doctor Riddle. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
You never came into contact with anyone who was a manager or a foreman or anything in the steelworks did you? You never knew anyone from the steelworks who had a rather better job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well I know one or two but I don't know their names, I've forgotten their name.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What sort of people were they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Well there were one ever such a nice fellow. Oh he were a gentleman to everyone. Now the other one - he were younger than him, and he were on night duty. He were on duty when we were working at 
nights. And - he seemed to be just the opposite to him. You know, just his opposite. Do this, do it, you know, but the other one was as nice as pie. Difference in chalk and cheese in both of 'em. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You don't seem to know a great deal about the peopl
e who lived in Rotherham, other than your immediate family, but could you tell me who certain people associated with. I wonder if you could tell me who the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid208450\charrsid12200121 shopkeeper\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  friends were, who did the shop - keepers associate with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid208450\charrsid12200121 Well}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid208450\charrsid12200121 
there were}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  Mr Bury, that's in the paper - who we used to sell papers for.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Who were his friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Who - his friends? Oh I don't know who his friends were.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What about the clergymen? I know you went to the Salvation Army so you might not know much about the vicars?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
What about the teachers who taught at the school, who would their friends be, were they friends with people like yourselves, or did they have friends who were also teachers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well they seemed all alike to me.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Were there any farmers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Farmers? Not as I know, no. There were only one person that she were in - in - to learn to you cook. Cookery. She come from Sheffield. She learnt us to cook at such Mm. Called her Miss Barry, I don't know who their names is, I don't kno
w who - if she had any friends, I couldn't say.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
I wonder if you know anything about the employers, the people who actually owned the steelworks and owned any other mills or factories or workshops? Do you know anything about any of them, Do you know wh
at sort of a life they had, what sort of friends they had, anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well, the best mill I worked in were Parkers, in Gorgon Street.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 That was in Keighley?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. That was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I wonder if you remember anything before 1919 when you were living in Rotherham.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Do you remember any of the employers there, and what they were like? The people who owned the steelworks, I believe you worked in a sweet factory?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid208450\charrsid12200121 Kenyon\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 . It were }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid208450\charrsid12200121 Kenyon\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  - sweet factory. Called it }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid208450\charrsid12200121 Kenyon\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 .
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What sort of people were those who owned the sweet factory?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Well I'll tell you what - the boss over us, I don't whether were related to him or not but he were - oh he were an old schemer. He was a Scotchman, and he used to tell us this stu
ff, you never heard of such stuff. Mm. He were a bad 'un and all. And old Scotchman, used to live down Beryl Street where I was - lived with me mother down there. Oh -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 He owned the sweet factory did he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. He were just like a -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Foreman?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So you never actually came across the people who owned the mills? They presumably lived in another part?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well, Parkers down here where I worked up to 73 - they call him William Parker, I know him very well. Worked there a long while. A
nd me daughter worked there about seventeen year. Her what were a widow, what's a widow. And they call him William Parker. And - his father died, and his uncle died, and I thin it's all been left to him. They call him William Parker, but he were a nice - 
nice young fellow. He was a right good fellow. He even went up to me daughter to ask if she could come back work for him. And she'd been poorly. He were one of the best men I could ever work for. Yes. Very nice, yes. Yes. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid208450\charrsid12200121 And then I worked in - what they call that in - by Cavendish Street - is in Friesborough Yard.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Roselee Fabrics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 He's a millionaire.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Norris's?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, further down love. Where the Co-op is. Well you go round there. There's a mill in tat yard. Yes, but I used to work there. 
Now he works - manager, he was very nice. He were lovely. I didn't know much about him but he were }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid208450\charrsid12200121 nice}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
 fellow to work for. But - but his father, I've seen his father, and I shook hands with his father, and I've seen his uncle. Mind you, they both died - r
ecently, they haven't been dead so long. And I think all he's got - Johnny and Billy left. Well they call him William, but we always call - call him Billy. Billy were a gentleman to me when I were off - when I did that finger. I had eight stitches in it, 
and - I was in a club there like - a - what they call an accident - fund, and I joined it, I'd been in it for two year paying sixpence a week. So anyway I come to have this accident.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You said a lot of nice things about the employers in Keighley.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 And the people you worked for from 1930 onwards.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 It's interesting to hear the you know all this about the employers in Keighley.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Y}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4603364\charrsid12200121 es}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 .

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 And yet the employers in }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid208450\charrsid12200121 Sheffield}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 , you don't seem to know anything about, as if they were very remote.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 And as if they had nothing to do with you, is this right? You }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid208450\charrsid12200121 didn\rquote t
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 ' come across
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 And you could taste it, little bit of sharp things in - in sweet stuff. It's all - it's all ground up like paste, like making dough 
up. But it worked - worked with machine. Well it gets to a certain - a certain - time like there's time for you to do it, certain time, you took your lever off like that, and it's all inside this here in this mixer, mixer, and then - you've two big - oh -
 bigger round than my body, two big brass rollers. And you keep shoving it backward and forward while they get it - to such a - a thickness, you see, like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Would you say that where you lived all the people in the working class, would you say that you were of the working class?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Where I lived? Oh yes, we were all working people, yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Would you say that all the people in the working class had the same standard of living or would you say that there were different groups?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh no, di
fferent jobs were better than others you know. Better work and earn more money. Still they weren't big wages that day, but they was bigger than others. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What sort of jobs would they be that were better paid?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well - there were some people lea
ding coal. You see, all such like as pit - lot of pit work. Leading coal and there'd be - somebody working at Co-op, be all sorts, different sorts that used to come down you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 And they'd have a different standard of living?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 That's right, yes. Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do you think that there was one group that felt itself rather better than the rest?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Well I think them that had the money what made 'em - think they were it you know, they could get this, they could get t'other. And there were suchlike
 say me, I'd to - to come down to make ends meet, in one way. Because they got a few shillings by they just thought they were - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Were some families thought of as being rough and others as being respectable?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes. Oh yes, there's a lot like that. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do you remember a distinction of this kind between craftsmen and labourers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I don't know that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Were the craftsmen thought of as being quite respectable and the labourers thought of as being rough?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well, the more of the wor
king class in a rough district you know what I mean. They were more - like same as you say - like standard just simply to get theirself - you know thought they were it. They do though don't they, yes. But still, the poor people were working hard, they wer
e better people than what they was, they would help one another, and that's the others wouldn't do. They'd see you down.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did your mother and father have the same attitude to people in different classes? Would both your parents behave in the same way wh
en they were with people of different classes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well I can't say about that because mother and father never got amongst anybody like that see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you think your mother saw herself as belonging to a particular class? Do you think your mother saw 
herself as being working class or something else?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I don't know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Or do you think she just didn't think of this sort of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Of course our mother never told us a lot you know. Did tell us - only what we should want to know you know what I mean.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Was it possible at that time to move from one class to another? Was it possible to move from say not being quite so well off to being quite well off? And if so can you remember anyone who did this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I don't remember. Never made no differenc
e to us. No. I - mother used to say what is to be will be. She used to say just take it that way, she said, well - I used to say to her many times, I said, well I don't know how so and so does it. You know. Oh there my lass, I will have a turn sometimes. 
You know, she talked that way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Do you remember anyone ever being described as a real gentleman or a real lady? Did anyone ever describe anyone to you in those terms when you were a little girl?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well - it was a public house - top where me mother lived, top of the - top of the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid208450\charrsid12200121 road,}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
 Park Hill, that's where two publics were together, and one they called John, he kept this public house, it wasn't as big as this other one. And he used to think the blooming world of me. And he had a brother living with 
him. And - oh he - he worshipped me, he says one day to me mother - he said, by gum, he said, I wish I'd have been a bit younger. She said, what for? He said, I'd have had your Alice. She said, you would? He said, ah but I would. It's only fellow as ever 
looked at me you know. And owt like that. So - my mother telled me about it, oh I jumped }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid208450\charrsid12200121 down}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
 his throat. Yes. Aye. He was a nice gentleman though.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You thought of him as being a gentleman?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, he was, he were nice fellow. Was sociable, and he'd help anybody. And very nice.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 And it was because of this help that he gave to people that you thought of him as a real gentleman?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, I did, yes, he was, very nice he was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do you remember seeing a policeman around where you lived when you were a child? Was there ever a policeman around?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes, were two or three top of - top of street walking round. You know. Looking for kiddies.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What did you think of them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well I think it were just a case he wanted you know - hit children, what children like when they're out you know. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid208450\charrsid12200121 Mischievous}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 But when you were a little girl what did you think of him then, were you afraid of him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I used to be frightened of 'em. I used to be frightened of seeing one, I used to walk by
 on the road and I'd say oh - I used to walk by and then I'd run home and say oh that - because my mother wasn't there, you know, I'd been up to the paper shop for a paper, I said, do you know who's at top of the street mother? I said there's a policeman 
stood, so she said, well, he's a right to stand there if he wants, he can't lock you up. I run down the road. And I got frightened of him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 She never wanted you to be afraid of them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 She never said when you were naughty, I'll call a policeman or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So looking back at it how do you think now he treated the people round there?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 He treated the people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How did the policeman treat the people round there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well they weren't bad, you couldn't
 call it bad like. They just tell you now behave yourself and - get down home and - and that and be patient with 'em you know. But treat 'em cheeky, get hold of 'em and shake 'em. Just put a bit of frightening in 'em you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 The house at Beryl Street, was it rented?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. Ten shilling a week.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you ever see your landlord?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. Me brother did but I didn't. It was only always in room on her book, between a book. Ten shillings a week. Every Monday morning.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did he collect the rent himself, the landlord?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. I don't know whether it were landlord or whether it were agent for him but - there used to be a gentleman come.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What did you think of him as a landlord?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well I haven't seen him 'cos I were at school. Used to come in the morning you see. Monday morning early.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do you remember feeling that at that time your parents had a struggle to make ends meet?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh aye. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What did you think about that at the time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well I thought well - me poor old mother's trying to do this and she's }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid208450\charrsid12200121 
trying}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
 to do t'other and she can't get on. You know she be - shan't make her way no way. Mm. Oh I've said it many a time, I don't know how she's done what she has done. Them days. I don't know how she used to do it sometimes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When you were at school was your father ever ill or out of work at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Not as I know on. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 It was later on that he started being ill?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. Yes. When he got with -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So you can't remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So you never had to go to the Guardians or a charity or the parish for help?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, I - no, not as I know on, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
When there was someone in the district whom the people disapproved of very strongly, was there any special way in which then showed it? Do you remember there e
ver being anyone in your district who the people didn't like and them showing this to them in any way? No? How old were you when you started to go to school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Five year old. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you go full time? Morning and afternoon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Went every day to school though, which were eleven or thirteen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you go full time, morning and afternoon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What was the name of the school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Alma Road Board School. Alma Road. Board School.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 It was a mixed school was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do what luv?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 It was a mixed school, there were boys and girls?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes, infants and - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you go to that all the time from starting school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, I never went nowhere else, no. I went there and left there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you used to walk to school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh I didn't live far away.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How long did it take you to get there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh about ten minutes. Weren't very f}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid208450\charrsid12200121 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 r.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Who went with you, when you started first who took you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Me husband. We used to go to school together.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 He took you when you started at first?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, both went to school together.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Your mother never used to take you did she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh she never - she didn't know nowt about that. But we got talking - talking like, we used to always meet up for the school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You used to come home for your dinner didn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 YES.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You never had it at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What did you think of school, did you like it or dislike it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes, had some good meals then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you like school or dislike it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 O
h - oh I - liked me school. And made good a - and made good attendance, that's why I left when I was thirteen. You had to make so - so many attendances you see at school. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How did you feel about the teachers, what did you think about them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 We
ll I couldn't find anything wrong with 'em. They were all right to me, yes. Of course they like to be a bit haughty sometimes if you don't behave yourself and that say don't they. There to look after you. I don't know as ever I did anything wrong.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Wer
e there any things that the teachers emphasized as being important in life. Did they ever tell you about manners, had you to be very mannerly?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 They didn't bother about that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What about tidiness in appearance?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 About what luv?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Tidiness?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Oh we had to be clean, yes, the fingernails, yes. All they things and our shoes. Tell you me brother used to clean mine every night. Oh aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 And what about being on time in the morning? Did you have to be on time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 For nine o'clock. We had to be in for nine o'clock.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What about ways of speaking, would they correct you at all if you mispronounced something?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What about your Yorkshire accent, did they say anything about that? Or did they also speak with Yorkshire accent as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 That's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 They did?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 If you did something the teachers disapproved of what would happen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well if you did anything wrong you'd to see the headmistress. And see what she got to say then. And the
n she'd - she'd ask her questions and she'd ask me mine if I did anything wrong. What was you doing for to be caned, they'd cane you, and they're not supposed to have a cane them days. Not a cane at school at all. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid208450\charrsid12200121 And - she'd - what's the reason why you're being caned, Alice Scroop. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Well she'd tell her tale And I'd tell mine. And now she'd chastise her and tell her well - if anything goes wrong again - just you to - tell me, come and tell me, and I'll - see to it, without caning her.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So really it was the headmistress rather than the teacher?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Who would administer any punishment?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What sort of offence would it be that you would be caned for? What sort of thing would you be doing to be in trouble?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well I was once in trouble.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What was it for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
And - it was outside. And - were - lads and - girls all mixed together in yard, you know, playground, and - it come about - oh two or three of us - sisters in - called her Miss Berry, she were at Sheffield. And she f}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid208450\charrsid12200121 etched us all out and put us to}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
 this line. And she asked us what we'd been doing this and 't' other and - all about it They're not supposed to use a cane. So anyway - she started me first, she asked me all - practically about when I'd been doing outside. I said
, well you don't expect me to stand here and not stick up for myself. I said, if I don't nobody else will. She said - what were the reason - tell me all about it. So I said to her, I said, well, I says - he shouldn't have hit me, and I hit him back. Defen
d
 myself. Well, one word got to another. She just - questioned the other two, they'd been hit or something. So she said well you can just hold your hand out. Holding my hand out and she give me three swipes across me hand, that left one. Put your right han
d
 out, not your left. So I put that out. Oh, talk about - scream. Oh she laid right into me. I never forgot it. So anyway. Move up. I had to move up for the other one to have a crack. So she had to move up with the t'other had a crack. She moved up. So all
 
at once - she said something to me, I just can't think what it was, and there were a - pile - pile of plates - what you write on, slates - yes that's right. So I thought well I'll get my revenge out of you. She was turned round doing something under - I -
 I gets hold of one - two of these slates, I don't know how many there were, two or three, I g}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid208450\charrsid12200121 ot these slates and I just give}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
 her a crack. And I}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid208450\charrsid12200121  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
run like the devil through - schoolyard and down the hill. So when I got home - oh I had a hand. Hand were all p
uffed up, I couldn't - it was this one. I'd put that out but she made me put this one. It's all on me fingers here, you never saw such a sight. So I got home, I run down into the kitchen to me mother. She says - where are you going, where you - what you c
o
me for, it's not school time yet. I said, no look at me hand mum. Whoever's done that? I says, schoolteacher with cane. She says, she never. I said, she done that, I've come - I've run out, and I've hit her at top of head with a slate. She said, do what? 
I
 said, I've hit her top of head with a slate, I said, she's hit me and I've hit her She says, you're not supposed to - use a cane. I said, well she used to on my hand And two more, I can tell you their names, I said, she's used it on them. Well - oh by he
aven, I had to have bobbies down at our house, mam's, so - policeman come to front door, mother want to it. She bandaged it up for me. So anyway - somebody at door mum. Went to it, a - a policeman. So the policeman come in, she says, come in}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid208450\charrsid12200121 .}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  So he says, I've come about your daughter at school. She said, yes, she's just been telling me about it. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid208450\charrsid12200121 She s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
aid, wait a minute I'll fetch her out of kitchen, out of - anyway, fetched me into room. Now then - Miss - what have you been doing. I said, well I expect you k
now, that's what you've come about for. Just like that. I were right bold in them days I was, you know, I had to stick up for myself. Anyway - he says - you smashed a plate - a slate on her head, see, it's bleeding, she had to go - had to have doctor to i
t. I says, yes, and look at my hand. I said, what about that. He said, you look as if you want to go somewhere with that. I said, just you look at me fingers. They're red raw and all swolle}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid208450\charrsid12200121 n}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  up, me hand and all. I said, that's what she done at me and I said
 and I hit her back to defend meself. So he said, well you did right in a way, he said, but, he says, I don't know about the case. I said, well you can do as you like with me, I said, I'm not having it. Well - I didn't know what I did say. Mother said, no
w
 shut up now, don't be cheeky I said, I don't care, I said, I'm not going to have standing here - blaming me for something as I haven't done. So - any rate - mother took me up to doctors, wrapped it took, took it up - up to a doctors. So Doctor Cray says 
-
 Doctor Riddle - he says, now then Mrs Burke, what's she been doing? Because I was a tom lad tell you the truth you know. And I used to go with me sister 'cos she couldn't help herself, with being a poorly lass, she'd always been poorly. I used to get in 
s
crapes for he Anyway - looks at my hand. What you been doing, have you been falling? I said, no, I says, that's teacher's cane at school. He said, you what? So my mother tell him, she says, it's cane, she had a cane - three times back of her hand, school.
 
He says - Oh, he says, by gum, he says, we'll have to do something with that. Anyway as I tell you, bobby comes round, and I telled him, I says, yes, I'd do it again, I says, if she did hit - I said, so he says - oh well, he says, what are you going to do
 then? Says, what am I going to do, she says, well what can I do? She's only - hit her back in self }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid208450\charrsid12200121 defense}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
 like. So he said, well I'll have to report it. But by God, she'd a - fine for it, for using cane on us. I just forget how much it was but yes they pu
t it on her. She'd no business to use a cane at school. Or do what she had done. And it weren't first 'un what she'd done, there were t' other two nearly as bad. Mm. Oh aye. That's the only time that I ever had any trouble with these at - at the school.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did your parents show an interest in your school work at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did they ask you what you did at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, not - not really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did they ever visit the school or meet the teachers?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh no. No. Did - we did - all of us did good attendance except one. Mm. That were George.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did the other children come from similar types of home to your own or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Don't remember now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You don't remember what sort of homes the other boys and girls came from?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What what luv?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
What sort of homes they came from, the other boys and girls at school, whether they came from the same sort of home as yourself, or whether they came from poorer homes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well some - some are better dressed, that's about all as I know to it, better dressed than others you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did the teachers single out some children for different treatment from the others?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well my class was all right, but some times we got into trouble outside. There were some boys what were hitting this littl
e girl. That's the only trouble I ever had at school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You won't say that the teachers treated some children differently than others?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I don't think so. Well they didn't do in - they didn't do in our - my class. Remember that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Were there any gangs or groups in the school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
There were some bad - bad children like you know, same as they were - wanted to be always in trouble, you know, like they do do when they get together and then they get bad and - and they're fighting one another.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Were there any children who were left out of things? Sort of a bit lonely, left out of the play?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, I don't think so, not in my class.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You didn't go to any other schools did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Alma Road was it called?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Alma Road Board School.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How old were you when you left school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Thirteen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Would you have stayed longer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 That were a good attendance, you'd to make so many attendants for that. And I left when I were thirteen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Would you have stayed longer if you had had the opportunity?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
I would, yes, I liked me school. I never had - stayed away, it would have to be something really happened - if I did. I used to like me school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you attend any part time education afterwards, evening classes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, no. Never had much of that, but not them days, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you have any regrets about your education?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So you think you benefited from attending school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well the only thing - as I couldn't get - I got past - I got - standard f
our, and I couldn't - take - geography in. Geography, I couldn't take that - I couldn't get above that. And I tried and I double tried but I couldn't take - take it in somehow. I could do me sums and dictation, all like that, but as far that I could not. 
Yet I stop at - pass standard four.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 After leaving school did you go to work full time or did you go half time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I went full time. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So while you were at school, you did a part time job didn't you, you took papers round
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 At Sunday, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you do any }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid208450\charrsid12200121 other part}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  time jobs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. No. No, none whatever.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 This taking papers round on a Sunday, did you do it right until you left school?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid208450\charrsid12200121 Oh yes, did it for - did it for a long, long while, years I did.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you carry on after you left school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. I left school. After I left school I did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When you were at work you still did this job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, not when I were working. Up to about fifteen. Just at Sunday, not other days. It was just - that were me - leisure day
, what I should have a rest. I used to go and help me brother you see. Because it were a long run for him to shove that barrow. And he said one - one - well I don't know what day it were - but he says - will it be - will I be all right, Alice, he says, to
 help me with barrow? I said, where to? He said, up - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid208450\charrsid12200121 Scolscope}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
 and that. I said, oh it's a long way isn't it? I says, anyway I'll go with you, if I don't like it I'll stop at home. Just like that. So anyhow I went with him and I went with him ever since.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You went on doing that until you were fifteen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. Then I started at the - sweet factory.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You left school when you were thirteen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What happened when you were thirteen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 This were the first job that I went to were the sweet factory. And then at Sunday I was working for papers at Sunday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So when you were at the sweet factory you were working five and a half days a week at the sweet factory?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 And you were working Sunday on the paper round as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
We - we worked five days a week, but it were a Saturday morning, and then I'd have - be the Saturday to myself and then I used to go out at Sunday with the papers. I've been a worker all me life.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How much did you used to get out of your paper round?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Well I didn't do it to get the money. You see, it was - he used to give it to me brother you see, and - used to give us so much to dozen. And whatever we selled, you see used to give us so much a dozen. And then our Thomas'd share - what he give you b
etween us. And then we used to give it to me mother, and mother give us some spending money back out and she used to save us other.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So you don't know how much you used to get out of it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Not - not really. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 But it would take you all day Sunday to do it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Ay?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 It would take you all day Sunday to do it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes, yes. Went out at nine o'clock, we never come back while about seven at night.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did doing this -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 We'd a good round though, we took some money, we had a good round. And we got some good Christmas boxes. We did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You liked the job did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I did, yes. If it hadn't have been so much - uphill, you know. Anyway we got through all right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When you did this job at first you were still at school, would you say that the job altered your attitude to school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You still carried on enjoying school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When you were thirteen you stated at the sweet factory?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When you left school you went to a sweet factory?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do you remember how you got the job at the sweet factory?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
The sweet factory? Well - I - I went after - well were in - it was advertised in - for 'em you see and I went to see 'em. And there - there's a - in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Morpeth Street
{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Rotherham{\*\xmlclose}. And - and I got the job. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You got it through an advert?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. Yes, it was advertised like.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do you remember what you had to do at the sweet factory?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well we had - we was learners you see, and - used to - well there was so
mebody there like to teach all of us - how - what to do, so we did what we could, do us best, so I was there about fifteen months there. And I went from there to - to - no, where did I go to? I went to Marsden near, {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}
Huddersfield{\*\xmlclose}. That were first mill. I went into
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Into a wool}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4603364\charrsid12200121 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 en mill?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4603364\charrsid12200121 Yes, t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 hat - that were mill I went into in 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Rotherham{\*\xmlclose} - in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Huddersfield{\*\xmlclose}. Well a little village called Marsden in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Huddersfield{\*\xmlclose}
. And I went to pottery. I weren't very - I - I weren't long at - I only stopped about a week
 at mill but I didn't like well I liked the mill but I - mill, there was five of us went from the Labour Exchange. But I didn't like the - the digs where - what we was in, you know, different places. So - and the others didn't like now, so we only stopped
 about a week, we come back.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 All of you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 All the girls came back together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, they couldn't settle with it neither.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you go to the Labour Exchange because you were out of work at the sweet factory, had you been finished at the sweet factory?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh I'd finished with sweet - sweet factory.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Had they finished you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh no, I finished meself.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You didn't like it very much?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well I liked it and I didn't like it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 And the Labour Exchange sent you to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Huddersfield{\*\xmlclose}?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Well - there was a - there was four of us went all together. And they sent us from the Labour Exchange. Had to go to Labour Exchange and make all re - re - you know, reports and that, then they sent - we had to send away to go to - to - we
 were going to Marsden Near Huddersfield. Everything would be seen to, like we go there all right, lodgings and all that. But I didn't like lodgings, it were terrible lodgings.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So you went back home after a week?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 We went back home. I went back o
ne week, that's - end of that week. And I think the others went week after. And that week after, didn't stop long.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 And then you got the job at the pottery?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do what }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid208450\charrsid12200121 luv}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 ?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You got the job at the pottery,
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, I went to work at pottery.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 The job at the sweet factory, can you remember what hours you worked there? What time you started and what time you finished?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well got near as - near - near as I can tell you - it'd be {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname time}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Minute}
{\xmlattrvalue 30}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Hour}{\xmlattrvalue 19}}}half past seven{\*\xmlclose} 'til five.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you work Saturdays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, I didn't work Saturdays.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Can you remember what you were paid when you started work at first?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Beg your pardon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Can you remember what your wage was when you started work at first?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Eight shilling.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Eight shillings a week?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you ever get any holidays with pay?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh no, there weren't nothing like that then. Not them days.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When you used to get your eight shillings, did you used to give it all to your mother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes, oh yes, had to tip up.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 And she spent it on food and other things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How did you get on with the other people you worked with at the sweet factory?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh they were all right, but - the old man were - that overlooker what was over - he were - he were old Scotch
man. I never forget him, he were a - oh he were - were a bad 'un, you know what I mean to say, you couldn't do nothing right for him. Yes, oh he was - he used to live down at same street as me mother and all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How did your employer treat you, the man who owned the sweet factory, how did he treat you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Oh - it were all right but him, it was him, you see. He - no one could get on with him because such a nasty old man. You couldn't do nowt right for him. And that more or less that's what we left for. You couldn't do nowt right at all for him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How did you feel about the work itself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 All right, the work, I liked - always liked all me work I've been to. But - oh it were - oh he were nasty.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You carried on delivering the papers even when you were at the sweet factory didn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Yes. Yes. That were when I were just thirteen when I left school that. I was doing it before that, before I was thirteen, every Sunday, and it were - when I could go like. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You went to work in the pottery, now how long did you work at the pottery for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well it's round about two years. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you finish working at the pottery when you got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes. Yes. About eighteen and all the little bits of different jobs, up to me getting wed like.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Can you remember any other jobs you did before you got married? Other than at the pottery and the sweet factory?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 But you did one or two different ones?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, I can't - I can't remember.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What did you do at the pottery?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Used to - well we used to have to - I - I made - I made 'em - I made 'em, and - and then we have to - what they call - used to be all one a bench, we'd a bench apiece, and we'd a treadle here, come through - through us board, and it were like a mushro
om And we'd call it pot moulder, white pot moulder, and then we used to - go and fetch us own clay - and we used to have a leather thing on here, you know, to save us from getting - wet.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Like a hod?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, that's right. And then we used to put it 
on this - get it on like that. Like that you see. And then we used to come and put it on a slab, and then we used to wet us hands - we'd a big bowl to wet us hands in because - it'd draw you in this - the clay. You know, you cold feel it drawing you in. A
n
d we used to just - put us hand in quick, and get a nice piece out, and then put it over us mould like that, on - and - over a - it's shape of a mushroom like, same as a basin, and then we used to put it on top and level it all down, all the way round sid
es, and make it as straight as I could right round. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid208450\charrsid12200121 
No finger tips in, you'd to have it right straight, and then - press it down, and press it out, and then at bottom round rim - round - edge - edge like, we used to have a lit - a right sharp knife on us be
nch, and we used to - used - put us foot on treadle like that, and then - it used to spin round, not so quick, and we used to hold us knife like that to go round. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Well it was shaping that all the way round you see. Taking all the raw edge off. Aye. Yes. An
d then it went into a kilns to dry. And it used to go in dipping house, what they call dipping house - and then it was put through kilns to dry. You know, big - big kilns bake it, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You were married 1909, between being married and 1918 did you do any more jobs or were you at home all that time, with the children?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Oh I never - did - didn't do much on - I got the children. Oh I tell you what I used to do. I used to go in fields pea pulling. Pea pulling. Summertime. Yes, and I potato picked and a
ll that round - where we come from, it is that way you know. Out to Lincolnshire way. Yes. Only seven mile there seven mile back for one and three a day. And we had to walk it. Yes. That's seven miles, seven miles back at one and three a day. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Was that when the children were small you did that?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Not - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4603364\charrsid12200121 well}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 , I didn't take me children there. I took me children - nearer to. What they called - Dennabigh Main, what we used to call Dennabigh Main through there, we never used to go there - they use
d to come and fetch us in a lorry. And I used to take me pram and me two kiddies, sit there all day picking peas. And the kiddies, they enjoyed it. It were - nice weather you know. Oh they loved it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you used to do that nearly every summer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I
 didn't always used to take 'em every day. Like just depends how me - 'cos me husband were a - he weren't - he - well he'd been knocked about in wartime you know and - some days he'd be well and - sometimes he'd be weak, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid208450\charrsid12200121 he\rquote d}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  be poorly, it were like that. 
I said - well he did, he used to always stop at home and make ends meet you know. 'Cos the money weren't like it is today. He got thirty-seven and six a week. My family and him. I had to do sommat.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You came to live in Keighley in about the 30's didn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Yes, we - they went us from the Labour Exchange. They sent me two oldest daughters one - me oldest is dead, and - she died while I were in Morton Banks, and me other one - she lives at Leicester, well them two - oldest - they sent 'em - they se
nt - they sent 'em through Labour Exchange to Cloughs. That's up at Keighley, up here. Yes. Well - they sent down two of 'em, they were here about nearly a fortnight. Oldest girl did settled, and her come to live with me sister - as now she lives back at 
church, she did do.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 She had lodgings did she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, she'd had her - she had her both her legs off not - oh years or two since. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid208450\charrsid12200121 Eeh}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  and she were nice old lady. But the old man were a cheeky old man. You know - so anyway - they come to Robert Clough
s and they found them this lodgings. And the lodgings were good. Call her - Nellie - oh it's on me tongue then - Nellie - it'll come to me, and - they stopped there about nearly a fortnight, our Annie, now she sat all right our Annie. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid208450\charrsid12200121 Well she didn't like 
- her husband, said he were on cheeky side you know, so she wrote home to me and she says, mum, she says, we've landed all right, she said, and we've got good digs, she says, but - I - I don't care for - landlady - landlord but - the landlady's all right 
with us like. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
So she says, if you don't look sharp and get a - get your house mother she said, I'm coming back. She said, I can't - she wouldn't stick it with him. I don't know reason but - anyway - they'd daughters and sons of their own and all. And - anyw
ay about a week after - had a letter come, would I go and see 'em at Labour Exchange. So I showed dad the letter and he said go down and see him. See owt doing. So he said, don't look as if we're going to get away at all. So I said well I went down and - 
I
 stated me case and told 'em like - oh, he says, don't worry Mrs Scroop, we've got you a house. He says, are you willing to go? I says, well I am, I says, I'll have to see me husband first. Well, he says - go back and tell your husband says. And then she 
s
ays - you needn't to trail right down, she said, we'll come to see you. If you're going to - have the house and all. I says, well me daughter - me daughter looks like coming back because she didn't like her lodgings. So - anyway she - she - there were a l
a
dy came up - this lady came up, she said now Mrs Scroop we've got you a house in - Hecross she said and is your husband willing to go and he said - he said yes like. So when we could go and what the house is, and I can remember it if it were now. It was T
hursday before Christmas. And we were up to eyes in - and snow - and ice it were bad coming. And - anyway we landed - we set off at seven in the morning, we didn't land}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4603364\charrsid12200121  until}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  teatime. We had to keep stopping you know on road, it were terrible winter that winter.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You came by bus did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
No, we come by the - he had a private car and he put us in private car. Treat us as well as he could you see. And - he - and we got - we got - got - here like and - got putting the stuff and that in, and at Friday
 morning - I went just up two steps, up to top of road, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid208450\charrsid12200121 to}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
 just see where the shop was. Well I baked nearly two stone of bread afore I come. And I was a looking for some bacon and stuff like for their breakfasts, for the workers. Down I went in middle of r
oad and broke me ankle. Yes. That were at Friday. That were - as I moved at Thursday and broke me ankle. And then I were about six week I wouldn't go to hospital. Anyway it was the matter and he thought I'd sprained it. Well I went and I went on with me k
nee on a chair like that you know. Well I had to get me son up at school, the only lad I had. Going for school and - anyway, I went - went on a Monday, I had doctor at finish, I }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4603364\charrsid12200121 had}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  to fetch doctor. And doctor come, he says, now what's the matter with you? 
So - Doctor Att's assistant it was. She were deaf. But anyway, she come, she says, oh my word, my word, whatever have - it was Sunday night she come. Eleven at night, Sunday night it was, looked at me leg, she said, oh, Mrs Scroop now when did you do that
? So - I voiced up and told her, she said, oh, she ought to go in hospital. He says, she - it's}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4603364\charrsid12200121  a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
wonder gangrene didn't set in. He said well I - I'd just escaped it. But I - be about seven week I was like - with it. I had nowt but bad luck.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You and your husband both got jobs at Parkers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
No, me husband didn't work at Parkers. They all worked - I'd five. I had four daughters and me - husband, working - at Cloughs. Them four did. I had three going to school, and four working at Cloughs and father. T
he four oldest girls. See, and the other two was ready - for work, well - our Alice - she's youngest in four oldest girls now, well she worked at a bakery. Greasing tins in a bakery. She only got three shillings a week. So - that - oh and then she fell do
wn step - slipped downstairs and hurt her back. So that come.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 And you got a job at Parkers?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Oh I've been at Parkers - I - I'd be - I'd been at - tell you in a minute - I was at - Ennis's in offices, and I've been to Cloughs. And - what were I do
ing down - in fleece millyard. I've forgot what they call it. But I was spinning there. And then I come to Parkers. And I finished at Parkers, I'd be about - seventy-three. When I had to finish 'cos me legs started swelling up.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What job did you do at Parkers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Well - I was doffing and spinning. When I went back I was - before I went I went spinning. Then when I went back - Mary Parker - he said we'll put you on a bit lighter job, he said, we'll put you on doffing. So they put me on doffing like. S
o I could have a rest in between you see. Oh they were good to me at Parkers. They were good to me daughters and all, me daughter worked there about seventeen year.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Is there any type of occupation that you would have preferred to the ones that you've done?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Well I don't know, there weren't such jobs at our way see like there is over here. Ours is more like a colliery district. There was a - bacon factory, well - that's not been going long. And there were - there were - a gas house, which made bott
les, me two daughters worked there, I didn't work there. They got what they called blow bottles, blow them into bottles. Mm. Well they had to go for that job because it were bad for chest. Mm, a big long pipe you'd to blow down you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You got it on your chest did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you ever serve an apprenticeship or training period for any of the jobs you did?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. No luv.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you ever belong to a trade union?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Beg pardon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you ever belong to a trade union?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, I 
were - I was in one union - and that was when I were at Parkers. And - I was in it two year, paying sixpence - no accident fund that were, and - I was in it about two year - and - when I come to - have that finger done, I put in for compensation you know.
 
I got compensation. But they did me out of me money. Well anyway - when I come back I asked to - have a look and - he asked manager and he said well I'll see Billy, see what he says Alice for you. Well he come up. He says, now then - he always called me A
l
ice, he said, now then Alice, he says, what is it you want? I says, well, I says, I - I've been paying two years into this insurance. And I said, I can't claim anything. He says, no Mrs Scroop, you was too old, they should have told you that. You were too
 old when you joined it. You should have been under seventy.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You'd been paying all that time for nothing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
And I paid all them - sixpence a week it were, yes. So I tell you I - I couldn't claim a ha'penny. But he were good to me, he said, I'll te
ll you what I'll do, I'll be frank with you - Mrs Scroop, he said, you're a good worker and you're always here - he says, he says, I'll tell you what I'll do, he says, do what you can with it - put a row in, it's going all round, he says, and I'll give yo
u your wage. So I thought that weren't bad. He says, I know it's a long while, two year in the - he said, you should have known it before now. I was too old, you're supposed - you to be under seventy. Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Some people say that in those days there 
was a big division between trained craftsmen and other workers. Did you feel that or not? Did you feel that there was a big division between craftsmen and the labourers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, luv, you mean to be happy at me work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you ever think that when you were at work that there was a big difference in -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I'd sooner be at work than at home. You mean that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You know people who have done an apprenticeship?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 They're trained craftsmen aren't they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Would you say that when you were at work there was a big difference between the trained craftsmen and the labourers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Oh yes. In a way, yes. Thought well they're a bit - bit - they're a bit higher up that me. You know what I mean? I felt under the - under them like, that's w
hat I used to feel. Same as a - an overlooker you know. You just sometimes get a - you get a good overlooker, sometimes you get a bad 'un. We had a right good overlooker at the - oh - called him Jimmy Mac - Jimmy - yes, Jimmy Mac Something they called him
. Anyway, he were a good 'un to work for, he never used to trouble you. No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Would you say that when you started work full time that it changed your general attitude to life in any way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well I felt different. Felt different.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What did it make you feel, how did you feel different?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Well - I didn't see much in it in - in a way like, you know what I mean. Always pleasant at work. I liked - I liked me work, better than working at home, you understand.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Was it because you enjoyed the company do you think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Well it were a lot on it because - when you've all brought 'em up and they all leave you practically, you know that I mean. And you get amongst com - bit of company and that. Yes. Oh I used to like me work. Never bothered about going to work.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you continue to live at home with your parents after you left school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When I left school? Oh yes, I liked - I liked to be at home with mother and father.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Except for the week when you went to Huddersfield?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 That's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 But you didn't like it so you went back?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Would you say that starting work full time changed your relationship with your mother and father at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh they didn't used to bother. As long as I were all right at me work, and - and everything were going on all right it - suited them.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you still get on well with your brothers and sisters once you started work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do what love?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you still get on well with your brothers and sisters?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 On a Sunday you still went out selling papers didn't you?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So you didn't go to Sunday school at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you take an interest in politics at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, not as I know on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You told me earlier of how you spent your spare time, you used to go walks and play out with the other boys and girls?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh aye.. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you continue to spend your spare time in this way or did you do different things now, now that you'd left school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh - was that different - that t
ime being, yes. That's different altogether. We more or less was helping about - were looking - after home, helping at home - with mother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you ever go out in the evenings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 In the evening? No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You were always busy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. Always something to do.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you make any new friends, either boyfriends or girlfriends once you started school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. I went to - I went to school and I went with me -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Once you started work I should have said, once you started work did you make any new friends, either boyfriends or girlfriends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
No, no. Only - me - well - when I were going to school, but after - we all fell off then after. Then he - he come to move to - to a place called Dreighton, and then you know started courting him - when I wer
e about - just turned sixteen, reckoned to be you know. And then -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 During the period just after you left school, did you have any special friends, either boyfriends or girlfriends?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. I used to go - me and my brother used to go to school toget
her, and me husband what was - he used to go to the same school and we all three used to go to school together. Yes. And that - that's - that's - the reason I know him and I got courting him and I got married to him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So he was sort of your boyfriend, special boyfriend?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, he was, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 From being at school to being married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When you went out with your future husband, where would you go to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I wouldn't - I wouldn't go far. We never went far from home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Would he come to your house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Oh yes, he - he'd come in for a while, sit him down, he'd come sometimes, he would - oh I'm not going there all night, how you do you know, kids like.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you ever go back to his house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh I went - oh well I went by, come ne
xt Sunday, come again, aye. I was practically a sister, he only had one sister. And he thought - she thought the world of me. Mm, after I got wed. That bad started then. When he went into the Na - Army. Were a grand lad afore then, but when he went into t
he army, come out of the army - I had a poor life.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did your parents meet all your friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do what luv?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did your parents used to like to meet your friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes. Oh they'd all come - yes, they've been down time - many times now. Oh they liked - yes, they liked me dad and me mother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did they expect to know where you were when you went out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do what luv?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did they expect to know where you were going when you went out?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Who, me - me parents? Oh, they used to - don't b
e - they used to say, go on, ten minutes and don't be long before you're back. When I used to go out of sight you know. Like being young you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you have to be home by a certain time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh I don't know as I went away from top of - top of thi
s street where I lived. Used to stand there talking hours. I never went away much from home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You were eighteen when you got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How long had you known your husband when you married him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well, he were a Not - he's a Nottingha
m boy. Well Not - he come from Nottingham. They come to live in Rotherham. And that's where I got - were going to school and that's where I got in tow with him like there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 If you knew him at school you must have known him at least five years?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh at least. Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You met at school, he came from Nottingham originally?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. He was born in Nottingham.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you save up money before getting married or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh no. Hadn't much money to save them days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did your parents help you in setting up a home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 In the - my parents what?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Help you set up a home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh I helped me mother at home every - he'd be in lodgings I believe you know, I used to stop at home and give her a hand then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When you actually got married did she help you to set up a home? Did she give you things for the house, or buy you things for the house?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Well - she partly did. But I couldn't get a house then, we couldn't get a house for love nor money. But I did get a little house, and then he went - I 
had our - had two babies - no, I had one. I had our Annie, well he went soldiering then. And then no - I had two, I had our - no, I had Harold in me mother's - had both of them at me mother's.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You lived at your mother's house did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, at time, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you get engaged at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. No, it were just a straight marriage a - register office and - aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you have any presents, did anyone buy you wedding presents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid208450\charrsid12200121 Eeh}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  I've forgot.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Were there any guests at the wedding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, there were only his sister and - and her husband and me and me husband.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 They were witnesses?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you have a honeymoon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So where did you live at first when you got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I was at me mother's. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How many years did you stay with her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well I can't tell you that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I think you said you got a little house before your husband went in the army?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I was in a little house behind the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid208450\charrsid12200121 bake house}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 . And - I had a little - our Annie, that oldest gi
rl, an then he went away and left me, and I were pregnant with me other baby. And he went from pit with three more - three more men. But I didn't know where he'd gone.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 He didn't tell you he was going?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Beg pardon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 He didn't tell you he was going in the army?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
No. He went from the pit, got word and went straight through to - Aldershot. I and there was three of 'em. Well I couldn't get to no - no one. I lived in this little house behind bakery, well I couldn't pay - me rent, I couldn't do
 nowt because I'd no - no money or nothing. So anyway - I go down to Town Hall where - soldiers was and I reported it to - officer. Oh he says, is that the case Mrs Scroop? I said yes it is. I said, he's been gone about - a month, I said, I don't know whe
r
e he is nor nowhere. I said, he went from pit, I said, in his pit clothes and all that, never changed himself nor nowt. And I said I've got three on 'em. Because all three went together and they never seen owt no more. Well - the old gentleman down at the
 
Hall where - soldiers were billeted - so I went down and seed him and - he give me a cheque to - rig me little lass out, you know, with shoes and that, and - anyway - he - he says, oh leave it to us Mrs Scroop, he says, we'll find him. Well he's away in A
l
dershot. Well I got all me back pay down, he says, you'll get your back pay, I says, well - I've had to give me little house up, I said, I couldn't pay me rent nor nothing. And I couldn't expect me poor old mother I says to do it for me. She's done enough
 
for me I think. So - he says, yes, he says, very good of her. So that was - so we'll find him, he says, and there's a - a - what did they call it, the Tommy ticket or something they called it, to go and rig - our Annie up. Clothes and that for her, and bi
t - something to eat. Because they were good to me when he went. But I got all me money down. I had a rough life while he were in the army.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you go back to live with your mother then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, I had to do because - I couldn't stop in me house you 
see I couldn't pay me rent. I wasn't getting a ha'penny from nowhere. Not while me - pension book come through and everything you see well they - they didn't know where he was - he was, well they had to find out where he was. Then they would have let me k
now you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 And then you started to get your pay every week?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 That's it, everything all - all serene like.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Was it about 1914 when he went in the army?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 That's right, first world it was, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 The beginning of it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So you went to live with your mother, you went back to live with your mother in 1914, did you stay with her then until the end of the war?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I stayed there - yes, yes. My eldest was born then. And she was born and - I told you about him coming home didn'
t I? Then he went back. He stayed over his leave and - I told him he could come - to see me, he says, I'm very - very sorry Mrs Scroop he says - he's been over - over here with - his time. I said, well he went from here soon enough. Ah but he's been stayi
ng somewhere, he says, and that's the reason why he come to see his baby before he's gone over to France. I never saw him while - he come home for good.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So she was two was she? He saw her first when she was two?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, well she'd be round about that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 That was Elsie, the second one. When he came home in 1918 did he come and live at your mother's with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 He come and stayed with me while war were over do you mean? When he come home for good? Oh yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 He came to live at your mother's with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, had to stop because we had nowhere to go you see. No place you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Then you bought another house did you, you got another house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, and we managed to get one after that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How old was your husband when you married him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well - he's two years and a half older than me. And I'll be eighty-one next.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So he would be about twenty or twenty-one when you got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Something like that, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When you got married at first you told me that your husband was a trammer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Had he always been a trammer from leaving school? Or had he done any other jobs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh - no. No, he went straight to pit as far as I - I know.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When he came out of the army what job did he go to then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I think he went back into pit again, I'm not sure.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Was he a trammer again?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well he wouldn't be a trammer then, he'd be different. I just forget luv that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Can you tell me briefly what he did between the end of the war and him dying, what sort of job
s did he do in that period? I know he worked at Cloughs for one period.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes, he worked at Cloughs.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2714250\charrsid12200121 What was he doing at Clough's?}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 He was in - what they called it, where they give 'em all - have to go for the stuff, what do they call 'em
? Where they go for brushes and all suchlike as that you know. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2714250\charrsid12200121 Eeh}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
 - well he used to - he used to have to look after that, look after this place, and lock up, lock it up. Used to come for all -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 He was a storekeeper?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 That's the thing. That's right, yes. I just couldn't get it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You can't remember any jobs he did at Rotherham, other than being in the pit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, not as I know of, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You had to go out to work as soon as your children got a bit bigger?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How did your husband feel about you going out to work? Did he not mind?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Well - no, he - he said I cold just go please myself. I tell him I said we can't manage on this? I said, I'll go and do a bit of cleaning or something like that. Well at Sunday morning I used to go
 and clean - the public houses, used to go and clean that out of Sunday morning. Just odd jobs like that. To help us out.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Was this because he was out of work quite a bit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Ay?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Was it because he was out of work quite a bit?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well - he w
as out of work, we didn't get the money like, you'd depend on the pit giving them - what they call - a - a sub - sub - sub something they called it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Subsistence?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Something like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How do you think your husband felt about his work, did he like it or dislike it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh I never heard him grumble. No, liked his work.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You had eleven children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How many of these were born before 1918? Was it just two, Alice and Elsie?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. Yes, at wartime.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What year would it be when Alice was born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Our Alice? Well that's first oldest.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Alice is the eldest?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, El - Elsie's the oldest.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What year would she be born in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I know it's in November. Yes, the tenth.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You were married in 1909, which was your first baby? Was Elsie your first baby?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Who?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Was Elsie your first baby?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, Annie. Annie what died.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 And then Elsie, but Annie died so Elsie was the eldest?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you have them both at home?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes. Yes. I never had one at hospital. AND I never had an operation.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Before you had Annie and Elsie did you know what to expect in childbirth? Did you know what it was going to be like having babies?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh I'd an idea, yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Had your mother told you all about it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 She told me like - to expect you had to be poorly, you know, and - few little details about it you know and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How did you get on having them? Were they easy births or difficult births?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh - it weren't very - oh it weren't bad, I took a 
long time in between. Because they were all big - they was - and - first baby were eleven pound two ounces. No. Me first were fifteen pound two ounces.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Annie?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No - the four what died you know. And - yes, he lived to be three month old, he died, 
and - and then - I buried - I buried - four girls, you know, one girl and three boys. And the last'n I buried was three year old, when he was in Moreton Banks.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 That was when you came to Keighley?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, he had to have him and two others in a week.
 Took him in at morning, I were - I had doctor to him and fetched doctor to him and - and it were on his throat. Well I fetched doctor to him, he sent him straight away. And then at Thursday they come and fetched my Dolly and - my Bess away, at Thursday. 
A
nd then - and then at Monday they - they come to fetch me, said I was - germ carrier. So - I was in and - my Dolly were in, we both come out together. But Bessie were in and she developed - scabies in her hands while she was in. So she was in there eleven
 
week. And she couldn't walk when she come out. And - I wanted to bring my little boy out at same morning. And Doctor Crocker come up, and she see'd the nurse, and the nurse said, I don't know what you - you're doing with - been doing with your little sonn
y
, Mrs Scroop. I says, why? He says, every time we give him his - meals, he says, he throws his pot and plate on the floor. Well I says, he never used to do at home. And he didn't. He was a good child. I says, he might have seen someone else do it else he 
w
ouldn't have done it. I'm not saying he's an angel no more than no other child, but I said I've never known him to do - he weren't brought up to it, I said. I said, but he did used to have an enamel plate. You know, I used to have - he did once break one.
 
And I said to his dad, I said, oh, I said, I'll - I'll get him an enamel mug and a little saucer and a - plate of his own you see. But do you know he knowed different. He said, I don't want that little plate mum. I says, why? He says, it isn't enough. So 
-
 so - I never laughed at him you know. So he says, well, he says, anyway, he says - Doctor Crocker - he should have come home that morning. So she says - I said, how's me family going in? Oh he says, they're doing fine, she says - right champion, she said
.
 Well at twelve o'clock Doctor Crocker come up to see us, he always come round about dinnertime. And he used to shout to me so we knew him you know. Well he said - you know, and our - our Doris she were in other room, she could see all what were going off
 
you know. First night they went in they had to let him sleep with her. Oh he raised the place down. Talk about upsetting. So - anyway - doctor come, he said, now Mrs Scroop, I'm sorry to tell you - say a prayer for little Billy, he says, there's no hopes 
for him. Well that put me back, and I've never been right since.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When you had Annie at home did a doctor come to help you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes, I had a - what did they call him, Doctor - well there was baby one and Doctor - Doctor Riddle, and Doctor - Carrie
r was it, Creagh, Creagh. Mm. They'd both the doctors. But more or less - me children being - born - me first 'un I tell you, that was such a big boy, well me youngest, that's our Bessie, she were eleven pound twelve born. All big babies. And me lad were 
a big lad and all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did your husband help you having the babies?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Oh no, he wouldn't - he wouldn't - he was glad when I got it all over you know. Oh you wouldn't catch him seeing him doing nowt like that, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How quickly did you get out of bed after having them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Well them days we didn't get out of bed, it were ten days. Just depends how you was you see. But I had to try and make me way out, sake of the other children you know what I mean.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 After ten days did you get up for a full day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
No - me mother said, when you feel tired go and lay on bed a bit, stop up there and make sure, or on your own bed. Because she had me bed at lower being like that you see. I had - I had to have both - both at me mother's. That's when he went soldier
ing you know, I told you about and - yes, yes. Had a good mother, she looked after me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When you had Elsie she looked after Annie for you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Annie there, she was as good as gold, she were good. I couldn't have wished for a better mother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So you wouldn't need any neighbours or anything to come in?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
No. No, me mother could do that job herself. But she weren't certified you see. She could do all but - but she didn't do me 'cos being like - being her daughter. Been a stranger, you or anybody 
else she would have done it. But anyway she used to send straight away for - doctor to come, and midwife.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you breast feed your babies?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I breast fed 'em all but one. All the lot, all the lot.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you enjoy feeding them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes, I l
iked that, feeding 'em, yes. Me mother used to say come here and I'll feed him while you do so and so. Me mother loved children. Well she'd eleven of her own, good as twelve. You know, I already told you - only one as had a big family. She said, our - our
 
- our - our Alice takes after me, she's five, she's got biggest family what's married. Like the fourth oldest - third oldest girl now what's living. The youngest is fifty. 'Cos they're all getting up you know. The youngest is forty-three. What's living, b
ut our Billy - our Billy'd have been next, if he'd have lived, oh it broke me heart that. She said he were going on rising and champion and - and then to come and tell me they're doing all they can for him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you have any difficulties in feeding them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Well - no, I - I had milk, I had plenty of milk, I don't know where it used to come from sometimes. I don't. I was all right, I were fifteen stone two. Oh aye, yes, I've a photo - I've a photo of me when - took outside with me young - me youngest l
ad like what's living, this boy who's living. I've always been - a big - fine la-s you know. Have to work you know, go to work. Oh aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 If you needed any advice who did you ask, about bringing the babies up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well there were at them days, there w
ere never anybody come to see you after midwife had finished you see. But - anyway, if she - if she saw you couldn't feed it - do you think you'll be able to feed it Mrs Scroop? I says, well, I says - I'll have to give it chance you see, to draw milk. I s
ays, as a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2714250\charrsid12200121 rule}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
, I said - I - I've always fed my children. Except our Nellie. Well our Nellie, that's the second oldest girl that's living - well - when I was carrying her - and me sister, me sister weren't married then, she were living - with my mother like
, and - oh aye, she was - no, she weren't married. And we both be down with this here bad - oh and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2714250\charrsid12200121 diphtheria}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
, they were taking them away with dozens. This is when they took us away. Me and my children. And - yes, 'cos it's gone now. Oh I were going to tel
l you. So any rate it were all in my throat, and all in me sister's back, me mother had both of us down with this, so anyway - oh I couldn't swallow me own spittle like. So when doctor come he says - told me mother, he says - is very poorly is Alice, and 
B
ess is all right, she's going on grand. He said well it is - to tell you the truth Mrs Burton, she said, I thought I'd seen the blind - me mother told me this after, she said, a blind down for Alice, she was so poorly. So an old lady in - in the lane - an
d
 - and she were a nice old neighbour in - me mother's - talk a bit together, right - and - she told her. She said, Mrs Burton, said, I'll tell you want to do with Alice. She said, you get a big jug of boiling hot water - and put a half an ounce of Friar's
 
Balsam in it, and it all goes like coddly on top you know, and she said, let her breathe - her bronchitis is for - and she said let her breathe over it, put a blanket over her head. And let her breathe through - onto jug like, inhale it. Mm. So I did do. 
A
nd I did it three times that day. Said next morning I could - I could sup the same day. So anyway - you feeling better Alice? Oh I said, I do mother, I said, I feel a lot better with that stuff. She said, well keep on while it moves then. So when Doctor R
i
ddle come down the next day to see me and he says, well, by gum Mrs - Burton, he says, there's big alterations here. He said, what have you been doing? Well it's a simple thing doctor, I don't know whether you've heard about it or not. But says there was 
an old lady says - lives at - up the - lane here, she says, she told me, she asked me how she was and I told her, and she says - what I}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2714250\charrsid12200121  do}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2714250\charrsid12200121 w}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
hat she - he telled her like. And she said I told her it was the only thing as could get her round. So I says - she t
ook a - I got a jug, this here what I got in, I said, and inhale it, inhale it and he said, now how often did you do that? I said, about three times. So he says, by gum, he says, I've never heard such a thing. And I've been a doctor all these years, he'll
 be dead and buried now, he says - he said, I've never known a simple thing like that. And he'd never heard of it. Well anyway he said, he said well you've been a miracle to your daughter. She got me round, me mother. She got us both round. Mm.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 If your baby was asleep would you wake her for a feed or would }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2714250\charrsid12200121 you let}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  her sleep through?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh I'd let her have her sleep through. Then she'd have a good feed then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 If she cried before the normal feeding time would you feed her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh I would, I knowed - I knowed she'd be hungry.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What did you do if she didn't seem hungry, and you thought it was feeding time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well - if she didn't cry nor nothing like that, as long as nothing wrong with her - I'd try - I'd just give her a - drop when I felt f
it to give her a drop, see if she did take it. But - they've all been right - right good at breast. You know. Oh never had no trouble with nothing like that, no, not a bit of trouble. Only our Nellie I tell you, she were born - pregnant with our Nellie sh
e were born - with a cracked palate. That was through me with me throat you know. 'Cos I was going to tell you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You had }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2714250\charrsid12200121 diphtherias}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  when you were having Nellie did you?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 It were - yes, it were all in me throat. But they didn't take 'em away them 
days. And - I had it all in me throat and I thought I were going to choke I tell you and - that's when I inhaled this here - yes, Friar's Balsam. And - then he come the next morning, and he saw what I were like, well he told - he told - midwife - me siste
r
 having called, he kept a public house which was somewhere around, she used to do - I used to go and clean for her a bit you know now and again, and anyway - she - oh when she come in the morning - and I didn't live there then, I lived on - Sheffield Road
.
 In rooms on there, we couldn't get a house for love nor money then. And - when she come all morning, it were third morning, no it wasn't, it were the next morning, she were born at day before, and I says, oh listen at our babby, Mrs Standby. She said, wh
a
t's the matter Alice? I said, oh, she's making a funny noise. I says - she's - you'd think she was having - drawing a pint of milk way she's going at it. And she never had a drink. And she kept going - and I thought, well I've never had any kiddie - you k
n
ow, making them funny noises, I've never had 'em. So anyhow I told her of it, well so - she got this spoon and - put it in our babby's mouth. And - holded it down. And - right down into her throat, yes. And - she had two - what they call two - cracks, lit
t
le cracks you know. Well she'd two instead of one. Yes. And she had to - it was with me coughing and - me throat, it had split, and it were shape of a lemon here, like - well like an egg like that, it were open. And anyway I never felt that - I never felt
 
nowt but anyway - nurse - She had to going to - going to - you know, when she got to going to school - well started mimicking her at school, calling her to talk right, this that and the other. Well it grieved me and it grieved our Nellie. She used to cry 
e
very time she come home, I thought well, I'm not having this. So I kept her away, that - school policeman come down. Now Mrs Scroop, what's the matter with Nellie, she's not at school? I said, well - I said, well, I said, she's not fit to go to school, I 
s
aid, I'm not going to let her go - to be called after, she's deficient in her throat. So anyway, so I report this. So her put her down to clinic. So I went down to clinic - I took her and it were - he said, now Mrs Scroop what about Ellen? I says, well, I
 
says, the reason I've let her go to school, I said, 'cos it's shameful how they're calling after her. She says, can't you get it at hospital? She says, no. So she says, for why? I says, well I've a - me husband off poorly, I says, that's he nearly had his
 
fingers nearly taken off in pit and they won't give you a recommend when they're not in work. Oh, she says, it's a funny place. Said, you leave it to me she says, I'll get her in hospital. So I says - I'll see what your husband says, and I'll drop you a l
i
ne when to ring up. So when I went - come back home I tell him what did owt about. So he said, well it's up to you. I said, well we'll let her go in. I said, I'm not going to have this - and she went in were nearly thirteen year old. Anyway we let her go 
in. She went in, she had an operation, and - you know, I could come up for - two or three minutes at night time, so we went up and she were laid there and she'd a - she'd a piece of wire - I call it wire, that - what do they call, the stitching.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Cat gut?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Something like that, were shining, and she had it right - right round her ear, from her ear here, right round here, right in her mouth, and stitched all her throat up at the back. So anyway I know whether she were - she - partly come out - so nur
se - nurse says - now Mrs Scroop you won't speak to her if I let you have a look at her will you? Oh she's gone through her operation all right, and I think it's just as much good - success. So I says, well I hope so. Oh she says, I think she'll be all ri
g
ht, she'll talk as well as you - when she gets going so - went up twice to see her, and the second time went up to see her she were - in kitchen washing pots up for the nurse. So I looked at her, said to her dad, I - look at our Nellie. She's washing pots
 
up. So anyway she says - come on Nellie. Hello dad, hello mum. Said, are you any better? She said, mm. I want to come out. So anyway they let her out. Went to fetch her. Isn't it funny, same doctor. Goes to where we had to sign for taking her out you know
,
 and he says - he says, I know - I think I know this little face. He says, I've seen you before. So she looked at him, shy at him you know. He said aren't - aren't you called Mrs - Ellen Scroop? I said yes. He said, I'm sure I've seen her, I said you did,
 probably did. I said, she were only three days old. YES? THE same baby. And is this - Ellen? I said, yes. Well he says, she has a suc - successful operation, and she'll talk as plain as you once she starts talking.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 And }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2714250\charrsid12200121 did}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
 she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, you wouldn'
t know if you didn't tell her. Yes, right at the back of her throat round - that crack you know, a crack. She'd like two - a split now. That were me having - yes. That were through me - having it all in me throat you know. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How long would you let a baby go on feeding for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How many - how many minutes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How long would you keep her at your breast for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh not - while she'd had a bellyful like you know, like she had sufficient. Then I'd take it off her. I didn't want to feed her every fiv
e minutes, feed her about - every other - about two hours, something like that, you know what - I know when she were hungry, she used to come to me you know. Creep to me anyway.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When did you put the babies on solid food, how old would they be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do what luv?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How old would your babies be when you started them on solid food?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well I don't know, I used to make - a bit of carrot and a bit of potato - after nine months. And I'd put gravy and that you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When did you wean them off breast feeding?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Oh fifteen months. Aye. Well the milk were best. I could tell when I were going to be out the road, you know, poorly, and - that used to go to milk you know. Well then I could tell me -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So did you do it gradually?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, you get - do it bit by bit you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did the babies mind, did they mind stopping breast feeding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Oh no, because - they soon had that - what I used to give 'em. And used to sometimes make them milk - milk bobs you know. Yes, had plenty when they were little.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you think at that time that it did any harm to a baby to let it cry or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Well according to Doctor Attrey - told me - when I had me grandson, and - me daughter's - son, me daughter's lad I had come to live with me 'cos - her husband, 
she were divorced. Well he were crying one day and - he's got his fingers in me sister's machine out on the road, out in the back of house, and there were a little girl playing, run his fingers into the ringing machine when she were washing, it were an ac
c
ident, but anyway I picked him up, Alice fetches him round and - I was in me rocking chair and I'm rock - rocking him. I says, go on, nip down for doctor see if he's broken or anything. So when he come, Doctor Atlee, he said, now what's up with you Mrs - 
M
rs Scroop. I says, oh I says - my little Billy, I said, gone and had his fingers, his mother'll tell you. She says - and he were crying. Oh, I says, he's cried doctor. Oh, crying'll not hurt him. Said, it'll do him good to cry. Do you know, I were heartbr
o
ken with him. So when me daughter went down next time, he said, bring your little boy William, he said, Mrs Kelly. So she took him down, do you know what he said to her? He says - your mother upsets herself over least things, she says, yes I know she does
 
doctor. Telling him not to cry, it's best thing he can do, he said, is to cry. You know what these old grannies is. So next he come I said don't you call me an old granny. And that's what I say, it does 'em good to have a good cry. Oh I don't - never used
 to pick 'em up or that went straight to lungs. No good to have a - not too much.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 But let them go for a while?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you ever punish them when they were naughty?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When they were still babies, if they cried a lot or were naughty some way?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
I don't ever know me to put a finger on my children. None of 'em, no. No, and not since they've been - grown up, I've had some good family. Mind they've been - not saying no better than anybody else's, but - I've - I've been - I hav
en't had a bad child. In all the lot of them, they've gone to school, I've never had policeman on me door for 'em, I've had nothing. I've always said, well - maybe Mrs }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2714250\charrsid12200121 Scroop's}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  a dope but she says she worked hard to bring her family up. And I had. To try a
nd bring 'em up respectable and they all are. Every one of them. And they all stand nearly six foot. As tall as you, yes. Aye, well, it was taller than you, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Your husband was in the army when one or two of them were little so he wouldn't help you much with those.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 But before he went into the army?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 He didn't do much help to me. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 He didn't help you with the babies at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, well he was always off - with his mates. Sometime - sometimes I used to think I'd sooner see
 his back than his face. He were a rough 'un you know, I had a - rough husband.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So you never remember him helping with the babies at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. He might just bit of fooling in the house like, things like that, he never took 'em out though.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 He'd play with them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh he wouldn't - no, he never touched the children, never - tell you neither of us, nobody ever touched our children. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I want to ask you now how you and your husband managed the housekeeping money in those years before 1919
. For part of this period your husband was away and you've told me how difficult it was, you had no money for a while.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So I'll talk about the bit before that, between getting married and him going in the army. How much - did you know ho
w much your husband earned?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I couldn't tell you what at pit, I don't know what he earned. He }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2714250\charrsid12200121 never}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  - he never let me know nothing, used to give me just home what - I had to manage on. And then tell you sometimes I had to - well - I used to go and hav
e a couple of days somebody'd ask me if I'd go and - would I do their washing, something like that so as I'd get a copper in between. Oh no, I never - I never made - I never had to cross - cross him. All my wages was thirty-five shilling. But - had }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2714250\charrsid12200121 more}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  wo
rkers, you understand. And he would be working on them you see. But the wages weren't like they are now. Well them four workers - well others and him, and he used to give me thirty-five shillings for the week. Well what cold I do with that. }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2714250\charrsid12200121 It were the dau
ghters what were bringing - in that way for me, were all money, money, money, do you understand, he used to back horses - and often he'd go and have a drink with lad and suchlike, and I never used to bother, I were working, scratching me eyes to get work 
- to try to bring more - yes.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So from getting married to him going in the army you never knew how much he earned, he never told you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. No, he were - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So you don't know how much of his wage you got?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. I didn't know what I was going to get tell you the truth.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 It varied from week to week did it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you ever discuss with him how the money should be spent, or was it left to you what you did with it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well - he used to give me this money and I used to t
ry and make it out with - best I could out of it. I went - I'll just tell you something now, it's a bit long and - I went - me and him fell out - he fell out with me like, and he were right jealous man, I daren't go out anywhere. So anyway we fell out thi
s
 part week, and our lasses used to say give up on our mam, dad. If I went out to do shopping he'd swear blind I'd been with a man. He's like - were like that, a too jealous man. And he were a bit on that side when I were courting him. So - anyway - I neve
r
 spoke to him for about - oh about a week, or he never spoke to me and I thought to myself well - and that's when I turned. And I thought, well I don't see why he should throw me like this. I don't go out, I've done nowt wrong. And this is what I'm gettin
g
. So - anyway, it come Friday, 'cos we were on the dole, it come Friday. Of course he got his money, but the dole weren't it is today. So anyway - he gets his dole. He comes home in, he says to my oldest - he says to my oldest girl, Annie, I'll never forg
et it if I live to be a hundred, he says, Annie, he says, can the}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4603364\charrsid12200121 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
 bake? She says no, she were only a young girl, she says, no, she says I can't bake. He says, why? She says, well you - he didn't like shorthand, anyway it were me baking bread you know, so a
nyway he said to our Annie - got a nice little set of drawers in corner, and he - he - sent our Annie, put it on a piece of paper, he said, write it down. Come on, go to shop for these, well - and I - so I never said a word. And he says - fetch a stone of
 flour, and that what you make bread with, I couldn't remember that, yeast. So }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4603364\charrsid12200121 go}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
 and fetch some of that. And she fetched two pound of sugar, all what we wanted - and half a pound of pork dripping, it were dripping them days, and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2714250\charrsid12200121 butter}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  - well we had margar
ine, didn't have butter. You know, just what he thought I got in. Then - what I like, I used to try and get a tin of sommat, bit tasty for us you know. So - it passed on - it passed on nearly the week and this here flour on - oh glory be to God. He blowed
 the top of the roof off. He says - how long is that going to}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4603364\charrsid12200121  be }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
there? To me. I says, what? And I looked at him. I says, what? He says that in that bag. I says, I'm not baking it. And that's when I turned on him. I says when you start laying money out, I s
ays, I says, I'll bake it. When I got right money I says I'll bake. He's says well it's not stopping here. I said, it'll stop for me 'cos I'll never bake it. That's why he asked our Annie if she could bake. So I says, well as soon as you tip your money up
 and you give me your right money, to bring these children up, you get so much at dole and you put so much down. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2714250\charrsid12200121 
And - he - I says, soon as you was to tip your money up, I said - you - I'll bake that flour and I shan't till then. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 And that stood there nearly
 another week afore he tipped his money up. And when next - the Friday after come in and he put his money on the table.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 And you bake}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4603364\charrsid12200121 d}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  his bread then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Then I baked his bread. And that's as true as God's above. I said, and if you do it again I sh
all just do same, I said, you get no more bread out of me. 'Cos he wouldn't eat it. I said, oh - when I come here I baked a stone and a half of bread when I first come here. 'Cos I know he didn't like - none of 'em liked it. So they have to put up with it
 now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When you got married at first you lived with your mother for a little while?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 And then you rented a house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh we give me mother so much to stop there while we got a place. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 And then you rented a house didn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes, yes. The - the first house in back of this here - one up one down at - back of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2714250\charrsid12200121 bake house}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  what I were telling you about.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 And it was just one up one down?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 One - that's all, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 There was no cellar or attic?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 'Cos - oh no, only - anyway I'd }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4603364\charrsid12200121 been}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
 - I tell you I was right up from there, I'd no trouble. But when we were younger, our - our Dolly and our Dessie - whether it was our Dolly and Bessie, yes, they were - weren't very old, and he had - what was it now - try - was i
t typhoid fever? And - Bessie - no Bessie got over it worse - all but worst, and - our Dolly, she was - oh no, I'm talking - I'm thinking about me sister luv. She - me sister, she weren't married. And she were thirteen month laid up - on pillows for hr - 
her - yes, for her to get her breath. And - that's why she's so think she never looked up after that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So the first house you had, you and your husband, it was just a downstairs room and a bedroom?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 That's right. That's it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When you had Annie she slept with you and your husband in the bedroom?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 By the time you had Elsie you had moved back with your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, I had a room downstairs to meself. When I had our Annie. When I had - had them two - had them tow old - oldest, the
y were born at me mother's. At mother's - a - a she'd a living place and a - like a little - another room, and be like a sitting room, well she used to make a do in this sitting room.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 That was when you went back to live with your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When your husband was in the Army?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You never paid anyone to help you look after your children or house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh - never in me life, no, always managed myself.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you always do your own washing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. I did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 The clothes for the children, did you make and mend them yourself?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did I what luv?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you make and mend the childrens clothes yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh, me mother used to do a bit for me you know. She were good sewer, she - she'd make 'em napkins out of - me
 dad's shirt bottoms, you know, yes, she would, cut the flap off and she'd run 'em round. She would do all like that for me, she were right good.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When Annie and Elsie were small did you have new or secondhand clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh no - well - I used to buy for Annie, and what - did for Annie used to do for Elsie.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Where did you buy Annie's clothes, was there a particular shop you used to go to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh no, I used to go where they were cheapest. You know what I mean.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How often would she get new clothes, when she needed them or was it once a year?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Oh no, when I see her - it's like little vests and that, thought well I'll buy her a couple of pair of vests. And they weren't worn out, nothing like that, and they would come in for Elsie you see. L
et her finish 'em off. Poor old Elsie had to have seconds.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What about shoes, did she get new shoes, Annie?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes, she used to have - right natty little shoes. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 And you passed on to Elsie as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, well I - if they were - if she could wear 'em, you know what I mean.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When they needed repairing could your husband repair them before he went into the army?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well - he could repair a little bit in his tif - tiff-toff way, you know what I mean.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When he was in the army who repaired the shoes then, could you do it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Me? Oh no. No. No, I couldn't. Sometimes me oldest brother might do it you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You've already told me your husband never helped in the house. I'll just go through a list of things and you tell me if h
e ever helped you in any of those. Did he ever do any cleaning?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Cooking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Only for himself if I weren't in. If it were -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Washing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Washing up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, he never did a thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What about making fires?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Probably might make it now and again.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What about decorating the house? No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Had to do all that myself. Aye, do all that myself. Luv.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did he ever do any repairs to the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, he never did, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What about improvements to the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well I should have to tell the landlord if I wanted anything doing. And he'd see to it you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 As the children got to two and three, something like that, did he ever help with dressing or undressing them or bathing them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What about reading to them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You make laugh when you said -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did he ever read to them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Any what?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did he ever read to the children? Did he ever read a book to them?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh no. He were more out than in.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did he ever take them out without you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
No. No. There were only one and that's his lad what's living. And he didn't do much for him. I expect girls have made the best of it and - you know what I mean, and - never used to bother much about - were all the lads. Especially this one tha
t's living now. And - when he come to - you know, racing or - went out it were always with him, the both were always together. Wouldn't say, come on Alice, I'll take you out. No. Thought the blooming world of him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Were there any little jobs in the house that the children had to help you with, when they were quite small?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well, used to run me errands to shops and - if I wanted any and I couldn't get out meself like, were very good for that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What time had the children to go to bed when they were small?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Well - same as it is now, used to let 'em stop up while about - nine o'clock, if it were nice, round house or where we were. And - in the winter nights they'd all be in bed by seven o'clock. They'd ask to go to bed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did they pt themselves to be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, I used to put 'em - see they were safe in bed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
I'm only talking about the period before 1919, before the end of the war, so during that period you were living with your mother weren't you,
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Where did you and your two girls sleep when you were at your mother's house? Did you have a bedroom to yourselves?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Oh I wasn't long - I - I wasn't long - before I got - where did I go to from there? No, I used to - me and me two kiddies used to sleep together. While it w
ere in war you know, what I mean - and he had - a big - a bed - into front room you see. And used to have one of those - big clothes horses and that and I used to put that round me, well nobody'd practically come in. You know, be it's end house so nobody 
- practically come.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So you and Annie and Else shared a big double bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, it - it were big wooden bedstead. 'Cos they were only - little like you know.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You had a bathroom at that house did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 At your mother's house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So where did you used to bath them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
This - what were a bathroom made into a bedroom. You see, the - we had to have another room, and then we'd live in a place, and - then there was a room - oh be bigger than this, be bigger than this - the 
bathroom, and - I - anyway mother made - had it made into a bedroom. So we had a bathroom downstairs. 'Cos they'were big stairs down - big fireplace and all that downstairs.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So did you have a tin bath to have a bath in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well - no, we had to have a - enamel - bath, yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So where would you and Annie and Elsie have your baths then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
I'd have to go downstairs. Have me bath see. Used to - mother used to make fire - you know a big fireplace, and then we used to have bath in front of fire.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How often would Annie and Elsie have a bath when they were small?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Well they'd have one every night if I'd have let them. When it's hot like this, let us go in bath mum, you know. I didn't do it, they wouldn't have so much of it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How often would they have a bath?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
About - I always used to bath 'em at Saturday night. Either Friday night or Saturday night. About Thursday night, Wednesday or Thursday I used to give 'em a right good wash then. When it was all }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2714250\charrsid12200121 warm}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  you know. 'Cos you know when they're out they're always -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How often would they have clean clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How often would they have clean clothes to put on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh - I'd - oh I'd change them, but then I'd put them in water and get them washed out for another time. You know what I mean? Oh aye.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When you were at your mother's who did the cooking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Mother. I never did no cooking.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When you were in the little house that you rented behind the bakery you must have done all your cooking in the same room tha
t you lived in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes, a little gas stove, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
I'll talk about the period that you were living with your husband at the little house, at the little one behind the bakery, what time would you have your breakfast then, would you have it very early?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Eh I couldn't tell you, anytime in the morn - he would. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What sort of a breakfast would you give him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well he were - he were a - he were - queer fellow, sometimes he wouldn't - he'd have a pint of tea in his pint mug another time ab
out eleven o'clock. You know, and like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What sort of a midday meal would you give him and Annie?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh I don't know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When you were married at first did you ever make bread, you made your own bread?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you make your own jam?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes - oh no, I never made jam.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Pickles?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Me mother used to make her own.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Would she give you a bit of it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. Oh yes, aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Would you make pickles?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh - no, me mother used to do all that. If we wanted any I'd only to ask her.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you ever make any medicines for Annie or Elsie?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you ever bottle fruit or vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did I what?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Bottle fruit or vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. No luv.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You never had a garden to grow fruit or vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So did you used to buy any tinned or dried vegetables or fruit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well more or less - tinned - in fruit line. Oh no? I never bought nothing like that. Not when they were young.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you ever keep any hens or pigs or goats?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How many times a week would you have meat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
We used to buy a joint at Saturday. Used to make - try and make it last while - you know, whole Monday. Then sometime we'd have a bit of fish. Or something like that. Bit of a change you know. Sometimes I use
d to buy shank. Bacon shank - ham shank like. And then I used to boil it, make a drop of soup you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Was it pea soup?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Used to put it soup like, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you ever have to go short of food so that your husband and children could have more?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
No, I don't - I don't know - I never went short of food. Mind you it were rough like them days. We always had a good dinner. And then we used to put up what we could for us tea and suchlike. It wasn't - have a right good - you know, have every meal 
sat down to. And then I used to make 'em - bread pobs. You call 'em bread pobs you know. Steam your bread and - milk and that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did your husband need to have large helpings of food?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh - he weren't a right big eater. But he were particular what 
he wanted. In his way, if I could have afforded it - he - he wanted such as - he'd have - what - what is it he used to - in the fish line - not - cray - cray - is it cray fish. That - that - he used to like that. And do you know I paid seven and sixpence 
f
or a right little bit when he were poorly. Before he died like, when he were poorly seven weeks. And I did - it was seven and six, but you couldn't get it then like you know, when in season. But it's not very - not very rare that - it's asked for, but it'
s a lovely fish. Beautiful fish. I thought well - I'll buy it him, I'll get it him - while he's here, now he's gone I can't do no more. He were eighty-three yesterday. Born in - Independence Day, fourth of July.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I want to ask you about the table manners of your children, would Annie and Elsie be allowed to talk during meals or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well sometimes, if they wanted anything, say can I have that }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2714250\charrsid12200121 mama}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 , can I have a bit of that }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2714250\charrsid12200121 mam}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
, you know, perhaps, I don't know if there were owt else. They were never cheeky kiddies to nobody. Not as I know on. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Could they choose what they wanted to eat from what was cooked or did they have to eat a bit of everything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well we'd give it to 'em, if they didn't want it they'd have to leave it. You know, I me
an used to give it 'em and - well I can't give you nowt else, you'll have to have it, you either eat it or leave it. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 We were talking about how you brought your children up.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Your two }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2714250\charrsid12200121 eldest}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 , Annie and Elsie.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What did you used to say to them if they left anything uneaten on the plate?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 If they what luv?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 If they left anything on the plate that they didn't want, what }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2714250\charrsid12200121 you would}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  say to them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well I should turn round and say, why did you ask for it if you don't want it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You expected them to eat it?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 To eat it yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did they have to wait until things on the table were offered to them, such as the salt or could they ask you for it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh no, I used to always put it on table for 'em. And if they wanted salt have to put a little bit on for them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Could they ask for a second helping?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh they generally - yes, used to give 'em what there was like. If they did want a bit more they used to - put it one their plate for 'em.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you expect them to hold their knife and fork in a certain way and sit in a certain way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh - oh yes, I used to like 'em to use their fork and knife right, aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You were particular about that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, I was with that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you allow them to bring toys or a book to the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do what luv?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you allow them to bring toys or a book to the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Oh - well, I had one, and it were our Bessie, she'd a teddy bear. And she loved that teddy bear and she used to bring it to table, and she u
sed to reckon - to give teddy bear a bit with her spoon, when her was having here - and I said, give over Bessie, the - teddy can't eat that. I said, put it down while you've had your dinner. Oh I want me teddy mum, I said, put it down while you've had yo
ur dinner. Oh I want me teddy mum, I said, well go on then and get your dinner, eat all up as well. I said, don't play now with your teddy. She loved that teddy. And she had her teddy up 'til leaving school. It were a black and white teddy.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When were they allowed to leave the table? When they wanted to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Or did they have to ask you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, say, well I've done mum, I said, well all right then, go and play now. You've don
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Before your husband went in the army did you all sit at the table together for a meal?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Well it just depend if - you know, if they'd gone out anywhere - special like, somewhere - somewhere special well - we used to leave 'em like - we knew which had gone, you know like as I went you - say we've come to your ho
use, and they've come for their dinner, see, come for day, that's only time - they missed a meal 'cos they could eat like little horses. No, they never missed a meal.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 But you never allowed them to sit in a chair away from the table for a meal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh no. No. Then I used to have a high chair for them when they were babies.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you all used to have your own place at the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How did you serve the meal, did you used to put it all on the plates and then give them the plates?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Or did you used to put it in a bowl in the middle and they helped themselves?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
No, no. I used to give 'em what I think - what would be - they'd eat, you know asking them, I used to say to 'em, how many potatoes do you want, do you want 
some - greens, you know, like that, I don't want - no, I don't want any greens mum. All right, well I know what to do then, I won't put 'em on to waste 'em you know. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When they were too small to feed themselves you said they had a high chair?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you used to feed them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Yes. I used to have it on a little - enamel plate - if it were going to help itself like you know at table, and - it used to - enjoy it in a chair, with a spoon. Oh no, it's only small, that chair were. I never 
ever used a knife and fork with babes for cutting it's mouth. So I - I got a spoon - from shop like a - you know, what they used, like a bone thing it was. And she used to - and she used to love to eat with that. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When your children were young did you feel that there was a right and a wrong way of bringing up children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Bringing 'em up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you feel there was a right way and a wrong way?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh, they weren't cheeky children particular like, no. Not as I know on. I don't I don't imagine 
'em cheeking anybody. I learnt 'em that, and me mother learnt it me said don't answer people older than yourself. And I used to tell them that. Don't say anything, you go and tell your mam if owt's happened, don't cheek that old lady, I learnt 'em not to 
cheek anybody. And I don't like it, and I don't like it now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did your husband have the same sort of ideas as you about it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did what?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you and your husband have the same sort of ideas about it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh - oh they daren't do nowt when he we
re in. Like he weren't - you could say - a bit too strict. Understand what I mean. What he said it were law, you daren't answer him back. If I said t' 'em, fetch me a pail of - coal up from down cellar, to - don't matter who to, oh ask so and so to go mam
. Hey, who are you talking to, it's your mam, down that cellar and fetch her up a bit of coal up, all like that. He were right strict, up to - up to him dying he was. Aye, he were a bit too }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6255762\charrsid12200121 
much }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 sometimes, he used to be a bit too fast with 'em you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you sometimes talk about it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I beg pardon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you sometimes talk about, did you sometimes discuss this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I used to - I used to think about lots of things what he did say, what he did you know. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Was there anyone you used to ta
lk to if you were worried about the children? Did you have anyone that you would talk to about any worries that you had about the children,
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well - me mother. I - yes, it was, me mother. Having any troubles it's gone to me mother, said, now hold, on, 
say, come and tell me, so I did do.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How often did you see her, did you see quite a lot of her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Oh no, she - she were seven miles away. And I couldn't - with all the steps and stairs you know, well I couldn't - I used to come ever weekend. Well m
e sister lived with me mother, and she weren't married at time, and I used to come at Sunday, I used to visit me mother, and then I used to go what they used to call at work houses you know at them times, and I used to go up there to work see - me husband
'
s mother was there. Was between two and three years. Well anyway I used to call at me mother's and then call at granny's, then me - and me sister go to see granny, and then I used to come back, stop while about - half past six or seven o'clock, well they'
d look after children while I - went to see his mother you see. But he never went to see his mother.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 But for one or two years you lived with your mother didn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So I suppose at that time you'd be seeing her all the time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. Yes, I - yes. At weekends, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Would you say that you and your mother had the same ideas about bringing up children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well, I suppose she would be. She - she were a good woman, she were a good living mother and - she did right well for us al
l, I don't never remember her - touching us, nothing like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You told me earlier that you agreed with your mother about bringing up children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes. She wouldn't tell me nothing wrong, she'd tell me something for me good when she did do.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What about your mother-in-law, did she ever give you any advice?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Oh no. No, she - she was - she was nearly a hundred years old. Yes. She - was with me three years - when our Bessie were a little baby, and - we had to pick - pick her in - best way w
e could, she'd have little bedroom, well - and then girls used to sleep in our - by my bedroom. We had to make push but poor old lady, she'd nowhere to go. So - and the thing is that she started being funny, you know, went queer, and - she started }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2714250\charrsid12200121 slapping}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
 our - our Bessie. She went up to her, she said, now go away. I've got no sweets for you today. She weren't wanting sweets, she wanted to talk. That's when she went queer. Well they took her to hospital, and she lived to St Patrick's Day - she'd have been
 a hundred. Yes, been in nearly three years. I went every Sunday to see her. And me own mother. That's when she was at hospital.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Can you tell me some of the things you felt you ought to do for your children? Affection and safety, food, discipline, were
 any of these things that you felt were very important in the way you brought your children up? Did you feel that you should be affectionate towards them? Were you very concerned about their safety? Did you used to take a lot of trouble with their food, a
nd you've already told me they had to behave themselves?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes, it's true every word I said to you. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Did you encourage them to share their worries with you, your children? If they had any worries did you encourage them to tell you about it?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well, I - I don't know as I - as I - I can't tell you for that luv.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How did you expect them to behave towards you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 To what luv?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How did you expect them to behave towards you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well to tell you the truth I'd no trouble with my fa
mily, not a bit. They've all been good childer. Although a bit - they was brought up rough but they were - they knowed their manners.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When they were very small did you and your husband ever manage to leave them so that you could go out together? Did y
our mother ever come and look after them so that you could go out together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
No. Like me - well you see, then me mother never come to me while I lived in - in - Mexborough. No. I didn't bother me mother for that. I used to fight me own battles with 'em. All the time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So you never got a chance to go out with your husband?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Well I wouldn't leave 'em do you see. I wouldn't leave 'em. I never did leave 'em, I've trailed 'em with me before I'd leave 'em. Because I' know they've been safe then. Know what I mean.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When you and your husband }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6255762\charrsid12200121 and}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  perhaps your mother were talking did you allow the children to join in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh no, no, I should say - if they come to talk to me I'll say, now wait a bit because I'm talking to your dad, something like th
at if I were saying owt special.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What did you bring them up to consider most important in life?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I don't know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you tell them that they should hit back or not if another child hurt them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 To hit back? Oh I'd tell them to fight theirs
elf. I said, I'm not going out falling out with her. If you get worst end of it you get worst end. It were so - it weren't so bad then - if it were so bad then I would do. Mm. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Were there any children that you discouraged them from playing with for some reason?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
No. I used to let 'em go out like with others, long as there were no - trouble nor bother you know, falling out with 'em. Them days were like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 If one of your children did something that you disapproved of and you were cross 
about what would you do about it? Would you smack them or just tell them off?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, I used to bring 'em in and send 'em upstairs.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You didn't smack them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, I never hit one of me childer. I never remember me putting a finger on my family - a
nd nor their dad. And that was only one, and that was our Annie and they were blamed for something he hadn't done. Well it got to police, the police come and - and told us that - at - the school over here, and there were two of them and they both said - t
h
is young lad what went with him, and it were dinnertime, and my Alice what lives at Leicester, she says, where's our Henry mum? I says, he's not come home yet, I wonder what's the matter. So I - anyway goes up - in school. Well we waited, I says - you - y
o
u can go back - you can go back to - she were working then, you can go back to work, I said, and I'll wait for him coming. Well he come about half past one after her got back to work. Well dad says, well I'm not going back to work, he said, while I see my
 
lad in for his dinner. And so police who lived down here, one of these groves down here, and - Cromwell Road, and - he's died since and all he has - but anyway, go apart from that, and - oh hadn't they leathered him, school. When he come home - all his fa
c
e were - red - where they'd smacked him, they put third degree on to make him say that he took eight shilling out of school milk money. And him and his young - other young boy were all together, the two of them. So when he come his dad said, now what's th
e been doing? He said, dad I know - he said, I haven't done nowt, he says, they blame me for taking eight shillings from the school, and a bottle of milk. He said, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2714250\charrsid12200121 what's}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  that on your face? He says, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2714250\charrsid12200121 poll}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
 - he says, policeman's done that, they called him }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2714250\charrsid12200121 Twig}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
, and - tap on his face 'cos he were - oh and it were swelled up with crying. Well he bolted round to the school, he said, I'm coming up bobby. And I thought he were going to hit the policeman. We could see into schoolyard over here you know. Anyway - he 
- he said, yes, that's the only trouble I've ever had with any, never - never had a summons or nothing with 'em. They've been a good family.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You usually set them up to bed if they'd been naughty?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well I used to take her upstairs out of road else I'll kill you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Would you say that your children received the ideas they had about how to behave from you and your husband or did they get it mainly from you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh, from me. I brought 'em up same as me mother brought me up. Tried to do. We were br
ought up respectable, and knowed things were, all the lot of us.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When the children were very small you didn't go out to work did you, or did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh no, no, when they got bigger. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I think you told me -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When are we talking about because I was thirteen when I left school. I told you that
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Was it during the first world war that you went on munitions in Sheffield?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes, I was working up Sheffield when the bombs came first.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Wasn't that the period - was that in the second world war was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, 1914.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 And your mother looked after the children then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, yes. I had two.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How did you feel about leaving them with her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well I know they were left in good hands, else I wouldn't have left 'em. I didn't 
worry 'cos she'd have done anything for my family. Oh she were good to us all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Some people think that children should be with their mother all the time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Others think it's not necessary and does them good to be with someone else.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 'Course it does. I believe in that, yes. Just depend who they get amongst though, you know what I mean.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 But with your mother you felt they were all right?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I did, I thought the world of my mother, and me father.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When your two eldest girls ha
d a birthday when they were very small would it be different from any other day, would they receive presents or have a special tea or anything like that when it was their birthday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh we used to buy sometimes buy them a little present, what we could afford to buy 'em you know. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Would they have anything special to eat at teatime, would they have jellies?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Sometime used to - if you had a good dinner didn't want a tea.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did they ever have any little friends in, was it a little party at 
all, did they have any friends from neighbours in for tea when it was their birthday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Oh - we used to make a little cake or - have a little cake and have 'em in the - in me mother's big room you see. And they just wanted what they wanted to come. Them as they used to play about with, let so and so come mother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Can you remember when they were small what you used to do on Christmas Day? Would it be much as any other day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well it were problem what to get for 'em all. Were a problem. They used 
to put a pillow slip up and - perhaps a new penny in the - bit of spice or - of course things weren't like they are now you know. Oh we had to do. What you pay for a penny now you pay two bob for - don't you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you ever have any musical instruments?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do what luv?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you ever have any musical instruments, a piano?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Oh I - I did when I lived up at Groves. I had a - a lovely piano, and then we bought the lad, we bought him a - what do they call them things that -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 An }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2714250\charrsid12200121 accordion}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 ?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. Bought him for his birthday. Dad bought it him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 He could play could he, he could play the piano }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2714250\charrsid12200121 accordion}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 ?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Me daughter - youngest daughter could play piano. Yes, and - she could play }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2714250\charrsid12200121 accordion}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  better than him, but she liked piano better.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Could you play anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Could your husband?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Had no time to play one. No, it never bothered neither of us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So it would be after 1919 before any of the children learnt how to play?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh aye, me - youngest - young ones.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When they were small did you ever play any games with the children? Such as }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2714250\charrsid12200121 dominoes}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  or cards?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh aye, we used to have a game. Used to have a game at cards and - just a little bit of sport and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Would your husband join in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. He }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2714250\charrsid12200121 wants}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  the paper at front of him like that. And you haven't to move. Be like that, read a - all papers you can give him, even little corners - never missed nothing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When the children were small and you had your own house did you get newspapers, you got a daily newspaper did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Not me, he used to get Express every morning. The Express every morning.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you ever get any magazines?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. Hadn't time to read them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you or your husband belong to a library?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. He used to go to library. But he didn't have no - nothing - he never brought them at home. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2714250\charrsid12200121 He used to frighten his kiddies'd, get hold of 'em and look at them you know and -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do you remember you or your husband ever reading aloud to each other or to the children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do what luv?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you ever read aloud to each other or to the children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well sometimes we had to like.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you read?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh read.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you ever read to the children or to each other?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh no. No. Hadn't time with all them - lot you know
, their - took a whole lot of looking after - getting 'em washed for school, coming back for their dinner, going back and - then it were teatime and then it were bedtime. Had me jobs set with 'em when they were all home I'll tell you. But they were good, 
they're not - wasn't cheeky with parents.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you ever take the children out visiting, either neighbours, friends or relations?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, I had nobody - only when me mother when she lived in Rotherham.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You used to take them over to your mother's?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When I was going, sometimes I'd - I'd take 'em - with me like.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did the children ever go out with just their father when they were small?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Never seen him - never took 'em out.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Would you do anything special on a Bank Holiday, on perhaps
 Easter Monday or Whit Monday, did you ever take them out on a day trip or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well sometime take 'em up in park you know, we never went a - anywhere like. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Would you take a picnic with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, used to go out and have a drink of - you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 In the park?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You've already told me you never took them away on holiday until they got quite a bit older?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. No. Never had to mention holiday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You couldn't afford it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, I couldn't, it's a fact.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Could you tell me how you spent Saturdays when the children were small, what would you do on a Saturday? When Annie and Elsie were babies?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well I used to go - give 'em their breakfasts and get 'em ready, and if they wanted to go out just let 'em go out 
to lark outside, and then oldest has to - look at - she'd look after youngest while I went doing me shopping.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 It would be shopping day would it?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. Mm. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What about Sunday, did you used to send them to Sunday school or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Oh yes, they used to go to Army. Went to Salvation Army. I had two - christened down at - like at Army. Mm. I used to like Army meself. When I'd time to go.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When you used to go to the Army did you have special clothes for Sunday, did you used to have 
best clothes to put on on a Sunday that you wouldn't wear the rest of the week
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well they weren't - they weren't what they call best, they were - clean and - they were good and we had to wear that at weekend.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you think it wrong to work or to enjoy yourself on a Sunday or did you not think it mattered?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well Sunday were like any - every other day to me luv. You just - like it was every day.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You went to the Salvation Army, did you used to go every Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. Just occasionally I used to go, when I had chance to go.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did your husband ever go with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. He's never been in church since we got wed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you ever belong to a choir there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you ever belong to a temperance club?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Was there anything else organised by the Army that you took part in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. No, I like}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6255762\charrsid12200121 d}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121  Army, only just went to Army.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Your children went as well did they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When you were having a meal at home did you ever say grace, either you or your husband or all of you?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I had one that did. Our Nellie used to always say a prayer before she had her dinner. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 But you didn't make a practice of it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, I didn't make a practice of that, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you ever have family prayers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Family what?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Family prayers, when all the family would pray together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you teach the children to say their prayers when they were little?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Used to teach one another, I didn't tell 'em.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you take an interest in politics at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So you didn't have any particular views on political parties?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
No, no. I hadn't time. Washing for 'em and cooking for 'em, I hadn't much - I hadn't much spare time for meself. Spare time I ever had were all in bed. I got rid of 'em all in bed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Was your husband interested in politics at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. Only himself that's all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So neither of you were members of a party or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You never helped in an election or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did yo
u ever feel that people at that time were under some sort of pressure from employers to vote a certain way? Did this apply in Rotherham?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Beg pardon?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did this apply in Rotherham? In some places at that time men felt they had to vote for a certai
n party because their boss did, because their employer did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I see, I know what you mean.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do you think this happened in Rotherham?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. I don't remember it. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When your husband and you were not doing your work, such as when you'd got the children to bed at night, what would you do then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I'd have a rest, and I wouldn't be long afore I were in bed myself.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You just put your feet up and had a rest?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 That's it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You wouldn't read or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh no, that's right, think well I've done enough for day's work.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 And you never went out together in the evening?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
No. Never went out. He used to go, I never used to bother. I'd say, go on if you want to go, I'm not bothered going. He'd walk you miles. He likes a walk, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Would you sometimes go a walk with him in the evening?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh no. I were tired when I'd done me housework and looked after me childer. I just felt I've had enough.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What time would it be when your husband would get home from work when he was down the pit, what time would he finish in the evening?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
When he worked in pit? Well he used to go down at four o'clock in the morning. Yes. He'd be up at three o'clock every morning. And - he used to be home for half past one.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 It was sort of an early shift?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
The early shift, yes. Then in the afternoon they've to be down for one o'clock. And they work while - ten at night. Come up at ten at night. Then night men go down while six o'clock next morning. Mm. On three - it were three shifts like.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So it varied from week to week?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. More or less he were on - on days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You've already told me that he enjoyed a glass of beer.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 He does.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 How often would he go out to the pub, would it be every night?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. Be just he get - he just - he'd go out if he got enough money to pay for a pint.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So it was usually Friday night?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Aye, Fri - Sat - never hardly touched it at week, it was just Friday and Saturday. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You never went with him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh I never went out with him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Can you remember -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 He'd got too many mates with him for me to go with him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
At that time were different clubs run to help working class people pay for all sorts of things, you could belong to a boot club and you paid so much and then when you needed a pair of boots you got a pair of boots.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes. I used to - I used to have a club. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Were you a member of any?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well - "didn't have a clothing club, well - the clothing club used to be held at the shop. And there's some
 as pay - you could get some people coming collecting money round you know. But - now what did then call that place? Sardison's they called shop and I always used to go there for me stuff. Like overalls and socks for children, all that. Mm. And - if I wan
ted I could - give her so much into club, perhaps a shilling, what I could afford, into club for next - when I wanted next time. Yes. Yes, same it were like a savings club.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You've already told me that you didn't take part in any sports?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 What about your husband?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Sometimes if he were having a - backing a horse, you know -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You'd have a flutter?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well you - will you - no, he used to say, do you fancy a bb in Alice? I said, oh I don't like - go on, he said, it might bring 
thee a pound. I says, go on then, and by gum it did, it brought me thirty shillings. I had the same as - won - it - it won at fifty to one. I had two bob each way on it, and then we'd to share that between us or - didn't I tell you, he said, you're lucks 
turned round. And I had a shilling on a horse, and it were like a big race, and I fancied one. That's when I like -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did your husband ever play cricket or football or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh he'd play football when he were younger. A young lad.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 That was before you were married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 When he were going to school, before we married. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do you remember him ever going bicycling?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do what luv?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Bicycling.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. He used to box a bit. Boxer. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Was that at the pit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, that was when I were courting him. Mm. He spoilt hisself.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you ever go to any theatres or concerts, music halls or cinemas?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, none whatever.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you have any hobbies?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you keep any pets?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, I had enough two legged didn't I.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you have a garden?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you ever do any gardening?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Or collect anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. No, no luv, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you have any interests at all outside the home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, I right like to go, the children - tw
o of me children went there, and I - I right liked if I could go - try and go for an hour, I used to try and go but I never could.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 But the Salvation Army was the only place you ever went to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 That's all, yes, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Your husband used to go out perhaps twice a week to enjoy himself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 That's right?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 But you never did,
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, not at week.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did anyone outside the home ever help you with the family, run the family and home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, I bat - no, luv, I battled 'em all myself.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You've already told me that when you had your first few babies your mother came in and she took over the house didn't she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, over Annie and Elsie.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You were never confined to bed other than when you had the babies?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh no, no, I were never poorly, I was strong girl. Over fifteen stone two.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did either you or your husband have relatives living nearby, in Rotherham?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. His mother's been dead a long while. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Was your mother's house far away?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No - no, we had nobody, mother were out just like on her own. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2714250\charrsid12200121 
She didn't belong to Rotherham, she belonged to Worcester. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 She were a Worcester woman over here like. Yorkshire.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So there was only your mother, they were the only relatives?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 That's all - that was - that's right, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you have any friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. Well, not what they call friend of me - just speak to 'em like I might be to - I never made like - neighbouring, as they call it.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 It was just your mother, she was your only friend?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 That's right, me only - the only person I looked on as best and always shall do. She were good mother to me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So if you didn't have any friends I don't suppose you'd invite anyone into your house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh yes, see I - it wasn't my house, it's mother's house w
hen I were with her you see. I daresay I could have done. But me mother were worked hard enough without - that you know. She didn't believe in neighbouring. My mother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So you wouldn't say that anyone ever called in casually, a neighbour?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Without
 that something happened. Then they'd say, go and tell Mrs Burton to come. I want her a minute, maybe something happened to a little baby, what do you think so and so and so and so you know. Well I'd call doctor in. Oh they'd tell advice, advise them what
 to do you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 This is while you were living with your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
YES. Yes. The next door neighbour, she had a - she were about twelve year old, I don't know whether you've ever heard of it, had what they called a lance scalp. And - she - her husba
nd was a collier, she's a big fat person like this, still person like this, and oh she were like a merry go - now she took to a girl, and - she had no children of her own, and she were about - she'd be about eleven or twelve year old and she were a lovely
 
girl. And - but - remember I told you one as me mother made like anything on. Now - she sent Mr - I gorge this name now - in to see me mother, would she come in two or three minutes to have a look at this lass. Now me mother went in. And she said, look at
 our so and so, isn't she poorly? She says, yes. Have you had doctor? She says, yes, but he hasn't been for two or three days, she says. So she says, what's that on her head? And she had all }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6255762\charrsid12200121 
her }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 hair cut nearly off. Told you she had beautiful hair. On top h
ere, top of the scalp here - it were lifting up. And me mother says - to - her mother, well step-mother like, brought her up, she says - what's that on - Vera I think they called her, on her head? She said, I don't know, well it turned out to be a lice sc
alp. And -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Lice was it, head lice?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Head lice, head lice, and it lifted up like a shell. Exactly like shell. And me mother happened to say to her, says, what's - matter with her head Mrs - so and so.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 We were talking about when you were livin
g at your mother's and the next door neighbour's stepdaughter died from this what you call louse scalp.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 She got pneumonia?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2714250\charrsid12200121 Yes she did, yes, yes. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
Yes. I don't know whether it were coming on her then or not but she had pneumonia.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You don't know whether it was a coincidence or whether it brought it on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. But she did have pneumonia. 'Cos I never went, only on what mother told me you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Both you and your mother didn't do a lot of going in other people's houses?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
No. No. Never. Never luv. We just kept ourself to ourself. We weren't independent like, used to speak, used to speak same as I do to you but - we made - never made that practice - of going in and telling the tale. Never. Didn't - believe in that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So you didn't have any friends into your house either?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, no. We were like a family on us own you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Do you remember you and your husband ever going out to visit friends at their houses?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No. Well he had nobody. He was the only one you see 
what were living and his mother were in hospital. And me mother's parents - me father's parents were all dead, we couldn't go and visit them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So you never got together with any friends in any home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 That first little house that you got by the bakery.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Was it rented?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Did you see anything of the landlord?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well I just forget. That many years since. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So you don't remember anything about him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 I lived there then when me husband went in - the Army.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 You lived at your mother's house first when you were married, then you got this little house by the bakery?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So you were only there a year or so?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 And then you moved back to your mother's?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Well - I did - 
I had our Annie like, at me mother's and then - I - I was pregnant with Elsie. Well then I come to live - with mother 'cos he left me then and I couldn't pay me rent nor nothing. Didn't know where he was for nearly three months.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Would you say that throughout the early years of your marriage that you had a struggle to make ends meet?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, I wouldn't say it were so bad. When I come to have me family, bringing me family - you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 As the family increased?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Yes, yes, that was it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Was your husband ever out of work during the early years of your marriage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 No, he weren't out, he'd work. He were a good worker.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So you were always comfortably enough off not to have to go the Guardians or a charity or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 Oh n
o. See he went soldier you know. And - I got me Army money, I got me back money, and then I rigged me children out with it. Well I got - I bought 'em all new clothes and everything for 'em.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3230341 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 So you were never absolutely penniless or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009002 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10504500\charrsid12200121 
No, well see me mother went a bit short while I was there, well I gave me mother a pound or two you know, for keeping us and whatnot. Well I couldn't do no more. She were that good to me.
\par }}