{\rtf1\adeflang1025\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\adeff0\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang2057\deflangfe2057{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}{\f38\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f39\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f41\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f42\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f43\fbidi \froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}
{\f44\fbidi \froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f45\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f46\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f48\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}
{\f49\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f51\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f52\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f53\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f54\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}
{\f55\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f56\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden 
Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs20 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}}
{\*\latentstyles\lsdstimax156\lsdlockeddef0}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid475243\rsid1773035\rsid1842944\rsid2171993\rsid2951080\rsid6373433\rsid8521398\rsid10887275\rsid13451110}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 11.0.0000;}{\info{\title <pagez1>}{\author PRASAD3}
{\operator lhorto}{\creatim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min8}{\revtim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min8}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords16450}{\nofchars93765}{\nofcharsws109996}{\vern24613}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 http://schemas.microsof
t.com/office/word/2003/wordml}{\xmlns2 urn:schemas-microsoft-com:office:smarttags}}\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1800\margr1800\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0\ltrsect 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\donotembedsysfont1\donotembedlingdata0\grfdocevents0\validatexml1\showplaceholdtext0\ignoremixedcontent0\saveinvalidxml0\showxmlerrors1\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace180
\dgvspace180\dghorigin1800\dgvorigin1440\dghshow1\dgvshow1\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\splytwnine\ftnlytwnine\htmautsp\nolnhtadjtbl\useltbaln\alntblind\lytcalctblwd\lyttblrtgr\lnbrkrule\nojkernpunct\rsidroot1773035 \fet0
{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}\ilfomacatclnup0\ltrpar \sectd \ltrsect\linex0\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ltrpar
\ql \fi-461\li461\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid6373433 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\ul\insrsid6373433\charrsid16072257 Information about interviewee}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid6373433 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid6373433\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\ql \fi-461\li461\ri0\widctlpar\tx2057\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid6373433 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6373433\charrsid16072257 Date of birth}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid6373433    \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6373433\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6373433  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid10887275 1904}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid6373433\charrsid16072257 
\par Gender}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6373433           \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6373433\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6373433  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid10887275 M}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6373433 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6373433\charrsid16072257 Marital status}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6373433 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6373433\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6373433  
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid10887275 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6373433\charrsid16544153 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6373433\charrsid16072257 Occupation}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6373433 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6373433\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6373433  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid10887275 Storeman}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6373433\charrsid16072257 
\par Geographic region}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6373433 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6373433\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6373433  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid10887275 Isle of Lewis
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6373433\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\qj \fi-461\li461\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid6373433 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Could you say your name?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Norman Paterson.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Could you tell me where your father came from?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Well my father was born in this village, a mile from here in Brue, but originally he came from Carloway and - if you're - if you're interested I could go back another couple of generations. First of all they came from North Uist. My great-grea
t-great-grandfather, John Paterson, came to Carloway as a tailor from North Uist. For - was a tailor and a blacksmith in - and - and a shoemaker in every district, they couldn't do without them because there was no shops so my great-great-great grandfathe
r was a tailor and he came to Carloway and he had five sons and three daughters and - they took their living out of the sea, Out deck - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1842944\charrsid2171993 deck boats}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 , what they called deckers, they went fishing. But one stormy day the storm came out on the west side here and 
the mast broke and - while my grandfather was working with the axe trying to make a place for the mast - a big - swell or a wave came over and it put him off his stride and he cut his leg here, with the result - that he's been taken ashore down here in Ga
l
son, a place nine miles down, and - he was there for two or three weeks 'til this wound healed up and the house he was taken to there was eight sons and one daughter and he married the daughter, with the result that he stayed down there and brought up a f
amily of six sons and three - two daughters. And in 1863 - Galson, that {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceType}}village{\*\xmlclose} of {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceName}}Galson{\*\xmlclose}
, was - they - they were evicted and they were sent to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}Canada{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 on the ship Elisabeth which sailed from Loch Dun here with emigrants. And my daughter was one of them. And
 she left Galson in 1863 with her husband and three of her family, a girl, Evvy four, a boy Donald, two, and a boy Alexander three months. And they went from Galson down here up to Carloway, that's where they came from originally. And her father and mothe
r rowed her out to a boat who was an - at anchor in Loch Dun that was to take them to }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1842944\charrsid2171993 Belfast}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 , and that's where a lot of the Ardroyal people and drift people and these Unich villagers, that's where they came from. And they landed in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname State}}Quebec{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} in seven weeks at
 sea and of course there was no transport. They were - taken through the bush and given a plot of land a quarter acre. It was thickly - the trees and forests and they were ignorant of saws and - and axes to break down - the trees and to settle it - to bre
a
k it down. Of course, there was a community spirit amongst them and I don't think I heard her saying that there was nobody - from these islands anyway that could speak the English except her husband who was a merchant. And they settled in Myland about a h
undred and fifty miles from {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Montreal{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 and she lived there to a hundred years. She never moved out of there, she never came back, she raised her family there. But I - went out there in 1923 and I've been back and forth - visiting up to 1928 and I got a lot of
 the information from her. They had a lot of hardships when they went there first I - I put an article in the local paper here at the end of a hundred years telling this. The peats, their only fuel - it was a bad year, they didn't dry and - whether you'll
 
understand this I don't know, the fire was smouldering and the peat was - potatoes was - so long in the pot that the water - there wasn't any heat and they could boil, but the potatoes was cooked on the fire without ever boiling. And the - there was no pe
a
t on and they knocked down all the turf walls to keep them going and, of course, they were all crofters and there was a law then that unless you paid the rent within that day it was due they could evict you. The landlord could evict you. Now there was no 
fish, and there was no seed to put back into the ground. That's what forced them to emigrate. They were forced to emigrate because they were thrown out of their homes and out of their lands and they gave them a chance to go to 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}Canada{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}. I don't know now, I th
ink the government paid their fares out there. And their descendants are still there, some of their grandchildren I still hear from them, they've been - that's the third generation but they didn't know much about it. The first and second generations has g
o
ne and the third generation's up in the seventies and eighties and - they just - but weren't interested in these affairs. But to come to this - to our own family for instance, I'll come down to my own father. The first thing we did when we were going to s
c
hool is to measure ourselves to see it were high enough to go to the militia. Every son wanted to join the militia and they had to be something like five foot five and a half to join the militia. And - they had to be eighteen years of age but - the people
 
up in the highlands had generally - they were then more than now - they were big, tall and they would take them for eighteen when they were only really fifteen. I can prove that by giving you the - soldiers handbook or pocketbook of one of my brothers who
 
joined the militia when he was fifteen, and then joined the Seaford Highlanders three months after that was killed in France in 1914 before he was seventeen years of age. Everyone went to the militia and then the next year they - they - they'd trained the
r
e for about six or seven weeks or sometimes up to three months the first time and then they were getting what they were called the retainer after that, some money from the government but they were bound - they were - same as being in the Army, they could 
c
all you any time, if war came. And they had to put in a certain amount of training every so often. Maybe one training a year or maybe one in two years. Now my father was in the militia and then they went into the Royal Naval Reserve. Now this is common an
d ninety percent I would say of the islanders did what I'm telling you, they went to the Militia first. This was something like the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1842944\charrsid2171993 Territorial}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 . Army today like, but this militia, they just went there but - they came back after putting in their training and
 they were called again for some more training. Then they joined the Royal Naval Reserve. The same happened to that, they used to go down to Portsmouth and Chatham and to go out - spend so much time at sea. And then they came back generally in the spring 
a
nd in the autumn to help with the spring work and to help with the harvest. How it was hard work - eking a living out of our plot of land, and it wasn't very good land, about a - approximately six acres to each croft - running for about a narrow stretch f
rom the houses straight down to the sea. This is Brue and Barras in general. All the - the rural area. They were all crofters, and they were numbered. Like Barras - {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Lower Barras{\*\xmlclose}
 is numbered from one to fifty-seven, that's fifty-seven croft, fifty-seven fami
lies. Upper Barras twenty-four. Brue twenty-eight. It applies all over, the same the side of the border, it goes like this, one, two, three, the crofts are numbered beside one another. Now, there was no way of earning any money. They lived in black houses
, thatched houses, which they built themselves - there was no -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Your father was in a black house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Yes. Yes, he built that house himself when he got married, he lived the first year along with my - in-laws - with his own in-laws rather, and - he 
then got a croft and he started building a house, it's - it's still up, part of it was anyway 'til very recently and - that's where we were born, there was five sons and two daughters. But he was - always at the fishing. Used to go to the east coast fishi
n
g to Cullen Fraserburgh or Peterhead, and he generally followed the same employers which - they thought a lot of him, I think two of them - he had pneumonia - I think two of them coming home from the east coast to see him. So he set himself that so they s
hould, many's a time they left thousands of pounds - that's the boat - in my charge. So he was fishing 'til - up to about 1910. He went to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}Canada{\*\xmlclose}, up to western {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname 
place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}Canada{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}, Nelson B.C. He had one training to put in the Royal Navy. After they put in twenty-one y
ears they used to get a Pension, which they called - Reserve - the Royal Naval Reserve pension which was fifty pounds, and that was a lot of money in 1910. So he came home to put in his last drill, last training. And seemingly they were lifting potatoes a
n
d he got a very bad cold and he had flu when he left and he came back with double pneumonia which left him with bronchitis and he was - just able to be up and about and not able to work. That would be in 1910 - 1911. Then - my oldest brother was in the Ni
cholson, the high school }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1842944\charrsid2171993 in Stornoway}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
, it's called the Nicholson Institute. The next one that I'm - I refer to you joined the Army when he was fifteen. The third was in the Royal - in the Navy. Now the one older than me and I we - we were in school. So - my
 father then was more or less - between the bed and getting up days and going to bed and he got on better and that's when he went to the Bishop. He went to Church of Scotland missionary to Harris to - to }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1842944\charrsid2171993 L}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 everburgh Harris, it was called Obbe then, that's w
here Lord - Lord Lever started, so they named Obbe after Lord Lever and it's called now Leverburgh, that's away from Tarbert, it's a nice place too. Now, my father was in - Obbe - it was called Obbe - Obbe - it's called Leverburgh today - he was there 191
6
, '17 - '18 and he came home at 1919 after my mother, a brother and a sister died with the flu. And he was home for a few years and then he went to - in 1921 and he was engaged at the ruik, you'll notice that place called Geshader, he was in there for ele
ven years 'til he retired in 1931, and he bought this house here. I was in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}Canada{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 at that time and - I helped him - well I bought most of it - of this house so that he'd have a home. There was a mission house while he was on the mission - there was a home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 So between 1911 and 1916 was he a missionary around here?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
No. 1911 - you see - 1911, that's when he was in Canada and he came back from Canada in - in - 1911 and he went into - to finish his training with the Royal Navy. In order to get this big
 pension of fifty pounds. And when he came back from there war was declared. 1944 and all three of the eldest of the family was called up. The one in the Nicholson Institute was called up, he was in the first landing in the 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Dardanelles{\*\xmlclose} on the N.N.S. Implac
able. In Calipolli and he was severely wounded there and was in Malta for a long time and then he came over to England, he was badly wounded and - had some of the shrapnel in his left shin bone till his - 'til he died - by a V.2 bomb in the second world w
a
r he volunteered from Canada and was on the first Canadian ship to come over to London. And the second V.2 bomb that came across he was killed then and his remains was taken home here, I took them up to Barras here in 1944, 30th of November. Barras here. 
T
he second one I told you joined the Army, he was killed on the 15th of September 1914. Now my mother had to worry and responsibility of raising us. We had two cows and sometimes three foals and about up to twenty sheep. All this croft work was hard work t
i
lled with a spade. The manure was carried mostly in creels on their back. Some had carts and some didn't. There was no ploughs. It was all tilled. And - the ground - they kept so many cows that the ground was so well manured and they always kept more than
 
the croft was fit for. And - in the beginning of May they were sent out to the shielings, that's summer houses out miles on a moor, at the beginning of May they were out there to beginning of August. And they came out - came home from there - fat, differe
nt altogether, but they were very poor that they just hardly wintered it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Did you go up there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
I did. I did. And there was a habit here then all the cattle had to be herded. They weren't allowed to mix with one another. and there was always one 
of us kept from school for herding cattle. In ever household. But - the moor was so - the pasture was so good and the cows was fat coming home from the moor.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Could you tell me about life on the shieling?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Well the life on the shieling was there w
as always one left out to look after the cattle, look after the shieling. It was only a small bothy. And - the summer - we went - barefooted from the end of April. We only got one pair of boots, it wasn't shoes, but boots with seven drills of Hungarian na
i
ls in the toe plates and heel plates so that they would last us all the year. But once the weather would get better at the end of April all boys and girls - was casting their - boots and they were running barefoot again right up 'til the cold weather woul
d
 come again in October. But - a lot of the crofters, they sold a cow or a steer or a heifer - or two - every year, there used to be three - markets and - buyers used to come up from the mainland. There was a - a market in the first Tuesday in July and the
r
e was a market in the first Tuesday of September and there was a late market again in November, where they sold animals. If they got four pounds for a cow they considered that a big price - I remember that quite well. And there was a lot too had - were in
 want, that didn't have anything at all but what little the neighbours had they always shared, there was a community spirit that is fast dying today.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Would the people in want be people without crofts at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Yes. Living on just a small bothy - g
enerally bachelors, old maids and old bachelors. And - people that wasn't very strong or very well in body or may be in mind. But was very independent. And if anybody - lent them or gave them anything it was kept secret, they weren't to - to hear it, and 
i
f I wax to go and help somebody who I thought was in need - I would be careful that nobody would see me going there with potatoes or with a bit of meat or with anything that I had. They shared what little they had. And - it was very common, in my young da
ys, growing up as a boy, to see a woman coming and asking my mother could she get a pail of meal 'til they could get some meal themselves. That there wasn't a grain of meal in the house.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Would your mother get meal from the parish?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Oh no, you had 
to be destitute - and you didn't need to have - you - you couldn't have a croft to get anything from the parish and if I tell you, excuse me, what some of the widows that was raising a family they could get something from the parish. It amounted to two an
d
 sixpence in six months. Two and six, it was raised latterly to four shillings and - if they had cows, a lot of cows and sheep they couldn't qualify at all for it. They raised their families like that. But - they worked hard and they - they raised a lot o
f
 - they made a lot of barley meal themselves. They manured the ground when there was a big crop and then they took the seed off by a flail. That's hitting the - hitting the barley and taking the seed off and they were boarding it in places where there was
 a fire. Then they took it down to the water mills that ground it into meal.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 There was a mill for each village was there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Well - there was and some - more than - you'll see them across the road where there's a river and if you go to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Ness{\*\xmlclose}, if you 
haven't been there, there's a mill there, a big one, it's still going. But they're taking the seed home for the big farmers instead - they don't raise any of that now. No. But everybody did - their own meal. Mostly barley meal. Flour meal was unheard of. 
A loaf of bread wasn't heard of - in my young days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Would your mother bake her own bread?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Bake her own - every mother did that. - Baked their own bread. And there were - potatoes - we had them once every day and sometimes twice. But I know others
 that had them three times. Was anything up to eighty bags of potatoes. They went to the sea shore and they cut seaweed, and - that seaweed was the manure that was used on the sandy soil. They used to get anything up to forty bags of potatoes out of piece
s
 there, they changed them every year, so that some places that was - the potatoes was planted - planted - it - be up to anything to thirty years before any; thing was planted there before, that the ground was strong, and they gave a good yield because the
 drill was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1842944\charrsid2171993 filled}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
 with - filled with seaweed. Black seaweed. It was just rotting you see, cutting it then - rotten seaweed, that was the manure they used for the - potatoes that was planted in the sandy soil. But - in - black soil it was the cow manure that
 was used. And the - the - the crops was changed every year. Where there was barley this year it could - could have big crop of potatoes off next year without any - manure at all. They were depending on the barley for their meal. So they were pu}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1842944\charrsid2171993 t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 ting more 
manure into it than any other part of the ground and then the potatoes followed it next year. Good dry mealy potatoes. And -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Did they grow other vegetables besides potatoes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 But - potatoes only and cabbage. They didn't go in for carrots or any 
of what we have today. Leeks and lettuce, I've got some down there, lettuce, leeks, beetroot. There was hardly if any, but there was plenty of turnips and three or four hundred head of cabbage. But the cabbage was mostly planted for - sheep and rams and -
 
of course they were planted for themselves but not so much as for the sheep. Fattening the hogs, the yearly lambs. The lambs, wintering the lambs. The lambs was with the - in winter. They - they wouldn't survive out. We used to have good big heavy falls o
f
 snow then. I've seen snow here lasting for six weeks and all the roads from here to Stornoway's blocked. It was a trawler that went round at 1916 with mails from Stornoway right round by Carloway. And there was some - there was one, she's still living at
 
Shader, she's eighty-four, she had four brothers in the war and there was no mail coming and she walked the distance from her to twelve miles to Stornoway took the mails out of the Stornoway Post Office and walked the moor again at night following the tel
e
phone poles. She's still living to tell the tale. The roads were full of snow. And then it was all cart - it was - more or less what you'd call a track. It wasn't roads. It was only tracks. It - we called them roads but it was only a horse and cart - and 
just hardly enough for horse and cart. Cart was a two wheeled -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 You had your own horse and carts?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
We had our own horses and our own carts and there was always a man that made carts, and there was always a blacksmith where you'd - sharpen the tools that you required - whether - to dig the potatoes with or what they hoe them with.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Would they also have a croft themselves?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Yes, they would have a croft themselves but this was on the side. This is something they had on the side. But - they ma
de a little bit of a - living out of it as well and the tailor was making - their suits of - mostly of - thick - thick, thick - tweed, it - was laster - it was well - lasting for a long time. It was tough wearing, and - of course they went out when they w
ere away from here they bought a lot of stuff, clothes and boots, when they're away. Shoes wasn't - I don't remember ever seeing a pair of shoes in my young days, it was all boots.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Did your mother make most of your own clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 They did - she di
d, and she knitted, that's what I was coming - going to come to. She knitted all our - sweaters and - she didn't - well - I don't think she made very - she did when we were young before we went to school she made trousers. And made skirts, made skirts for
 
the - I was going to tell you that when I heard about it. There was as much cotton - wool - cotton thread used every night when we went to bed she was always patching and sewing our trousers, patching our trousers, and - of course - the - we went around w
i
th just - very thin underwear and a shirt and a jersey and a pair of trousers. That was our clothes. I don't remember any of the boys in school with me ever having such a thing as an overcoat. No. None of them possessed it. But we had incidentally what th
ey don't have today, every man had a cap. And if - you had been here last week I got a son in - {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Glasgow{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 and he made thesis, he's a - an H.Ed. Used to be Bachelor or - and he made a thesis on the education in the 19th century here, and - he's got a photo that was taken down in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Ness{\*\xmlclose}
 here in the '80's, and every boy was barefooted like this, and every boy had a cap on. So he was - it's now the other way around. Now - I think you'd better stop that for a little while 'til I have my breath to see what we come to 
after that. I would like to lay stress on this, what gave me a - a heart - what broke my heart many's a time when I've thought of it, the hard work that the mothers did. I think it was Napoleon that coined the phrase, the hand that rocks the cradle rules 
t
he world. But I could say that the characters of the Lewis man or the highlanders was - their mothers more than anything else. She got up in the morning, she kindled the fires, she cleaned the house, she got anything from five, six off to school, gave the
m
 what breakfast and had to share and share alike. It - which was mostly every morning a big pot of porridge and milk. That was our breakfast. Mostly every morning. Eggs when they'll be - plentiful. But in the wintertime they'd be scarce, but in the summer
 
and spring they'd be plentiful. Sometimes we all had an egg and a cup of milk, just as it came from the cow. And - in the afternoon again there was potatoes what we called dinner, which usually was between three and four. And I've seen others having potat
oes in the morning before going to school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Just potatoes for dinner?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Well potatoes and - we had - in the wintertime we always had a barrel of salt herring. And - we had potatoes and herring and skimmed milk generally and sometimes fresh milk. Tha
t was the dinner. Very little tea. Up to the first world war at the end of it tea became plentiful and loaf - bakers loaf became plentiful. But - it was still - mostly - it was barley and oatcakes that the children was brought up on. Oatcakes and barley b
r
ead. And soup. There was a lot of oatmeal - soup made of oatmeal, and - the odd sheep was killed and salted and dried up above the fire and fish - was salted, ling and cod and sort of preserved, and I think that's what drove them to poaching. The rivers h
e
re are pretty plentiful with salmon but we're not allowed to take any out of that river to this day, which I don't think is right, which I would like to see the day when anybody could go and fish for a salmon. But if - in - to go back to the '80's and the
 
'90's - if you were caught taking a salmon out of the river I know one family I met in Canada and you'll pass the place when you're going to Odze, a place called Gisla. I met five big hefty husky men and they were evicted from Gisla for poaching salmon in
 that river. Dolly Doctor that married Lord Leverhulme's }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1842944\charrsid2171993 niece}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
 got that place at Gisla, you come across it after you turn at the {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Kinloch Road{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
. He says, the boys was caught poaching and they were evicted from the land and - the penalties was very severe and 
still is. Far more so than if I broke into a shop you'd get - more for taking a salmon out of the river. Now - in late September and October it was pretty hard on people. There was about nine or ten thousand more people on the island than there are today 
i
n the 1900's as you can see, there was over thirty thousand. Now there's only something like twenty or twenty-one. And most families was large, six and seven boys growing up in a family. How it was very tempting to see salmon going up that river - so they
 
started - they had a name especially barves of being bad poachers. They used to get nets and go up to their necks in there and get some of these salmon and they salted them and they dried them. They had them for to eat with their potatoes through the wint
e
r. Not that it was very good but - Doctor McKinnon that was in Borve said that if it wasn't for the salt that they'd been all dead long ago, by eating unclean - what they called unclean salmon. But by having it three or four days in pickle - pickle - salt
 
pickle and then drying them that that protected it. But I'm just saying this because - they were really very hard up and living from hand to mouth. But as I started about telling about how hard the women worked, they then started milking cow as and taking
 cows out to the pasture, they carried, as I said, their load of peats on their back, they knitted stockings all the way going and - coming with their creel of peat they always had their knitting pins working all the time.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Your mother would do all that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
YES? SHE was doing that, keeping five sons and her husband, knitting socks and darning and patching and mending 'til she could hardly keep her eyes open standing by a paraffin dull dull light. Many's the time I've seen her - putting ointment on he
r eyes before going to bed after being all night standing by a dull light - mending our clothes, and that's what I told you often gave me heart break. She had to do the washing besides that, with nothing so far as I remember but Sunlight soap. No washing 
m
achine, it was washed in a tub. We always used to get into the tub and - dancing up to - soak the blankets. But she used to have them out on the green for to - that would turn them whiter. They didn't have the money, they didn't have the facilities, there
 
was no piped water. Water had to be carried from the well in pails. Water had to be carried to the house to be - deal to the cows. All was - all that was - continual work, there was no such a thing, my mother never had a holiday in her life. Seven of her 
f
amily, the only - the oldest always got the worst end of the stick by having - to nurse and to look after the children - the - the oldest girl always had - helped the mother. And she learnt to knit. And that's followed to this day, they're still good knit
ters. And it was always mostly fancy knits. Now I left the most important part off. There was a lot of sheep and they - they hardly ever sold the wool, the wool was carded - washed, carded and spun by hand and made into }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1842944\charrsid2171993 woollen}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993  thread and that's where they 
knitted their socks and their jerseys and their clothes from. That was - they worked hard from March, April, May, June, July, August, September, October, November, but there was a slack time from November, December, January, February and March, that's whe
r
e the women did their spinning and did their inside work in the long winter. Lifting and cutting the peats and taking them in. They were stacked as you see my stack there at the door, we helped with the water, taking in the water, we helped with herding t
h
e - herding the cattle, but boys as a rule would sort of - they were insulted you see to wash dishes, or doing any washing - washing clothes. That fell to the girls. We did - another thing, in my young days, the boys never carried a cradle of peats. Like 
the women and the girls did. In - in - in Newick I}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1842944\charrsid2171993  seen them doing it, the menfolk}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 , but out here I seldom if ever seen a man carrying a cradle of peats on his back. It was all mostly women - or round about where I was born and brought up in Barras here I ha
rdly ever see a man carrying a cradle of peats. Unless of course some houses where there were no - where there were no women, but the women I'd say had the biggest load - had the biggest heaviest end of the stick to carry.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 What about milking cows?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
No, the men - the only time that the boys or the men would do that is in the s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1842944\charrsid2171993 u}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 mmer time when they're on the shieling. But in the house at - from the time they'd come home from the shieling in August 'til they would go to the shieling again it was alwa
ys the women that milked the cow and looked after the milk and generally fed the cows. But the men fed the horses. And they fed the - the lambs, the yearlings. Hocks we call them. The men did that. And the men did the shearing. And - well the women helped
 
too with the shearing. But the women did all the work to the wool, the men hardly did anything. But I'll tell you what the men did - they used to pull heather out while they were on the shieling - would be out - people would be out there herding the cattl
e
 and watching them, and watching the shielings as well. They'd have far - more milk out there and they used to make butter and - cottage cheese. They were pulling heather, and every morning taking home the milk to the house to the people at home. They car
r
ied the pails of milk on their back. There was a load of heather going home with them and that heather was stored there and the menfolk made rope out of it, which they kept the thatch of the houses on their barns and on their stables, and they'd coil some
 coils of this heather rope and - or heather stuff that grows down by the sea the}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1842944\charrsid2171993 re, it just - something like str}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 aw but it's not straw, it's stronger than that, I don't know what's the right English word for it, it's spelt muran in gaelic - muran. But it's 
very sharp, if you ever go down to the seashore you'll find it and they used to take home in - sheaves of it and then they - they made a rope of it. Of course there was no other rope then in my early - in my - when I remember first at that. And that's how
 the stacks was - protected from the gales, putting this - heather rope on it. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 And for the thatched roves?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
YES, that's right. That's right. To keep the thatch on because with the gales it often - if they could get under it - they would - it would just take all that straw away and - the hearth was in the middle of the fire, there was no chimneys.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 So what would your mother cook on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
On - one of these long chains that came down - there was only one dish could get on there - and that'
s where the baking was done too, and to this day they claim the baking is best by the open hearth than it is on - in oven because - it's - you can control sort of - the baking of the bread is - can be better slow baking beside a fire full of - red embers.
 There's still - I've seen them still putting them to - to the front of the stove to - to bake the scones like that - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1842944\charrsid2171993 oatcake}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993  scones and barley scones.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Did you have a table there then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Oh yes. Every house had a table but were just mostly homemade
 tables. We had one three boards of say eight by thirty - eight inches wide and then - cleats put underneath it and it was hanging up against the wall to be out of the way and there was one leg on it coming down to hold it and it was - bolted - it wasn't 
b
olted, it was hinged - with homemade hinges. That is, there was a - a - wooden thing - cut like this and there's a hole put in it and the table was in there and it was holding it up and then there was a sort of a - well something like I have on that door 
- to hold it
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 What do they call those?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
No, that's I don't know either. We have no - haven't got a word for it in gaelic. I - but I - that's what it held it up with. It was mostly homemade, I'm talking now prior to 1914, prior to 1918. And - and pr
ior to that most of what I said. I think ninety-nine percent of what I said. So there was only homemade chairs. There was no - nothing like this. Nothing like that. They make - used to make four pieces of - make a chair, just a frame, and then they used t
o
 make this rope in and out, something the same as this is made, if you lift that cover off it, like that. There were chairs made like that. Another thing, every house had two long benches on both sides, that could hold about eight or nine people on each. 
A
 big wide one like that, where you could rest, lie down and they say it was - when you were tired it's better to lie on hard boards. There wasn't so much rheumatism then as there is today. And - the beds was all wooden - bottom, with straw. No springs, no
 spring bed. And most of the - if not all - all the blankets were made - there's weavers here as far back as - hundreds of years. Handloom weavers.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Those were men?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Yes. Yes, were men. That's where the Harris Tweed came, although - the many - they
 made - they got a monopoly of it but they copied the old ladies from making the Harris tweed by hand. By hand. They threw their shuttles by hand instead of - making it automatic. They improved on it. They make - made it automatic. You've seen a loom work
ing? Well - I remember when there was looms in - two or threes her in Barras. The men was making blankets. And making - pieces of cloth and - the - the men or the women made trousers out of them.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 That's where your mother would get the cloth from too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Yes. The cloth to make trousers for the boys. She would - make the yarn herself and - she would - they would give it to - to the weaver and he could make us - ten, twelve, fourteen, fifteen yards. And they sometimes they made a tweed itself too. Narr
ow twenty-eight inch tweed. And - they didn't go hungry I would say outside of - well there was places that people that went hungry. But what they ate was very sound, they lived on the best of the land, they lived on - on - barley bread and oatcakes.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 You never saw your mother having less so that the family could have more?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Well, yes, often. Many's a time I've seen her going to bed and I've said already, it comes pretty hard on me when I'm speaking about it, many's the time what little there was w
e had to take it and she went without. Many's the time that. But - you know, there was always - something to look forward to like. The spring was always a hard time, it was so hard that - in order to have something substantial when the hard spring work wa
s
 on, carrying seaweed on their back, carrying manure on their back, carrying the corn, carrying the sheep and carrying the peats and carrying everything - they used to have a pig. A few of them. We had four in my time. And they used to salt it. But they u
s
ed to save it so that they'd have good meals when they were working hard. In the wintertime now they didn't work very hard outside of doing the necessaries. The ground had - there were - there was no spring work to do and there was no harvest work to do. 
B
ut - they mixed a lot of turf with the manure, so - to make it go longer and to - to strengthen it. They mixed a lot of the seaweed with it. And that would give out better yield, out of the ground. Because the ground wouldn't yield anything. I referred al
r
eady to my grandaunt who left in 1863. Now she said that she would never go back to the life that she had in this island. The trees that we were cutting down she says here was like the money we had - you have in the bank, because we never put a spade full
 of manure on that ground since we came out sixty years ago. Because when the stumps rotted away that ground would - would yield a big crop of if year after year. And she had the - six or seven horses and about fourteen to fifteen cows and steers. In 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}Canada{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
. But her husband composed a song about the hardship that met him, they went without meal after planting potatoes, they had to pick them again, they were hungry. And I heard her saying that many's the night she went to bed without a supper. That's the fir
st year, they were deep in the middle of the woods, they followed - what they call in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}Canada{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} blazing a trail. When they landed in 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname State}}Quebec{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} sometime in May '63, they left here in April, there - there was a chip out of each tree, they call it blazing a trail th
rough woods. That was their guide to take them to where they were going. She carried the three children. One on her back, one on her hand, the two of them in her hand through the woods.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 When was your father born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 My father was born in 1863. He 
was the youngest of the family and he was the only one that went to school. That's when - when education - go to school came - became compulsory, in 1871 or '72. And I think '22 it was because - this boy of nine wanted this local paper, the Stornoway Gaze
t
te - to - to put this thesis into the Gazette and they're waiting 'til it's a hundred years, which'll be next year. And if you're living here if you get hold of the Gazette - he had the book here but it's all in the Gazette office. Thesis on the education
 of the - in the 19th century, in the {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceType}}Island{\*\xmlclose} of {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceName}}Lewis{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
. Now the churches started the education first. It was the churches that started but people here wasn't keen on getting education. They - they just wanted their children to raise up to help them on the crofts.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 What did your parents feel about education then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Well - my father - I could show you his writing on his letters yet, he was - he was very good. And one of my uncles on my mother's }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1842944\charrsid2171993 side}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993  was very good too. But the rest of the family, they couldn't write. Some of them couldn't write their own name. There was - they never went to school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Could your mother write?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
My mother could write, she was the same age as my father, she was born in 1868, he was born in 1869. Both of them could write.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 And they both spoke English?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 They both spoke English. Both - my father's been to 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}Canada{\*\xmlclose}, my father's been to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}England{\*\xmlclose}, to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Chatham
{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} and all over and he's been to school. My mother has been to the fishing in - Lowestoft and - Peterhead, Fraserbu
rgh, Shetlands, used to go up there every year and - some of them made a little bit of money there to with the fishing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Did she ever do any other sort of paid work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
No. Never. She never - she never - she - she did - she went to the fishing befor
e she married but not since she got married. She had her hands full once she got married. Because it was nothing here to see five or six, as I've said already, of boys and girls going to school together. They raised large families. Eight, nine, ten. Yes. 
I
 think - there was over in this village of Barras I counted them once and I know I'm not - I'll be on the safe side - there was over a hundred able bodied boys here from this village in the first world war. Over a hundred. On average - there was one to tw
o emigrated to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}Canada{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} and the States? {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}Australia{\*\xmlclose} and 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}New Zealand{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
, a lot of them loved the sea and wanted to stay where they were born and brought up near the sea and the fishing, they - they wouldn't do anything else. But I'm talking about the average - I do
n't mean the average - household, I mean the average family. Because there was some houses that there was no family, or maybe one or two girls and - maybe spinsters - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1842944\charrsid2171993 old spinsters}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993  and bachelors. I mean, the people that had families. There was one to two o
n average emigrated to Canada.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Were there some boys who wanted to stay and would simply squat on the croft?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
No. Now you come to another question. There was a law that the eldest son - inherited the croft and the house after the father, and the 
mother could never say in it. She could be thrown out like that. The father died, the older son took charge. He married. The rest of the family scattered. As a rule. But I'll tell you what I heard my mother-in-law say when she got married. When I got marr
i
ed she came down here to see - her daughter shortly after we got married and she says, you don't know, she says, that you were born. When I married your father I went in with his father and mother and - four sons and three daughters, and every one of them
 
there you - was watching to see how you would - what - you know - how - how able you were, how capable you were more or less. Now you can understand how a young bride going in with three sister-in-law and living in three - apartment without - you know, th
e
y didn't have rooms to themselves or anything like that. But - there was some squatted on the land and there was some where the old man - divided the land up where he could see - instead of having the whole croft it was a half croft. The commission of 188
6 anybody who owned a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1842944\charrsid2171993 piece}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
, a stretch of land, either it was one third of the croft he was given a number. If there was a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1842944\charrsid2171993 crofter\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993  commission come around and they raised the rents and they gave numbers to people who never had a number, if you didn't have 
a number you weren't a recognized crofter. You were called a squatter. And a squatter didn't have - very much - he - he had practically the same as a crofter but not the rights, not a say in the village. Not - he could be told to - to clear his stock off 
the land or anything like that, and a lot of them emigrated.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 People were quite tolerant of them though?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Yes, they did. If you had a lot of relatives - if you didn't they weren't so tolerant. There would be - reporting you that you were building a
 house and if - if you - there was some law, if you got a house up before anybody reported you, once you'd had a fire in the house they couldn't put you out by law. Possession of it was nine tenths of the law. And they always build a little bit of hearth 
f
irst and put a fire in it before they're reported. Then they could extend it after that. But Barras was very free of squatters. I - I remember when there wasn't any. There's hardly any to this day, two or three maybe. But some of the other villages throug
hout the island, there was half squatters and half crofters.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 So were there no struggles around here to get more land?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
No, there couldn't - the pasture - they were very strict - the crofters wouldn't like to give you ten feet of their - of their 
land. They went up in arms about it, they wouldn't hear of it. But today the law is changed. If I - if you want to come her and build a house there all you've got to do is apply for - put your name in the gazette that you're applying for this piece of lan
d
 to build a house on it. All the people here wouldn't stop you, couldn't stop you, so long as you weren't encroaching on a right of way, or anybody else's ground. That's how all these apportionments are given to them today. And even in the next village he
r
e everyone in the village was against them, and the crofters commissioner or - this committee anyway - over ruled them. They're trying to give us much land. The more you ask for the more - the better chance you have of getting it today. And there's a lot 
of people having apportionments. There's some apportionments that's been given in a community scale, but now this apportionments that's each individual to do for himself. You can see them along the road here on the right and on the left.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 You started to tell me about the beds?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Well the beds was put - what we'd call - what you'd call a box bed. The reason of that box}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1842944\charrsid2171993  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 bed was the thatched houses with the - with the heavy rains would lead to - leak through, but with the box with the roof on the bed th
ere was no - no rain getting through to the - to the bedclothes. And - it was - wooden beds. They were made of new wood, and - and they made - there was always some joiners that was better at tools than others, I'm coming to that point in the passing - al
l
 the coffins was made locally and it was only just a man that was handy with tools that was making and three or four other people helping, even some of the Odze district up to '23 when I was there, the timber was taken home by the Hebrides from Glasgow an
d
 was stored down there at the far end of Geshader in a house built on a shed on it, and it's just when a person would die that coffin was made locally and - a man had to - cloth - it was all covered with cloth then. Generally black cloth and it had plates
 on it and name plates on it, a lot of other sort of - decoration like, on the coffin.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Could you describe a funeral at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Yes. Fine. Well I could describe you that I walked from a village, if you'll take your eye coming to Loch Crosa - be
fore you come to Loch Crosa on your right hand side you see a little village called Ungshader, Uni - you see the shaders, that's from the Norwegian descent, they called it shaders. That's what they called what we called shieling, the norwegians called the
m
 saters. And you see the shaders always - there sixteen shaders in Lewis. Lower Shader, Upper Shader, Sheshader, Grimashader, Geshader, Caryshader, Geshader and so on. Now - I walked from that town Geshader and carried an old lady from there up to Balnaki
l church yard, and that's one of the oldest }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1842944\charrsid2171993 churchyards}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993  in the 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceType}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}island{\*\xmlclose} of {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceName}}Lewis{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
. And I'll advise you while you're in Lewis to go to that graveyard. It was - made - carried - the turf was carried there - land was so valuable they didn't want to lose any of it
, so it's just in the back of the Manse, do you see the Manse, you're bound to have seen Balnakil - aye, Balnakil Manse. You're bound to have seen it. Well it's just beyond it. It's an old one. There's no - nobody went there except the Gazeette here that 
n
obody went there since - 1900 or 1800 but there was, was some widows. They wouldn't bury a widow except where her husband was buried. And - I walked from there to Balnakil, so when you're going over it just now, it's - four - five, six, seven, eight, nine
 miles. Carrying the coffin.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Who went to the funeral?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Well - everybody in the village went. The able bodied especially but - the older people were inclined to turn back when they would go up about half ways, they're still doing that. But today t
here's a great - graves are dug before you go. But they just - they just walk a little bit and then of course they get to the hearse and cars follow suit. But that was all walking. Did you ever see them? Well - well -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Did women go to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 No. Women 
was unheard of ever going to a funeral, but they came to the house where the death wax. And they came for two nights or two days before the - if a person died today this - the village went idle, there wasn't a turn done in - in that village. So long as yo
u
're outside the village you could work, unless - unless it was some near relative. But the women only went to the house and came to the door when the coffin was taken out, and that's all. But the menfolk, they started - there's eight handles - they starte
d at the - the top, and then they come down the their you see, they - they changed hands 'til they were down to the last one, and then they went aside, so on 'til all the people want past and then you joined the tail end of them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 So everybody helped to carry it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Everybody helped to carry that was able. If you didn't you'd soon be told that they wouldn't - carry you if you died, if you turned back and you're able they would be saying that they would dock - stop - drop you where you turned back. But
 - they very much to - a man followed. And that was hard work too on a rainy day. And then we had to dig the grave then after getting there. And - but we were fortunate in having a good sandy dry soil, dry place to lay them. And it'd be worth your while g
oing there too, you could get a good sight of the old - this is the Atlantic Ocean as near, you know, I don't - I'll tell you - well it's very wild in wintertime, you can hear that roar of c}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13451110\charrsid2171993 o}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 ri}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13451110\charrsid2171993 
n}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 g sea. It's called the - there's a big beach there. Big stones.
 You can hear it on the other side of the island in wintertime, it's a sign of bad bad weather when you hear the sea roaring. Now - very little boats was here compared to the other places, because it was difficult to get them out and was difficult to haul
 them up the steep cliffs there. But in calm weather used to cure - there used to be a fish curing place in Carloway and they could get out there at any time. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13451110\charrsid2171993 
That\rquote s how}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993  my - my great-great - grandfather and - and his wife rowed - this granddad of mine out 
to the boat that - with their three children and I asked her 'were you homesick when you left?' She says, yes I had left something behind me to be homesick after. I left my father and mother, five brothers and two sisters, and my brothers was out fishing 
a
nd I never seen them, but my father and mother rowed us out to the boat that was anchored in Loch Dun. She went then to Belfast where they joined that boat by name of Elizabeth, took them to Quebec and some of us - one of the sons and some of the grandson
s
 been over here but she never came back. She swore - she was only twice she was up on deck form the time she left in seven weeks, some days they were losing more ground than they were gaining. And her husband was - well, better educated than anybody - of 
t
he rest and he used to go up and speak to the Captain and he could tell them what - what progress they were making or if the winds was against them, it was all sailing, and it's only twice she was in - up on deck during the seven weeks. Once when the Capt
a
in shouted, and that's the first word and the last word of English I ever heard her say, she said, the Captain shouted, all hands up on deck. And they were all taken - she - they were given up as lost with the storm, and other time her husband took her up
 to see the sailor and she says they were just like the blackbirds - birds up in the masts. It's a sailing boat - so - they had their - hardships going across the {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Atlantic{\*\xmlclose} in 1863. Now - anything else?

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Going back to the beds?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 To the beds?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Did you share beds with your brothers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Yes. Oh yes. Two and three to a bed. But - boys and girls never went to the same bed. No. Not even in a family. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 And there was nobody else besides your mother and father, no other adults?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 No. No. No
. There never is, there never was outside of - say just now there's - a sister of - of - an aunt like, an unmarried aunt, someone like that in the house.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 But you didn't have that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 No, I didn't have that, no. No. And - it wasn't very common. Wher
e there was aunts you see - they built a little }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13451110\charrsid2171993 bothey}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
 for then - beside the house. They - they didn't - the house was small enough - there could have been an aunt say just now - say I had an aunt here when I got married, well there'd be plenty of room her
e, but when the family came there wouldn't be room. She'd either have - take a room or - have a bothey built for her. I had an aunt here, even after coming home from Glasgow, after raising a family, she come home here and - three of her brothers built her
 
house for her, asbestos slate and everything. So - they always considered that she was better on her own - on their own. Now - but they would never think of - sending any of their relatives, if there was anybody at all to look after them to an institution
. To the state, the poorhouse was always in Stornaway, but it was an insult to you to send any of your relatives to the poorhouse.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Did you know anyone from the village who was there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Yes. Yes. Yes. I - I knew a few. But they used to run away fro
m there and come across and go to friends. And then they used to hit them and hammer them, for running away. They were - they weren't very good to them. They were given clothes sort of cast off clothes, generally big baggy tweed trousers and jackets and b
i
g wooden clogs and - it was just a - what I would think was cast offs. And - there was a big high wall - to keep them from going over. And - they were driven - they used to make them till the ground and cut the peats or carry the peats, all these people. 
B
ut there wasn't very many. I mean in the olden days. But latterly they don't like you to call it the poorhouse now. It's called Coomagray house, it's call just the house for old people - there's two or three of them. There's Dunberis are for old people, a
n
d they pay. But there's this other place and if you haven't got any money I mean - they'll keep you, the Social Security today. But pensioner's got to give part of their pension, of course, the same as it's all over. But - there wasn't very many. There wa
s
 one or two that I know that used to go there and they used to run away. We used to see them coming across the moor after jumping, then they'd be after them. And - they were scaring the life out of them, for - for running away from this poor house. But - 
t
he houses, although to look at them from the outside - it's very different, I mean, you couldn't tell - in some of them that it was a - a - what we call a black house, they call it a black house if it's thatched that's all. There's plenty of houses - hous
es yet with thatch, and I think there's some of them down the south of {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}England{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
. Yes. Now - the inside of them is just as good as this. Yes, at that time, the only difference was there - there was a stone floor. - Flagstones and clay, leveled up, but - they 
- they - walls was - wood put up on it and there was paper on top of that. And - up about two or three feet of the roof and above that it was just the thatch. Because they used that soot instead of what they're using today as fertilizer. That's what the b
e
st potatoes you ever tasted - dry potatoes, they used to put soot on the potatoes after cleaning them before they hoed them. Take a - make a hole above - near the fire or - either side of it, they used to take that down to put it on the peat - on the - on
 the potatoes. And then they filled that up with new thatch.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Was there a separate entrance for the cows?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Latterly there was but - in the olden days there wasn't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 What about in your time when you were a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 No. But I'll tell you what
, you came in on the door, it was separated door right but you came in the same door. Mostly. But - I don't think there was very many. There was - there - in U}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13451110\charrsid2171993 n
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 ick there in 1921 there was a separate door for the cows. In Unick, but there wasn't down here. 
Because - down here - there was nothing new to have fourteen cows. My mother told me - the day - the year she got married, six cows calved on the shieling. She came home with twelve, four - six followers along with the six cows, five calved and there was 
a
nother cow besides and the - the five claves and the other followers. Now - the biggest part of the house was under cows. For the cows. But there was a partition between the people and the cows. It wasn't wide open like. There was a partition right up to 
the roof.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 But then it stopped just below the thatch did it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Well - it did in the very olden days, but not in my time. It was a wooden partition in our house, the partition went up to the very top. And the second room it went right up to the very
 top. You couldn't tell on the top bend of the house, it was just the same as this.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Were there windows?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Yes, there was windows - we had two windows in the walls like. Frame windows. But our house was - sort of - new. My father built it in 1918-1
919 - 1898 - my third oldest brother was born in it, he was born in 1899. And the roof of it came home from Rossithe and it was just - new wood. New rafters, new joists. And the partition went right up to the very top. There was no smoke could get up to t
h
e bedroom. But there was plenty of smoke from the fire in the middle of the fire. In - in the kitchen. And - the cows, they had - the partition was right up to the very top. The cows came in at the door and they went down into their own place, but the men
 went up to the kitchen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Did you have to go to bed at a fixed time then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Well - to go back when I - as I said already, although you'll have to forgive me for saying so, we were a wee bit better off financially than our neighbours because my fathe
r was always earning. He was at the fishing every year, from the time he went there as a young boy, 'til his health broke down in 1910 or '11. And he was very lucky in the fishing, we had a clock in the house ever since I remember but I remember quite oft
e
n people coming, especially in the dead of winter, coming to see what time it was. There wasn't a clock in - in - I would say half the houses anyway in - before the world - the first world war. There was no clock, not - there used to be watches sold in St
o
rnaway for five shillings, Ingersoll, and - as I told you earlier there was market days, well we walked it a - the first time I went to Stornaway, twelve miles from Barrus, I walked every step back and forth, that was twenty-four miles, I was only about t
e
n years old then, and it was with big boots as I said on - it was always on the road - market day was a great day. Everybody from the island gathered there. There was tents and there was lemonades and there was - lots of these sideshows. Cows galore. Sold
 and sheep and horses and foals. There were a lot of mares here and - they always had - had foals and they were sold in the fall of the years, that's November in this last and -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Did you go with your mother then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 No. I - we went the whole - with 
older - an older brother and - nearly all the people about - say about ten, eleven, twelve here, fourteen, they'd be going and we'd follow them. There'd be carts that we'd be following along the road. We used to to go there and there were - there - they w
ere selling, they - they were selling beasts there to make it - to make some money. For to make some money.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Did you in fact have a fixed bedtime?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Yes, well I was going to tell you. We always had to go to bed, we were very late in going to bed, an
d they are still in Lewis. We always went to bed, we were told to be in bed about eleven. But seldom ever before then. But what we use to do when - when - there was more life in the kids then than there are today, we used to do a lot of jumping, we used t
o
 do a lot of running, we were forever running and - and after we'd have our - before even the - the porridge, we had porridge the last thing at night. Before it was ready and - now it was never given us as was well cooked. We used to lie down on these lon
g
 benches and go falling asleep. But - we didn't have any - what you'd call a fixed time. But only - the cockerel could tell you it was three in the morning, if anybody came in. But - and another thing, and this is no - no like, about nine o'clock the cow 
w
ould get up and start moo'ing it was time to milk it. You could pretty near set your watch to - some of them - by that. But we had a clock as I said. As well as I can remember, but I know plenty of other people - and we also had one of these tin lamps wit
h a reflector at the back of the chimney. But I know plenty of houses who had only a tin lamp with a wick but - these - tinsmiths made, there was just a flame without a chimney at all to it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 You mean the tinkers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 That's right. I do.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Were there quite a lot of them around?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Yes. Yes. And you could hang it - we used to have that down for - feeding the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13451110\charrsid2171993 cows}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 , hanging on the nail there, or to take it to the barn to get some fodder, take some corn down from - because there - there used to be ab
out four - three to four stacks of barley, three to four stacks of corn - of - oats and then there was hay. But the barn was filled from top to bottom, so you wouldn't have to go outside to feed you had this - the feeding the folder in the barn. We used t
o
 take that lamp up, that's when it was blowing a - a - a cold - a heavy - strong wind, it would blow it out. Sometimes you had to - turn your back and put a coat over it and - just be very windy but the house was warm, and I believe myself the smoke from 
the peat helped to disinfect these black houses, I believe it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Is it true that they only cleared the cattle dung - out once a year?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Yes. That is so. They - they left - they left it - if - if - they didn't believe that the manure was any good and
 it - it's proved it since I came here, I - I had a cow up 'til about four years ago, I used to raise a calf every years. We put a cow, the calf - the manure out every day, cleaned the - the cattle. Now if I was going to that put that manure on a piece of
 
ground, say I'd finished about half - I couldn't tell the difference from where the manure stopped from where it didn't get any at all. But the manure that was inside, it held - it held the cows - water as well as - which is most important. And it's farme
r
s even that's doing that today. They have a - a - a load of manure - a load of manure is cleaned, I've got a daughter whose getting married at the end of August to a - a farmer. And - I know it, I've seen it myself, although - although the manure is clean
e
d from the - from the hire there's another place where - where none of the water goes out or anything like that, it's covered. It's covered all the time. Because it's no use unless it is covered. And - well - I - I - I went to Canada in 1923 and I was the
r
e until 1932, went as far as - British Columbia, to Nelson Camp, Vancouver, now - I've seen; there was a depression in '21, '22, '23, and things was pretty hard up here at the time. There was some work on the mainland. Now - they started making improvemen
t
s then in housing and in byres, people started getting a little bit of money for they could afford to do that, before they didn't have anything to improve, they - they valued their - their money for what they could eat, for their comforts like, more than 
they did for - extending or building better houses and like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
What sort of things would they buy if they were going to buy anything at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Well - they were very good to themselves as - as far as - they never grudged themselves and they don't to this day - they would rather make sure that they would have enough to feed their family on than to improve their - their - their dwelling house like.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 What food would be bought in, was there any tinned food at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 No. None whatev
er. I had never seen a tinned - tinned - a tin of fruit or a tin of - any tinned stuff in my father's house.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Did you ever have fruit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Well I had it in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}Canada{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} and I had it in Glasgow.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 But before 1918?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 No. No. No. Never. But we had oran
ges and apples. Oh yes. Well, they were always coming up at Christmas time, they were coming to the shops. Yes. There used to be a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13451110\charrsid2171993 Halloween}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993  party and we all used to go to the Manse and we all used to get an orange and an apple each. And - oranges and appl
es would come in the wintertime. In time for Christmastime and New Year.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Was Christmas a special day as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Yes. Well it wasn't so much a special day as New Year. New Year was a lot of celebrations going on, there was a lot of drinking going 
on. But Christmas passed just as merry Christmas and there was no celebration. But New Years Eve, what they called Hogmonay, there was a lot of celebrations going on, a lot of drinking was going on, and still goes on. Celebrating New Year.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 What was it like in your family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Well, there was nothing in the families, it's only the grown ups. There was nothing all - if we got anything we got - the people was away, if there was any of the family away they would send home a - cake, five shilling or a ten
 shilling, just as big as that. I remember them quite well. There was a cake would come. Before Christmas and we'd get a slice of this - madeira cakes or currant cakes and - for Christmas. Which we didn't get any more 'til next Christmas. There was no suc
h a thing as a piece of cake. No. No. No. But we used to get a - the bacon loaf very early, even in the last part of the war.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Were there any other special days, what about Easter?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 No, the - the only thing we got then was eggs. Two or three eggs, 
we used to try to see who would eat the most eggs, and that's another thing, most crofters here had anything up to thirty hens. They used to raise their own chickens. And - they had their own barley - seed to keep the, and they had their own potatoes. Mas
h.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Did the women look after the hens?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Yes. It was always after the scraps, after the dinner, the breakfast was fed to the hens, fed to the calves. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 You didn't take any notice of Bank Holidays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 No. No. We didn't know there was such 
a thing as a Bank Holiday. Didn't know what banks was for. No. And didn't know what any kind of money that we got as kids, for running errands maybe.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 You were paid for running errands?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Well if we run an errand - an errand for a neighbour they wo
uld give us a penny to go to the shop, but - we always gave the penny to my mother and she would say, give it to me so that'll go up to the shop and get something for you to eat, to buy a loaf.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 So you never had any pocket money?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Oh never. Oh never.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Was there any other way you could earn any money?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
No. There wasn't really - well I was herding cattle for - two months in 1914. I got two and six, for herding them for two months, during the school holidays. And I was herding cattle again -
 in the Autumn, that's keeping the cows out of the cold down here, he had six cows to look after. I got another two and six for that. But that's all. If I was planting potatoes I would }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13451110\charrsid2171993 get}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993  tuppence for - or the small threepenncy bit maybe for planting pota
toes for people. That's - ploughing - when the ploughs came, the red ploughs, this Oliver plough started.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Is that before or after the war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
During the war they first started of it, the ploughs came, the first number one and it was Hugh Olivers pl
oughs painted red. They came, before that it was all spade work. And - there was a big heavy iron plough that two great big horses used to pull but there was only one of them, the minister had it up in the Glebe there. He was - he ruled the roost. He had 
everything. Yes. Oh yes - he had places out on the moor here which was protected for his own stock and his own cows, that the crofters didn't dare go near. At that time. The Church of Scotland ministers, they had glebes, big glebes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Was he the most important man here?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Oh yes. Oh yes. He could by the stroke of his pen, he could - tell you to move. They would say that if you don't behave yourself, if you go in a - if you were going in on his grounds I mean, if the sheep and cattle was going to his g
rounds he would threaten you with eviction, to report you to the landlord and - have you met any of the books about - Father Bandra, Crofters Walk to Stornaway to Chamberlain Munro and - didn't you, well you should try and get a hold of them, I haven't go
t
 them - handy. Yes. Well there was a riot at the time of Sir James Matheson was in the Lewis Castle, that was before my time. They walked as a man to see Sir James Matheson because this Chamberlain was ill treating them and taking some of the land from th
em. They walked to Sir James Matheson, so they won the day. I don't know very much about - I've read it all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 There was nothing like that in your time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Oh no. No. No. No. But the day war was declared in 1914 - it was a Sunday and I was out with th
e cows herding, I came home. The first thing I knew was the post and hear the whistling, whistling at every door, people running out to get their mail. There was the call-up. There were several hundred Royal Naval Reserve men left Stornaway that night. Th
e Duckworths here, they're down in - in - {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Essex{\*\xmlclose}. They have a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13451110\charrsid2171993 brewery}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993  or - or a wine making business there.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 The who?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 The Duckworths. They own this ground here just now. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Who was the landlord at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Well, it was the Bolt
ons that was here during the war. People called the Boltons. And they sold out to the Duckworths.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 They owned the whole village did they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
They owned the whole - the whole estate. They have the - the salmon fishery. They're killing salmon here eve
ry night and sending them - over to town and sending them to Billingsgate. Up to last year or the year before they were went to Billingsgate. They were sent here in boxes, killed down by the sea and sent to Mallaig and there was ice put on there in Mallai
g and then sent down to London.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 They weren't doing that before the war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Oh yes. Oh yes. Oh yes. Yes, as long ago as that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Did you see anything of the landlord at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Yes, he comes home every summer here.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 In the time when you were a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Well - when we were a child I remember they - they used to take their friends home. Oh three boat loads used to be out on that {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Loch{\*\xmlclose}
 fishing. Fishing with a rod. But that was a sport - in them days. But since then - what they do now, t
hey are controlling this fish, they have a - a concrete dam and they have - gates where no fish can get up into the loch, and they gates are closed. And then when the tide comes in and they're sure there's a lot in they string wire netting across there so
 they can't get out. On the tide, and - when the tide starts going out so the fish is caught on the inside, there's a deep pool and three watchers kill some and they're packed there in boxes and they're sent over - by the main - to catch the main boat.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 But at that time they had these parties of people who came down?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Yes, that's right. And they used to fish in boats with - with a rod and there used to be some of the men here getting a days work gilling then. Gilling them. Two or three - oh for a month, they'd have the same gillers every year.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 You never did that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
No, no. We were at school. No. But they don't even do that now, they might - their friend, T.B. Macaulay from Stornaway and maybe they - they can take a friend too, they go maybe
 for the day themselves, and they take one of the watchers with there but I remember when there's three boats on the loch all day fishing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 They didn't live there all the year then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Yes, they lived here in this place here.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 They used to live there all the year?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Oh no, no, no, no. They just came home here for - for - about the end of - just about July and August. Then some of them went - went back and came in September to shoot pheasants here again - grouses, they come in - they came in S
eptember again after the 12th of September or - 12}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\super\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 th}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
 of August, I don't know which date, some of them came.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Did they employ the girls in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Yes. Yes. There's two or three, there's a cook and servants.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Did they employ the girls from the village before the first world war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Yes. For - for waiting on the tables. Yes. And cooking. Yes. But I was going to tell you this you know, before - before I forget it. To go back before that again there was - they took their cooks with them. Gen
erally the cooks. And there's one of them came to Morsgail, and she married - one of the - one of the - watchers, and she just died over in that umbrella shaped cottage, McKeevers, and his son is the gamekeeper for Lady Thornicroft over in - in Lochs. Ano
t
her one married another employee that was in Morsgail and that's her at Gisla. And the - the - the landlord gave her and her husband that place called Gisla until they died. And then Dolly Doctor that married Lord Leverhulme's neice got it. There's a powe
r
 house there now as you pass Gisla. And there was the third one came down here and she was married in this inn there. That was three English - cooks. I used to go to Gisla and she used to tell me that she kept eight - that she had eight lady customers sup
plying her all the year round with fresh eggs. And she would never go back to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}London{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 she said, she lived there 'til she died about ninety - she was ninety years of age, a fine old lady.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 She came from {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}London{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 She came from {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}London{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} and she was coming every year to cook with the Tofts in Morsgail Lodge.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Did the Tofts come from {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}London{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Oh yes. They came from around {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}London
{\*\xmlclose} and - and - these people, I think they come from {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Essex{\*\xmlclose}. They have some - oh cider making, they make cider. Called Duckworths and they have a lot of lorries around - it's near Sheffield.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 That's Yorkshire.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Yorkshire{\*\xmlclose}
 is it? It's not far from - {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Sheffield{\*\xmlclose}. And - because there's a girl from here married in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Sheffield{\*\xmlclose}
 and she says she sees the lorry with Duckworths Cider
 Works. They are great big - jars about that high, they bring them home here full of cider. And - they're in up there just now, there's Mr Duckworth and his wife and two friends are there. But I remember when his father and mother was here with six sons a
nd two daughters. Now - he's the last of the, the rest of them, they died off and some of them got killed. They were here that - when war was declared on - on - on August 1914 and they left by boat, they - they were - they were in the Army.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Did the people see much of them though?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
No. No. They don't mix with you. The - some of them, they don't speak to you at all, see they've been coming here for the last forty years and - maybe if you lift your hand they'll lift their hand but - they - they sort o
f - look down on us. They look down on us, to be honest. Especially the - the ladies and - they're not - what I would call approachable.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Would you say that the minister was very distant then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Well, the minister - the minister came periodically t
o visit because it was his congregation, and he expected you to - to pay so much of his }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13451110\charrsid2171993 tithes}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993  that they paid to the church. He came if there was death or a - sickness, but outside of that they didn't. They had servants and they had - men servants and ladi
es to - to do their work, to do their home work for them. It's always - in all the manses there was - in my young days, there was a servant, sometimes two, and there was two men to look after the horses because they - they went around then by horse and gi
g. One of these gigs with the light wheels on. Just like what they have at the carts in the olden days, they remember the - the carts that was drawn by horses. When I went to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}
Glasgow{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} 1919 it was two horses that - took us from the Central Station down to Cov
an. You know, with - taxi cabs. There was no - there was no motor cars then. It was - well - they had some of these here, the ministers had them for going around their congregation, preaching and - places six - twelve miles away. And they had men employed
 to drive these horses and to feed them and look after them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Was there a doctor with a big household like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
No. No, no. The doctor involved, that's - Ian McCleaods grandfather and uncle. They had all the district from the - from {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Ness{\*\xmlclose} right up
 to Carloway. That's about - eighteen miles this way and - six that way, the population, all the population. But he went - old doctor Ross went on horseback. But - I don't think he ever had a car, he went on horseback.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Did he have a big household though?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Yes. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 So these were the big people really?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Yes. Yes. Yes, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Going back to meals, I didn't ask you whether you had rabbits?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
No, we had plenty of rabbits down on what we called the machir that's down the near the shore. They call it machir, there's thousands of them down there but we didn't go in very much for them, especially since this myx}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13451110\charrsid2171993 o}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 m}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13451110\charrsid2171993 a
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 tosis was about that, people sort of - didn't like them after that. Before that, yes, yes, yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 As a child did you have them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Yes, we used to catch them and kill them quite often in September, they're in the best of condition, in the Autumn time. But they're no good just now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 As a child did you eat the seabirds at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 No. No, we didn't, we 
didn't eat the seabirds, at least we couldn't - we couldn't catch them, we didn't have anything to catch them with. We were ignorant of any fire arms or shooting or anything like that. But we used to be very much after grouse, and we used to make snares f
o
r them, and snares for the rabbits, homemade snares and as they would come in and out of the holes we would catch them and - and - traps too. We used to have traps there to catch them too. But - we didn't really shoot, we didn't - we weren't allowed to ha
ve any fire arms of any kind. It wasn't known to have a firearm except the gamekeepers you know. But we did go in for grouse very much. Very much.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Did you all sit at a table together for meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Yes. Yes. I'll tell you how the meals went, in the m
orning there was plate of porridge, each man -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 How was it served and that kind of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Well - there was just a - the same as it served now, as far as I know.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Your mother would serve the meal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Oh yes. Oh yes. Always. The mother woul
d serve - and - share it. That was her part. But it was all done before it was put on the table.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 So there wasn't a big plate in the middle?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Oh no. The only big plate that was in the middle was potatoes. And still is, a big plate. If you're to be here for a meal there's a big plate of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13451110\charrsid2171993 potatoes}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 , for anybody to help themselves as much as they want. But the fish or the meat is divided, shared about. But there's always plenty of potatoes. Never any }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13451110\charrsid2171993 scarce age}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993  of - up to about just now. We had our last
 meal of our own potatoes here about a week ago. Now we're on to buying potatoes off the vans. We have our own vegetables up to about a month ago. Carrots and beetroots.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Would you all sit in the same places each day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Yes. We all sat in the same 
place, go to your own place. That's right. That's right, we all went to our own place.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Would grace be said?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Yes. Yes, the head of the manse said grace, my father said grace, and if my father wasn't there my mother would say grace. And to this da
y - we say grace. We say grace before every meal, we say grace after each meal and we - we have worship every morning after breakfast and we have worship every night the last thing before going to bed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Was that the same as a child, you had family prayers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
We had family prayers all the time and from the time - the children could talk the mother generally taught prayers to the children and they - had the same prayer the first and the last, be merciful to me, a sinner. They would lisp that prayer fr
om the time they could - I said it getting out of bed after going in if I ever forgot to say prayers and - I remember - this one thing I'm going to tell you and I'm glad I remembered it. When I was a boy - before the first world war, about eight, nine, te
n
, it was very much a community spirit, we could walk into any house without think of knocking at the door, never think of who was in or who was not, we walk in and say on one of these long benches. But at a certain time every morning and at a certain time
 
every night generally I would say between nine and ten, mostly around ten o'clock - you could stretch it up to eleven if you liked, according to - if there was anybody in - there was - the man - the head of the house was always reading a palm and singing 
a
 verse or two and reading a chapter of the Bible and then finishing off on his knees with a prayer. I could say ninety-nine percent, or ninety-five percent at least of the houses round about in Barras at that time they all conducted family worship night a
nd morning. Sorry to say, that's not the case today. It's the exception more than the rule today, there's very few that does that. There are a few but not as much.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Were you Wee Frees?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 No, we wore - no, I was bought up a United Free church. That'
s the one that broke away from the Free in 1900. But then there was a union in 1929 with the church of Scotland. And we are Church of Scotland. But the - the free - the free church is in a majority in this island - and they're - following their old - the 
old traditions, the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13451110\charrsid2171993 Calvinistic}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
 doctrines more than the Church of Scotland did. Blame - to a certain extent it's true, the Church of Scotland's more moderate but - the Church of Scotland's a richer church. They pay their ministers more and their missionarie
s more, and their buildings are more - finer buildings, and they spend a lot of their - get to see - if you ever see a Church of Scotland record there'd a - nearly a - millions of pounds left to the Church of Scotland for aged and infirm ministers and - a
nd - well - well - grants to - to deserving cases. A lot of the money is left to members of the ministry and old age and all that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 As a child did you go just to Sunday school or did you also go to the church?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Well - we only went to Sunday school.
 We didn't go to kirk because I'll tell you, we - we - sort of - thought the kirk - we had to be well dressed before we'd go to the kirk because the people that went to the kirk they had what they called their Sunday suit which hardly ever went out if any
t
hing at all except on a Sunday and if came off for the Sunday as well and - they - it was looked after because they couldn't afford to get a suit as often as that - it was generally after they left school, be fourteen or fifteen - that's when I went to ch
u
rch first. When I got a suit of clothes to take them there and a white collar and a white shirt and - shoes and stockings to be somewhat respectable, same as the other people, 'cos they - they thought that nobody should go to church unless he was well dre
s
sed. It's different from here I know, different out of here from that, they'll go in any - anyway. Two boys was here from Perth, no, Cuparfife, yes, and they wanted to know if they'd go to - go to - to church, they just had sweaters on. Away they cycled o
ut of {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Perth{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 but I said - it was a gaelic service and they'd like to hear a gaelic service, they said, but - could we go like this? Oh, we says, I suppose so. But I know people wouldn't - go to - sort of - wouldn't like it a bit. Now that's -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Did your mother and father both go every Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Yes. My father's been away most of the time from home. But when they were together they went. Even when the - when the youngest - sister of mine that's not living, when she - she was left in charge to the - of t
he - older children, they went to church, yes, and we were left at home to - watch - boil the potatoes and take them off and boil the herring or the fish or whatever was for dinner, and look after the - well somebody was looking after the cows, somebody w
as looking after the house. If there was girls, which there was one girl - she's in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}London{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
, she's with the London County Council as a - what do you call it - child well - welfare officer.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 One of your girls?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 One of my sisters. Sister, yes, yes. S
he's a child welfare officer with the London Country Council. And - she would tend to the - the waiting on the - cooking of the meat.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
In the kirk would the men and women sit separately or would a man and wife sit together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Oh man and wife genera
lly sat together. Except a paw - the elders pew and the deacons pew, there was a pew separate for the office bearers. There's a - there's a pew now still in the churches for the elders right }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13451110\charrsid2171993 in front}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993  of the pulpit, and there's a pew for the deacons. Outsid
e of that the man kirks his wife in - into church. Same as it's down - I don't know if it's - it's done in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Glasgow{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 any way. They're - they're - they're dropping off some of it today but - generally they - the - the wife leads down a - the passageway. But h
ere it's the man that goes in first here. Yes. It's the wife in ahead of him and the children. But I see in town now that a lot of the - wife and the children go down first and the man sort of follows after, yes, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Were there weekday services?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Prayer meeting every Thursday. It used to be at twelve o'clock midday, when all work was stopped and - all members and devoted people went to the prayer meeting at twelve o'clock 'til about half past one and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Did they think it wrong to play on Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Yes. Yes. We weren't allowed to play when we were grown up, we were hardly allowed out of the house outside of the necessity - the things that was necessary, like - going out with the lambs that was in - been fed in all night, we - we co
uld go out with them and we could go out with the cows, we could stay with the cows and look after them so that they wouldn't go into bogs or - stay or go to fight with other cows, but - we weren't allowed to go to play, not Sunday. We were allowed to go 
t
o Sunday school after dinner every day and then back home. And - sometimes - if we had a good suit we could stay in the evening service and if we didn't we had to go home, and it's not only suits but we went barefooted from - April to - and we wouldn't go
 to church barefooted. We never did. But we went to - to the Sunday school barefooted. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Was your father an elder before he became a missionary?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
No. He was - no, he wasn't, no, he was away. He wasn't an elder at all. At that time there - there
 - there only used to be a - an elder to the village, and that elder would need to - practically you would have to die or lose - be confined to the house before another elder - an elder to every village. There wasn't as many elders as there is today. Near
ly - nearly - all the churches today, they haven't got any - any members except those that - office bearers. A son of mine is - an office bearer in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Gardner Street
{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Glasgow{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}, well in my day they wouldn't have any - any office bearers as young as that. They 
didn't believe it in - in young people.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Could you become a member when you were young?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Yes. You could - could become a member at - as young as fifteen anyway or -

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Even when you were a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 No, not younger than fifteen. Well, it was
n't the case - it was never the case where it was - I don't think they would refuse it if it ever happened but - it wasn't very common, even at fifteen itself, because that's about the time they start going to church. And they only went to church to - mor
e
 or less to - to keep company with their pals, it wasn't to listen to a sermon or anything like that. It was generally about eighteen or nineteen or twenty before they would ever - become members. I mean, it wasn't - the exception rather than the rule to 
b
ecome a member much younger than sixteen at - at any rate, very few at sixteen or seven - seventeen, seventeen, eighteen, nineteen and twenty and up to twenty-five was mostly common, and still is. They don't become members very much after they go over the
 
fifties. It's always when they're into fifty and up to about sixteen. After that I don't know, they - they leave the place and they go down south and - they sail all the all over the world and - when they come back they maybe go to church once but - some 
o
f them don't go to church at all today. It's falling off. It's not - they're not very good - outside of members and members families, they're - they're not so good at going to church as we were. But in my young days everybody went to church as soon as he 
got a suit of clothes. Girls and boys. There'd be one staying in to look after the - if there was children of - or to cook our dinner.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
When you became a member this was because you'd had an experience of conversion?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Was that usuall
y very much something that was happened to somebody by themselves or would it be that you would have a preacher who would come round?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Well, it - it - it applies both ways. With me it's something that - the conviction under the - the Holy Spirit witho
ut no - no man being responsible for it. With some, in the olden days more than today, it was always - according to the last thing. According - under the preaching of our minister or certain texts that the minister was using or certain emphasis he was put
t
ing on the text which sort of - rang the bell with - this - in the olden days that was true, in my father's and mother's day, but not since then so much. It's more or less today, they - they come - they become members through campaigns, through missions. 
Through faith mission people perhaps come here and hold their meetings every night and - and doing a lot of the gospel - preaching the gospel in song, and singing hymns. More than it was in the olden days
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Was there anything of that kind?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 There w
as, periodically there was pilgrims on the faith mission here in 1912. They was - from them we heard the first hymns. Because they didn't believe here in hymns. They believed - they used to - they didn't use the hymns, it's not that they didn't believe in
 it but they didn't use them. They used the psalms. The psalms was used always for singing. And still is used - in all the churches in this island outside of - two - churches in Stornaway, three. {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceName}}Martins{\*\xmlclose} {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceName}}Memorial{\*\xmlclose} {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceName}}High{\*\xmlclose} {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceType}}Church{\*\xmlclose}
{\*\xmlclose} and St Columba. They use the hym
ns in the English service still. But in the gealic service it's the - it's the psalms they use. And the psalm is led by a placenter. Placents the first - the line and the congregation then follows. And then - that was - supposed to be - people couldn't re
a
d the Bible, couldn't read the psalms and the placenter placented the line and then the congregation followed. And they still go like this. It's not like - like you sing in the English. There's a leader in the English and the rest joins and follows. So it
 
was - hymns are not used, in any - not in any Free Church, they don't believe - the Free Church don't believe in - they're still like that here, yes, all over, yes. And they don't believe in - having any music in their churches. The same with the Free Pre
sbyterian, you have some of them up Uick the Free }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13451110\charrsid2171993 Presbyterian}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
, you can't tell me which - can I speak to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Were there any social activities attached to the church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
No. No. No. None whatever. There was no Womens Guild here or anything. There is
 a Womans Guild in Stornaway, has been for - oh since the last war, but not before then. The only social activities that's attached to the church, there used to be a - a picnic for the children attending Sunday school only at - there was a picnic in the s
ummertime, they go for an outing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Was there this when you were a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
No. The only one when I was a child was a party at New Years. Where we had a cup of tea and one bun in passing by. That's all. At New Year. For those who attended - there was
 no - no parties or no tours or anything. But they have those today and they go out for a picnic and they go out for an outing. All over the island. With Sunday school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Were you allowed to talk during meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Oh yes. Oh yes. We were. We were - we
 - we - we were allowed to talk but we weren't allowed to - to - to be saying things you know that wasn't - in a - in a conversation, so long as we - we could ask or speak but - there was no argument. Anything that there was no harm in.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Could you cho
ose what you wanted at all or did you have to have what your mother served you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Well, yes, more or less. More or less we had to take what was prepared if we could. But she knew - things - for instance, there was things that some - I - I for one, my s
tomach wasn't very good in growing up, there were things, I never ate butter 'til I was - working up in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Glasgow{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
. I always had - had to have jam, I never - never ate butter. I could never eat fat, anything - any fat of the ham or fat meat or anything like that. She knew what each one of us that - that didn't agree and she would share it out accordingly.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 What if you left some food uneaten on your plate?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Oh well, that - quite - quite often happened. Quite often happened. Yes.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 She didn't mind?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Oh no. No. She wouldn't force you to eat anything, she would just say if you can't - if you don't eat - I - I didn't like this, if you don't leave it. That's what - all you'd say about it. I don't like oatcakes. Well if you can't leave it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Could you ask for a second helping?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Oh yes. So long as there was any. You see - it was more or less - measured before it was cooked, and it was shared after it was cooked. An you couldn't very well - maybe get a second helping all the time unless you took 
it - part of - which never happened or never - I don't think ever does happen - to take some off from one to give more to the other or anything like that. But anything that was left over any body else says, well you take it? Well, yes, I can take it. So o
n
, like that. If there was a bit of fish or - saith or cuttings or - bit of a chicken or anything like that, well if you left - one left something on his plate, you going to eat that? No. Can I get it? Yes. So on like that. That's all. There was no distinc
tion made between one, that was strictly adhered to, all my days, I never seen anything, there was no favourites with one or the other. Share - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13451110\charrsid2171993 fear}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993  shares for all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Was your mother strict about the way you sat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 No. No, there was just a - a big lo
ng stool on one side of the table and a bench on the other and we all took our places and - father was at the one end and mother was at the other end of the table. There was generally somebody on mother's knee from the time the first - of the family or th
e second came she was always having to feed somebody when they were up to a year, two years and three years on her knee. Father would be - helping somebody else, to peel their potato or something like that, which - all }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13451110\charrsid2171993 potatoes}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993  in my young days was boiled i
n their jackets. And ours too mostly, very often, mostly anyway was peeled - they were boiled in their jackets.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 As children did you eat with your fingers or knives and forks?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Well - we - we ate with - with - when we were little kids we didn't h
ave knives or forks. There was forks but it wasn't for little children. In my young days they weren't for - there were certain things that you had to use a fork for, like some bacon, or an egg, you wouldn't - a - a fried egg, you couldn't eat that with yo
u
r fingers. Certain foods but - there was forks in the house ever since I remember. No doubt there might have been some houses where there weren't, but there were forks and knives in our house, for bacon and for eggs we always used knives and forks. But - 
I
've seen this, many's a time when there was a - a leg of a chicken. You couldn't use - we couldn't as children anyway, use - we - we used our fingers to it. And a - maybe a - piece of a leg of a sheep or something like that with some meat on, we just get 
a
 hold of it with the bone and - chew it up, I still do it yet. Because you can't get it off - I don't know whether you heard the joke - did you ever try corn on the cob? Well that's how the joke, well hey used to make a joke of the Englishman in - in Cana
da, that he was trying to use a knife and fork with it and he wasn't getting on with it. So -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Did you say your mother did make rhubarb jam?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Oh she did, we always had rhubarb jam. Yes. Ever since I remember we had - tons of rhubarb - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Did she make pickles?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
No. No. No, there was always jam in our house because I couldn't eat butter. We bought a lot of jam from the shops too, when there wasn't rhubarb, out - when it was out of season. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Did she make beer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 No. Never. Never
. No. There was - the only - the only beer, yes, now I - I shouldn't have said that, there was. We used to in the summertime to make beer with these - what do you call them - is it yeast, you - you put some treacle and then there's beasts coming up throug
h the jar, fill it up with water and leave it there for two days. Yes, we did make that in the summertime. And then they multiply and multiply and then you could make another pail.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Did she make wines?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 No. No. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 You can't make that from rhubarb can you?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Well if you can we don't know the secret of that yet. I've seen plenty of it you see in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Canada{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13451110\charrsid2171993 raisin}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
 and wins and - all kinds of wine, the Italians was great for it. They have it instead of water on the - on - on - on the table. 
We had water on the table if there was salt fish or salt herring, there was always a pitcher of water on the table. Because - the - the potatoes and herring, the potatoes and salt fish, you get very thirty after it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 And the tea was mainly for when visitors came?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Well, no, not as far back as I can remember we always had tea, but the parents, our parents didn't encourage us to take very much of it except say at six o'clock in the morning, after breakfast porridge and then it was always a cup of mil
k. And then we used to come home for lunch at one o'clock, it was a piece of oatcakes and - and milk if there was milk or a - or a - or a boiled egg. But at six o'clock we could get a tea - cup of tea or maybe two. They didn't count - not that there was p
lenty of tea, they would say, leave that tea, that te}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13451110\charrsid2171993 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
's no good, take milk.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 But if somebody called they would be offered tea?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Oh that's without a doubt, yes, now, yes, I don't think I ever remember anybody coming into the house, any visitor, gro
wn up visitors especially, that couldn't take tea. And if children came in along with these each one was given a piece. Piece of butter or a piece of jam or a biscuit. A big biscuits or small biscuits or - a piece of scone or a piece of bread loaf.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Would there be very much calling?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Yes. Yes. Yes. In the wintertime there's as you say a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13451110\charrsid2171993 calling}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
, there's - hardly a night but there was always one, two or three calling, women calling, visiting my mother and - men calling visiting my father - except on
 - 'course windy and stormy nights it's very seldom. Yes, and the place was so dark there was not flashlights before the first world war, they had to take a peat out of the fire and the wind would blow and it'd take them to the road. That's how they used 
to guide them to the road. From - from the houses which was a distance from the road.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 On these winter evenings did they tell stories or sing songs or anything?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Well, they generally - repeated their experiences in places where they'd been at. The 
girls when they were at the fishing and the men when they were sailing and - when they called in New York or when they called at Quebec or when they were in Australia, they'd be telling stories about - it's not really stories but - telling their experienc
e
s and - the religious people always talked about the sermons they heard and the communions they'd been on and - the people they seen and what they said and - if - some of them that could read, they would repeat what they read in a - in a - in a book, what
 
Augustin said or - when they would be talking, well Augustin said that man - God made us for himself and - our souls are restless 'til they find rest in those. These things are quoted and what Napoleon said and what Spurgeon said and - and instead of - re
a
ding it they were more or less - a lot of them anyway, not all of them, they were illiterate and they were very keen on listening to a man who could tell what he read out of a book, if you were going to tell - and explain it to them, they would sit quietl
y
 and listen to you. And - outside of that - they discussed - the weather, they discussed the animals, the plights of animals and - how they had good crops and - where they could get a cow if they were going to buy one or who was would buy one from them an
d who was coming and who was going, and who was going to get married and - so on, so forth.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Did they sing the old gaelic songs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Quite a bit. Quite a bit. If there was good singers but - they - they're people that couldn't sing - didn't sing. The people that could - could sing and that learned to - how to sing the tunes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Was there anyone in your family who could sing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Yes, my sister was very good at singing and so was my father and mother. I wasn't very good, I could follow - but I couldn't lead. My sister was very good.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Did anyone in your family play a musical instrument?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
No. No. No. There was no musical instrument in our house but there's plenty of other house where there was melodian and bagpipes. Fiddle. And - if there was
 such a thing as that each - anybody could - go down and get a shot at playing it. But I've never been able to master it, I left - home when I was fifteen, I started working at - I think that's on there, I started working in - 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Glasgow{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} in a shipyard at fift
een. I arrived - arrived there on a Friday night and I started working on the Monday. And I've been going up 'til two years ago, I retired with pension. And - I didn't have very much time, I wasn't very much at home 'til I came - 'til I settled down here 
in 1932.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 You were crafting once you came back though?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Well, I was weaving for twenty years - twenty-two years. I was on seven years with the County Council, foreman in the quarry, working on the road. I got twice out to a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13451110\charrsid2171993 Hydroelectric}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993  schemes to
 Mallader outside of Inverness and - I was three years in the shipyards in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Glasgow{\*\xmlclose}, at the start, before I went to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}
Canada{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}. After I came back I was here with the County Council, Ross and Cromarty, on the roads. I was a quarry foreman. Then - work got scarce
 and I went out to Mallader with the hydro-electric schemes and then - being away and the wife couldn't manage with the family, young family here, I came back and got a loom and was weaving up to about a couple of years before I retired. I - I worked in a
 - tweed place as }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13451110\charrsid2171993 store man}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
 'til I got my pension here two years ago. Now - as I said, the first of the family's getting married in June - August and then there's the youngest. Three of the girls are not nurses - qualified. But - two of them went to - this 
one is a district nurse, she went to - full - through the full course. This other and maternity and then {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Queens{\*\xmlclose} nurse. And the boys, this one went through University, Aberdeen.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 He's the one that's written the thesis?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 What's the other one doing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
The other one is an inspector with Babcox and Wilsox, served his time with Stewards and Lloyd and he was - foreman inspector there but - his pay wasn't - he wasn't satisfied with his pay, he's getting more - he started - with Babcox a
nd Wilcox, he's getting more as an inspector than he was getting with Stewarts and Lloyd as a foreman and he's got three weeks holidays before - as soon as he was there a month, and two hundred pounds of a rise. So he went - but there's a tendency now - h
e
 says, nobody he asked them would - would - would he have - was he sure of his job. He says, well my dear man, I'm not sure of my own, he says, nobody can be sure what job to take. The way things are. It's true, the way things are. He likes - but he seems
 
to be very - he - he's - he's - all today taking a lot on themselves, more than we would ever think - I never took anything out on hire purchase, never in my life, I paid everything cash down. I never bought a pennysworth until I had a penny to pay for it
. I never bought this - here, I paid - had the money to pay for it. But they're paying mortgage on their furniture, they're paying mortgage on their - cars, on their cars and on their - houses. Both of them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Did your parents feel that one should never be in debt?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
No, that's right. No. We - we were always told and I told them but they didn't follow me, if they wanted - needed anything to do without 'til they could afford to pay it. I believe in that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Can you tell me some of the things that you
r parents emphasised as most important in life?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Well - the most important thing that was - my mother especially and I put all the credit to her because she was always with us and my father, as I said, was always away, it was only a visit, he was neve
r home during - he - he had several of the family and he was never home when ever any of the seven was born or anything near it. Never. He was always at the fishing or in the Navy or in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}Canada{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} or some place. The most important thing that my mother stressed
 on us for sure and tell the truth, not to tell lies. We would get more for telling a lie than we would get for breaking a window or - whatever we did to that mischief. Never to tell the - a lie. To keep on the truth, to tell the truth. And of course as a
ll mothers did in them days - to fear God and - to be honest, wherever we were and - never to steal whatever we do. I remember finding a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13451110\charrsid2171993 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993  swither}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13451110\charrsid2171993  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 coming through from the market. When I got home she asked me, where'd you find that? I says, I found it in the
re. Well go and put it back where you got it. I had to go back and put it back where I got it. That's one thing she stressed. On all of us. And - I shouldn't have left out - never to swear. Not to take the name of the Lord in vain, and I can honestly tell
 
you I never heard any of my brothers - or sisters swearing in my life. I never heard any of my own family - swearing in their lives - any of them, even to this day. None of them ever refused if they were going along the road and I shouted to them - they w
ould turn there - and I don't think I've hit them half a dozen times unless I hit them when they were about five or six years old when they - when they wouldn't - when they wouldn't behave.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 As a child did your mother say if another child hit you you s
hould hit back or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Oh no. No. They - the - the - the facts that we got, if they say this boy hit me, well stay away from him the next time. That's what she would say. I've never seen my mother going to complain to another house, supposing one of 
us came home crying. Never. And I don't think I ever heard - anybody else coming to our house either. Because they knew that these children although they call out they're friends before - very long.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 How did she tell you to behave to your brothers and sisters?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Oh well, we - there - there - there was a - a standing - a - an inbred law that we weren't to hit anybody older than ourselves and not to - to be }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13451110\charrsid2171993 arguing}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993  with - no, not to be sort of - how will I put it - well, not to - to obey the boys, the
 oldest ones than yourself. They seemed to have priority, the older one over the others. Just obedient. To be obedient to them. So long - if - if there was an argument started or something like that and - we'd say, he's older than you. So we -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 So you would respect adults?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes, and - oh yes, and - we were - we were - told to - to - to have good manners. Not to have bad manners to anybody and to respect anybody that would meet us on the road, be sure and have good manners. As - 
used to be quite often the case, if there was an old man or an old lady - there'd be a crowd of us, there were so many of us growing up together, as I said already, five and six in a family, and they were inclined to make fun, just for a sport for themsel
ves, and - we were told not to do that. And to - to give them - what they called as the manners of the road to anybody. That is anybody that's going the road, not to - use any bad manners. Everybody had the right to the - {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname 
address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Kings Highway{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}. We were definitely - told that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Was your mother easy to talk to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Oh yes. Very easy, but my father wasn't. We would ask my mother for anything and she would give us anything unknown to my father.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 If you had some worry you could share it with her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Yes. Ye
s. Well I lost my mother when I was - fifteen. Fourteen and three - fourteen and nine months. But - she would give me a sixpence if she - if I was - if she - if she wanted me to stay in with my two younger sisters and she was going to anything and she wou
ld say, you stay with them 'til I come back, I' - l give you something, and that was just as good as a word and she would give me something and - I'd go down to the shop and get a few pennies of sweeties or something like that. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Do you think that parents then showed affection?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Yes. I - I - I - I know this, they showed more affection, although I do say it, than I or anybody else has shown today. As I told you already, she lost her first - second son and he was only seven - before he was se
venteen. And it broke her heart. As it broke every other mother's heart in the first world war, that it wasn't child's child's game, and - she always blamed - he was just as good as he fellow that went to the secondary, but my father couldn't afford to ha
v
e the two - he had to pay their way then, there was no bursaries or anything, they had to pay their board and - lodgings and clothes and books and everything. Now - he was a pupil teacher here in school before - for the last two years he was in school and
 
- we couldn't afford to put him there and that's what he did, he joined the Hilitia and then he joined the Army, and she was always afraid that's the reason that he went to the Army - joined the Army and - he - never wrote to my father, it was always to m
y
 mother he was writing and - she was after him always to write to - to - to my father. Well he came home on one leave, October 1913, remember that, ever after that he was writing to my father all right but - somehow or other she was always afraid that a w
ar would start. True enough it did start and he was killed, one of the first - first soldier to be killed from Lewis. And he was so young.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 If you did something to displease her would she scold you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Well - latterly when - when we were growing up -
 she very seldom - since - since she lost the first one and the second one was wounded and the third one was - in - in the Navy, she - we very much - had a lot of our own - our own way. Because she used to say, why am I saying anything to you? You - one o
f
 these days I'll be without any of you - or words to that effect, but - although I do say it, we weren't really - weren't really bad, as bad as others were in a way and - being left alone with her we sort of - we had a burden to be in that - early hours a
nd to help, 'cos we could see that - a lot of responsibility was left on her shoulders.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 When you were younger would she punish you quite frequently?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
Well no, she didn't, she would just give you a - a clout on the hand if - if we did anything bad 
like that. She might - if we might run past her and she would just give you a clout like that but that's about all, something to show you that it was - wrong. She never took - took our pants down, never.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 So you would say she was gentler than others?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 That's - oh yes. Oh yes. Yes, that's quite true, I've heard }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8521398\charrsid2171993 plenty}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
 saying here - the same words as you said there, because they said that - you're mother was far gentler to - to you than our mother was to them. No, I don't think - I ever seen her, yo
u know, with the two younger girls than me, hitting them on the bare bottom or anything like that. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6373433 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 Would she play games with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid10887275 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid475243\charrsid2171993 
No. She was too busy. Trying to get everything - she'd be washing socks, stocking she'd be darning after we would go to bed. She'd be darning and the needles was - reels and reels of cotton thread she used to keep four or five pair of socks.
\par }}