{\rtf1\adeflang1025\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\adeff0\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang2057\deflangfe2057{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}{\f38\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f39\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f41\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f42\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f43\fbidi \froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}
{\f44\fbidi \froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f45\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f46\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f48\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}
{\f49\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f51\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f52\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f53\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f54\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}
{\f55\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f56\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden 
Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs20 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}}
{\*\latentstyles\lsdstimax156\lsdlockeddef0}{\*\revtbl {Unknown;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid403481\rsid469200\rsid1909464\rsid2711116\rsid3432858\rsid3684052\rsid3942983\rsid4012096\rsid4024006\rsid7686223\rsid8198308\rsid8536547\rsid8593187\rsid10041025\rsid11999753\rsid13060952
\rsid13271025\rsid13439349\rsid14703675\rsid14749910\rsid15617501\rsid15993603\rsid16409413\rsid16591344}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 11.0.0000;}{\info{\title Information about interviewee}{\author PRASAD3}{\operator lhorto}
{\creatim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min6}{\revtim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min6}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords16503}{\nofchars94072}{\nofcharsws110355}{\vern24613}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 http://schemas.microsoft.com/office/word/
2003/wordml}{\xmlns2 urn:schemas-microsoft-com:office:smarttags}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl1800\margr1800\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0\ltrsect 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\donotembedsysfont0\donotembedlingdata0\grfdocevents0\validatexml1\showplaceholdtext0\ignoremixedcontent0\saveinvalidxml0\showxmlerrors1\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace187
\dgvspace180\dghorigin1800\dgvorigin1440\dghshow1\dgvshow2\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale90\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\splytwnine\ftnlytwnine\htmautsp\nolnhtadjtbl\useltbaln\alntblind\lytcalctblwd\lyttblrtgr\lnbrkrule\nojkernpunct\rsidroot4024006 \fet0
{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}\ilfomacatclnup0\ltrpar \sectd \ltrsect\psz9\linex0\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}
{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ltrpar
\ql \fi-461\li461\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid8593187 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\ul\insrsid8593187\charrsid16072257 Information about interviewee}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid8593187 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid8593187\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\ql \fi-461\li461\ri0\widctlpar\tx2057\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid8593187 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8593187\charrsid16072257 Date of birth}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid8593187    \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8593187\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8593187  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid13439349 1896}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid8593187\charrsid16072257 
\par Gender}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8593187           \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8593187\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8593187  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid13439349 M}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8593187 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8593187\charrsid16072257 Marital status}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8593187 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8593187\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8593187  
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid13439349 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8593187\charrsid16544153 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8593187\charrsid16072257 Occupation}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8593187 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8593187\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8593187  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid13439349 Farm Labour}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8536547 er}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8593187\charrsid16072257 
\par Geographic region}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8593187 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8593187\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8593187  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid8593187\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\qj \fi-461\li461\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid8593187 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 If I could ask you when you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 1896.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Whereabouts was this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Over at Horton, Woodley Arton.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Is this a village or is it -?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh no, I was out on the wilds as you might say. I had the farthest for to go to school. Two mile to walk.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Had you any other houses round about?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well the farmer as I worked for thirty years. I wa
s born in a cottage about 300 yards away as the crow flies. And I went to live in the old house where, as he bought afterwards. When the \{ILLEGIBLE\}
 estate was sold up. The farmers, they worked hard before that see. One of his brothers lived in that house 
and he was born there. And his uncle lived there before that. And then there was another brother down at his mill farm. Well he down at mill farm he was more boss than the one that lived in this old thatched house.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What was your father's job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Farm labourer. Like meself.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 It was the farmer's cottage that you had then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 That's only a cottage on the farm. That's the last cottage in the lane. In them days.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How large was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What the cottage? Well this was two up and two down. Then w
here I went to live, after the war, before I got married, cos I was married in 1915, and I went to this other old farm house in 1918. And then we stopped in there until 1948 when I shifted over to Old Sodbury on account of the wife cos if she wanted anyth
i
ng extra we had to come to Sodbury for to get it. And that was no unthankful office especially on a bike, a push bike. When you get out on Sodbury Common you know which way the wind is blowing. And I used to come across there of an evening if we wanted su
mmat, extra. Sometimes I have had to stand on the pedals and I had to get off and walk when the wind was so rough all against me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, bad isn't it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh it is.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Had you a garden at your first cottage where you were brought up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh that was 
two gardens as you might say. One was one side of the road a three cornered piece and the other was adjoining the cottage. That wasn't what,}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13060952\charrsid7686223  \{blank\}}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223  oh I suppose all together it wouldn't be half an acre. Then when I went to live in this old thatched farm h
ouse well that was half an acre of garden to say nothing about the lawn and all that. And twelve month before we left over there I had the first prize for the garden. And he was twelve perch long. And wasn't the full length of the garden as was dug up see
. And that was 96 rows of 'taters, two feet apart. And sometimes when the onions and all that during the war, well I didn't plant, the biggest part were onions and the rest of em were shallots. And sell 'em. For to get the extra shilling.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did your father grow vegetables as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What sort of things did he grow?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Some of them all sorts.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 I see. Had you any fruit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 In this other, in this other old thatched house, it used to be a farmhouse in years gone by. Well I put it down to 300 year old but }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14749910\charrsid7686223 I}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223  was a long way out as it was more than 1600.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, very old.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 That was six rooms on him, three up and three down. Terrible great beams they were anyone wouldn't realize it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And when we went into it, I had to put some thatch on first because the estate lot see let it go. And I put some on there because the}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13060952\charrsid7686223  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
thatcher that used to do all the houses thatching he was away at timber cutting. When he came home well the farmer had it thatched all over see then. He done it once aft
erwards. While I was there. When I left there, the fellow that took my job see, both of them was a little bit touched, I am sorry to say, and the old doctor said afterwards when the master, he came and see the missus, Mrs Stinchcombe, \{BLANK\}
 imagine that, and \{ILLEGIBLE\} they come from the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13060952\charrsid7686223 beans. I}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 t was a darned great big whitened passage and \{BLANK\}
 just inside the front door and then there was the baking oven adjoining that see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 It must have been a very large house.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh yes it was. Fact of the matter when I went into it first there was a \{BLANK\}
 and cheese press there and a beating stone. What become of it I couldn't say. I forgot all about that. And the cheese room was up over, or supposed to be the cheese room. When the thatchers came first I 
said we better cut that there by root off hadn't I he said "No" he said "he is holding up the house". Da}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13060952\charrsid7686223 rn it}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
, it was as big as my body I was afraid it might part. And up in this cheese room when the children got big see well we wanted the room. And I aske
d the farmer about having it done and he said "No" well Mrs. Come over to the Council about it well they said if the farmer doesn't want the land well he must do it himself and so I had it done and then they got over in, I know what was like inside. Oh it
 
was all blooming joy ..... And I got and cleaned it all out and I can tell you I was in a blooming mess. Black as soot. And sweat as well. And then had it done out and 'twas a darn big room, in fact we could put three double beds in there if it was wanted
. Well three boys did have that and the girls did have the room on top of the stairs. And to the Mrs. Had the other big rooms, and had one of the girls in there see, if we wanted them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 It was big then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh it was and it was nice and cool in the sum
mer and warm in the winter. Far better than these is today. This is all ... Well fact of the matter, on top of the stairs when they made this other room, cause before hand you see you had to step up high for step over into this old cheese room. Well they 
m
ade a place on the landing or the stairs see into the cheese room. You wouldn't hardly have believed it. It was like a stake and heather hedge. Where it was twisted in a lump and that was black thorn and I suppose they used to go down you see it was about
 as big as my thumb, that was hard as iron for to cut see and that was all plaster, with clay see put on with your hands and that was as hard as iron.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How many rooms were there on the ground floor then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Three.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You had a kitchen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh yes a big large kitchen. It was as big as the hall and this together. And wider too.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 A big fireplace was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
Oh ah. An old fashioned fireplace. Well years ago before I went into it I can remember it see, in me school days, cause years ago the vicar a
s was at Horton in the wintertime he did have a prayer meeting see at each, one night a week at each farm. Well all on us, I don't say all on us, but a lot of us did always go to these prayer meetings. And when that vicar retired from Horton went into Bat
h
, there's a cousin of mine was at service long with him at Horton, course that was right on top of the hill then large house and when he went there and came out to Yate and opened the Y.M.C.A. down at Yate and when her got back his house was all (whispers
) burnt? And my cousin only had just what she stood up in. And I went for to see her afterwards, she were engaged for to be married at Christmas and I went to see her afterwards out at \{BLANK\} up in Forest o}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16591344\charrsid7686223 f}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223  Dean and when I got there, she, poor thing, was gone into convalescence, never seem her I biked it on me own. I was in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place
}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Gloucester{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} at {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname time}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Minute}{\xmlattrvalue 0}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Hour}{\xmlattrvalue 8}}}eight o'clock
{\*\xmlclose} in the morning. Push biking when I got back, come back, and got back to Wedminster, called into a pub there and got talking, tell them where I'd been, oh the
y said, you needn't went all round there if you'd have gone down to Claycliffs you could have gone over on the ferry over to Newnham and Newnham's on the bottom and \{ILLEGIBLE\} on top of the hill.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Too late wasn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, it was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Had your father hens and pigs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
I had some poultry. Fowls. Hatch our own chickens. We had a big lawn see and I could hatch em out up there see on the lawn or have the chicken on the lawn. He was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16591344\charrsid7686223 d}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 arn big lawn it was. And we had, and there was a walnut tree and a
 pear tree there on the lawn. In the garden, well when I went into it first, well it was more like an orchard than it was a garden cause the old farmer well he'd grafted all the trees see he'd grafted all the trees that was in the garden well I got any am
ount on }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16591344\charrsid7686223 \lquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
em out because it were no good, especially in the middle of the garden cause it takes all the goodness out of the soil cos they were so big, some on em were as big round as my body. And kept the best on em, best of the apples and on several occasio
ns see well I didn't make enough cider for to last us the best part of the season, having a little drop at a time. Cause we always had plenty of beer or cider see at work. At all the farms. All the farmers was the same. Always had plenty of beer or cider.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Would your mother made cider and beer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
Yes. And the Mrs. did, well fact of the matter before well I married her she'd been making butter and cheese for John Russell down here, it was then, well that's where the international is today. He bought 
the cheese that she had made down at Yate. Down at Mr Flowered then down {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Broad Lane{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 it is today. And I had the front room covered in cheese that she made. And since, I was on to the daughter about it to see if she could remember and she said yes she can. C
os I had to go down to clinic you see every so often and that to have my toe nails cut was two miles, cos I've had 'em stepped on me, horses carts and one blessing it got better now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And she did always come up and pick me up and take me down and bring me back.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 I see. How many brothers and sisters had you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well I was the odd one out.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How many were there then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well, let's see. Three, five. Yes. Five altogether? Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Were you the eldest, or youngest, or in the middle?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 The youngest.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 It must have been a bit squashed in the house
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How did you manage, were there girls in one bedroom and boys in the other?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well we \{ILLEGIBLE\} managed some how or other. Some on em used to sleep downstairs see. On the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16591344\charrsid7686223 c}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 ouch. Or on the sofa in them days. There was no couches, not like this.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Had you a front room and a kitchen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh no. Only a kitchen. No front rooms there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How big was the kitchen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Bit bigger than this one.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Quite a size.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes. And th
e pantry place, well when, before I got married, after I left school, cos there was a school mistress in my school days and then afterwards she retired and a school master come then. Well then he got up some evening classes well there was about a dozen on
 us used to go to these evening classes. Then we got on carpentry. Well I got and made a safe then. Bout that long, 3', 3 x 2. And this 'ere cream mesh wire, so as to put your vegetables and that in. Or else it was all \{ILLEGIBLE\}
 open rest of it was. And dust and all that would get into it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Had your parents any water in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
No, no water. We had to fetch our own water well you had to go along to the farm for to get the water. And as for washing and swilling down well we had a little pond dow
n the road. And up where I finished off, we had no water there, we had to fetch it from the farm. We had a pond there see, where we could have water from for washing and swilling down cos that was land drainage water come into that pond. And after, about 
twelve months after I left there, well they had the water and the electric put in. Cos my eldest son up and brought it from {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Dunkirk{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 on the top road, through Hawkesbury and down through the commons through Horton and finished up at Colonel Walkers and come o
n the mains. It was all candle and oil lamps then and we had an oil stove, a double burner see with the oven on top. We could do our cooking then.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How did your parents make ends meet?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16591344\charrsid7686223 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 t}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16591344\charrsid7686223  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 was a struggle. Ah. Cause when I got married it was f
ifteen shillings a week and me house. One me Mrs. I bought her that there sewing machine before we was married cause her sister had one see and she was a tailoress and so her sister showed her how to use that one well she could make her own clothes and ch
ildren}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16591344\charrsid7686223 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 s clothes and all on it. Had some old trousers come in \{ILEGIBLE\}
 and make they up for the boys. And the girls the same, ladies clothes, cut it to pieces and make it up for them. Oh she was a good hand on that job.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did your mother make your own clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Where did they come from?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
Well we did buy them see. Well fact of the matter I was out at work see in me school days to pick up a shilling or two and fact of the matter on one or two occasions when I was carrying straw for th
e thatcher, or the farmer, well he gave me five bob see for carrying straw for him, well I came over to Mr. Martins where Jack? Is today, and bought a suit of clothes for five bob.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You managed that way did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh yes. The farmer's mother she did bring me out me dinner tea.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What other sorts of odd jobs did you do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well that's all I could do, on }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1909464\charrsid7686223 th}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1909464\charrsid7686223  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
farm, work, doing some at or other. In school days and afterwards. Fact of the matter over there it was nothing else. It was all farms over there see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Had you any pedlars coming round at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Only the gypsies }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1909464\charrsid7686223 \{illegible\}}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223  did mostly come.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What sort of things would they sell?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Clothes pegs. Chiefly.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Would you have meat often? Or was money rather..?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh we did get a bi
t of meat. Fact of the matter we did, I did catch some rabbits in the wires. Fact of the matter the old farmer bought us a long net as you could fold it up and put it in what we used to call the poachers' pocket. We would go out at night, see, two or thre
e of us. And catch some rabbits. That way, then bring 'em home and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8198308\charrsid7686223 \{illegible\}}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223  skin em see and cook em see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 All right that wasn't it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes. Fact of the matter we had to do some at like that to make ends meet.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Had you any butchers meat at all?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh yes. Yes. If you wanted anything extra, well, in our early days, well we did take short cuts. Either down to }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8198308\charrsid7686223 \{}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3942983\charrsid7686223 ILLEGIBLE}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8198308\charrsid7686223 \}}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
 or else up to up }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8198308\charrsid7686223 Hawkesbury}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223  come up here to Sodbury across the fields. Never hardly touched the road, only just crossed over.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 It was much faster that way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How old were you when you started school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Five.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How far away was the school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Two mile. I didn't walk the two mile I always take short cuts across the fields.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh I see. How large was the school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
Well now, it was, we got up to 100 of us there. And then there was, the time had come see as we couldn't have no more so lads at Little Sodbury, at the bottom, Little Sodbury, had to come over here to Chipping Sodbury to school. And the top 
of Little Sodbury used to come to Horton. Cos there was one lot come to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceName}}Horton{\*\xmlclose} {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceType}}School{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 and they had nearly as far as I to come to school, as lived up on Sodbury Common, farmer's sons.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How many teachers would there be if there were a hundred children altogether?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Ah, one in a classroom, four all told.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Four. Would you have your mid-day meal at home or would you take sandwiches?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Ah always take our own, yes, \{ILLEGIBLE\}
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What would you take?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh some bread and cheese. Or some bread an
d butter and jam. Cos I loved that. I could make a meal out of that any time of day. Bread and butter and jam.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did your mother make her own jam?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh ah. And me wife did. Fact of the matter I known her, on ever so many occasions, make a hundred weight of jam a season.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Gosh that's an awful lot.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 It is.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 She made her bread as well I suppose.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 At the beginning we did. Mother used to make her own bread. And I had to go down to Wickwar and get the balm for making it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You ran errands for your mother a lot?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How much older were your brothers and sisters? A lot older?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 About how many years?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 I couldn't say exactly. They be all dead now, I am sorry to say. The last one died about eight year ago
. She was ninety-two. That were the oldest of em. 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Quite a gap then wasn't there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
Yes, well I'm seventy-two. And if my wife had only lived another two months to the very day we should have been married fifty years. It was Before I got married, the farmer said to \{BLANK\}
 where I was at work, Charlie, Henry's leaving, he's going down to Wickwar to live now along with his daughter. And I can give you the first chance of the cottage. So I took it. And I went down to the wife, or sweetheart as was then
, see and told her and she agreed to it and we got married. And took the cottage.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Had you saved up at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, nothing. Cause it was all on the hop as you might say. Well both }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13271025\charrsid7686223 
of us }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 had some many what we'd saved up between us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Had you any furniture?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well we had some. We never had up to date furniture then, nothing like today. Same as I've got now, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid13271025\charrsid7686223 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13271025\charrsid7686223  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
isn't all flashy stuff not like some. Long as it is clean and tidy that's near enough for me. I would sooner have a little bit and call it me own.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How did you like school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 All right. Yes. Fact of the matter I been up to school in the morning and lit the fires for the woman as cleaned the school. At 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname time}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Minute}{\xmlattrvalue 0}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Hour}{\xmlattrvalue 8}}}Eight o'clock{\*\xmlclose} in the morning. Especially if there was a sharp frost or ice on the pon
d or anything or snow. Make our own sledges and get up to the castle and come down. I used to be a bit of a devil on ice.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You skated did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes. Seeing as I went, when we went up to Wembley the first time the lady that next to me said "Can't y
ou keep your feet quiet" and I said "No, I am down there along with them".
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What sort of skates did you have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh only them hob nail boots then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh I see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And they could do the same - I know I had to pay for it!
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What were your favourite lessons at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Arithmetic. Or history.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Were they strict with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh yes, yes, fair. Give 'em their due, we had to do what we was told. Or else get the cane.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Were you punished a lot?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well not a lot. Not like some. And we did have two hours for dinner then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 That was a long time. So when did you come home then?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname time}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Minute}{\xmlattrvalue 0}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Hour}
{\xmlattrvalue 16}}}Four o'clock{\*\xmlclose}. {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname time}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Minute}{\xmlattrvalue 15}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Hour}{\xmlattrvalue 16}}}Quarter past four{\*\xmlclose} in the summer and 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname time}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Minute}{\xmlattrvalue 0}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Hour}{\xmlattrvalue 16}}}four o'clock{\*\xmlclose} in the winter.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What would you spend your evenings doing? as a child.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well I was helping some of 'em on the farm summer nights. Every evening, Saturdays and Sundays.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How about in the winter?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh yes and then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Were you? Even after dark?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh yes. Clean the cows out. They as was tied up. With a hurricane lantern.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Were your parents strict with you at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Fair, fair. Not like they be today... \{BLANK\} I was always in between nine and ten. Not no later. No. {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname 
time}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Minute}{\xmlattrvalue 0}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Hour}{\xmlattrvalue 9}}}Nine o'clock{\*\xmlclose} as a rule.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Were they Church or Chapel people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Church. Then we did have a short cut to that, that was a mile. Across the fields.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You went every Sunday did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, mostly.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Your parents went as well did they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes. And I did help do with the bell ringing. Especially in teenage days. I didn't get paid for it see, I did it just 
for the fund of the thing, as the saying is. And on three or four occasions well we did ring the old year out and the new year in.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What was Christmas like in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well at school}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13271025\charrsid7686223  i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13271025\charrsid7686223  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 was all right. We did always have the treat. Down at Hort
on Hall. That was Squire Emmett lived there then and we always had a nice tea and an orange and that and some sweets.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Anything special at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No only at Horton. At Christmas. My dad wouldn't drink, you know. I was never one of they that get off
 on the beer and that. After I got married, that, no, I guess I always had plenty on it at work. Beer or cider. Beer in the summer, see and cider in the winter.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Had you any brothers and sisters that started work while you were at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh they was all out in service. And married some on 'em, you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Were your brothers away from home as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 It was almost like being an only child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, that it, well it was a blessing it was as it happened. I was the last. Well I did bid
e home and looked after 'em. Do the gardening and that in between whiles, nights when I come home from school. And then mornings I'd go down the farm and get Dad's beer and take it to him where he was at work. And then go on to school.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 I see. You helped them a fair bit then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh yes. Same as I'm always saying, I believe in it.? \{BLANK\} You don't pay your debts with money.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How old were you when you started work then, after you left school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Thirteen. Left school on the Friday and started w
ork on the Monday. I went over to Kingswood, near Wootton, first. For a few months. Along will a farmer, and then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How did you get that job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well he asked me for to come, see. Soon as I left school. And then afterwards I left him and come along t
o his father to work, handy for home you see that was there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 I see, it wasn't as far walking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
Oh no. Then that was three shillings a week then. Then his father gave me four shillings a week. Course I had to put in an extra hour or two see then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What sort of hours did you work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, six to six.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Was he a good employer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
Oh yes, yes. I could get on with them all right. Bar one of them. It went from five to seven shillings a week. And then from seven to eleven shillings a week. The f
act of the matter this other farmer where I left offered me a chance for to go along with his sister. Mrs. Pryior, down at Rhibley, Yate. I thought}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13271025\charrsid7686223  to meself well, shall I or sha}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 n't I, this a long long way for to bike it. Not only that see I should have been on the meal carts and never know what time you get, down at the meal carts. D}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid4012096\charrsid7686223 own at the mill, Koubley mill, f}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
or the animals feeding stock. I thought to meself goodness knows what time I shall be home at nights. I don't much worry. Better let that bide a
nd go on with this at eleven bob a week then I had two horses for to look after, then And then for to go and plough and help with the milking in between whiles.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What sort of farms were the ones round here? Were they mostly arable?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh yes, all arable and grass and all that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And dairy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes. More on the dairy line under the hill see. Sheep and that over the top.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What sort of crops would you grow?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Very good.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Barley and corn and that sort of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Down under the hill see
 it was mostly wheat and oats and beans. Very little barley down under the hill. And on, well I was long with that farmer at Horton, for thirty year well I had to do all the cutting round of the corn. It was all done by horses in those days see Binding on
 top. I mind on one summer I cut round four acres of field and took that and then I was on a cutting round all the rest of the time. With a horse crook. I could go faster with a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4012096\charrsid7686223 hook}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223  crook than what I could with a scythe. I could time meself. I went so many
 yards with a scythe then I had to cut it down then sheaf it up and tie it up and throw it back on the side and I could cut with a hoo}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4012096\charrsid7686223 k}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223  crook quicker than what I could cut it with a scythe. Soon as I had me }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4012096\charrsid7686223 sheaf\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
 cut well I only just had to tie em up and throw em back. Well I could do it quicker. I know it was a bit warmer work but I didn't mind about that. And then we had up near 100 acres to cut round that time.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 An awful lot!
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4012096\charrsid7686223 Ah it }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How many men were there working on it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Er. Three of us beside the farmer.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Had you any extra help at harvest time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
Ah, in me younger days, there was when it was all done by hand. Or the biggest part of it done by hand. Because, well before I left school see I used to go and rake back for the 
farmer. One or other of the farmers. Before I would go to school of a morning. Then again soon when I come home again nights I would go and rake back or turn it with a rake, a hand rake. There was no machinery in them days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What sort of thing would you be working in after harvest, in the Autumn?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh I would go onto hedging then. Laying hedge and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Prune it out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And then lay it down.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Are there thorn hedges down here?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Ah yes. But t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2711116\charrsid7686223 h}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 is all going to wrack and ruin, there's hard
ly any hedges laid today. Today you see well they've got the machine for to cut the tops off. That was my hobby was laying out, hedging and that for the winter. I would start hedging about November and keep on up til May.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh I didn't realise it went on so long?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
Oh yes, yes. You get some old hedges I've found them you've always got to live and learn. You never finish learning. And I got on some of the old hedges here, as grow up here fifteen or twenty year old. See well I didn't cut they out and le
t them stop up til May and then they laid down so much better. We the sap was upsee in the middle of winter see you get the big sticks they break off, before you can get them down.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What other jobs were there in the Winter?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Dung hauling and things like that. And spreading of it, all by hand \{ILLEGIBLE\} Horses and dung carts you see \{ILLEGIBLE\}
 in the fields and about six yards apart \{ILLEGIBLE\} and later on see you would go and spread that. Then afterwards 'bout February March time you'd go over th
at with a chain harrow, 2 horses and brush it in. And that's where the best of the grass was see. For mowing. When they came over at Old Sodbury off hand milking onto machine milking, well, it were \{ILLEGIBLE\} or nothing.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How old were you when they started having machine milking
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well I took the job on in February, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2711116\charrsid7686223 '4}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 8,}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2711116\charrsid7686223  \{38?\}}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
 but we couldn't get the cottage not before November. Then I came over here to live see and then I started on the machine then. And when I was there, about two year and a half
, three or four year afterwards, well some of 'em come round see, cos this farmer he was about the only one around this part of the country see that had the milking machine with the glass. When it come from the cow it 50 down into a glass jar and that was
 
measured and weighed at the same time. And some of 'em come round taking films on it. So I was took on the machine at milking and then on another occasion I was on hand milking. And then on another time I was driving the cows in, into the stall. And on an
other place I was throwing up the dung out the barrel. And my mate he was took driving the tractor in. And then some time after that we had to go down to the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2711116\charrsid7686223 \{ILLEGIBLE\}}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223  that's the farmer, and my mate, we went down to the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2711116\charrsid7686223 \{ILLEGIBLE\}}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
 and see the film that was on. So I've been on the radio, on the films, and tele.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, have you now?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Ah, on tele. and we went down to the Club, went down to T.W.W. and watched \{ILLEGIBLE\}
 3 or 4 of us ripples set we went up on the well we was in a seat on our own. Mrs. Evans, that was the Chairman of the Club \{I}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16409413\charrsid7686223 LLEGIBL}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 E\} and the Commentator said How do you come to live so old. Well I he said I smoke twist tobacco. And Mrs. Evans spoke up and said aye have a cup of tea. And I was sat next to her and I said Ah without any m
ilk or sugar in it. \{BLANK\}
 on the film. Little did I think as I was on as well. And me daughter, me eldest daughter, come up here because six weeks after this was shown and she said it has been altered. Well I forgot all about it and went down to the loca
l and wasn't in there very long and \{BLANK\} and his wife come in. She said I just seen you on tele. I forgot all about it!
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Had you any outings at all in your childhood? Sunday school outings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh yes, yes. Two or three, outings at different times down to Weston.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How old were you when you went to the seaside first?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 I was somewhere about eight or nine.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Who took you then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 We was drove over in the wagon, over to Sodbury station, and went down by drain down to Weston. Then we had to
 walk see, to Sunday School, it was right up in the Vicarage over at the top of Horton. Oh yes. Then in later years after I left school they had the Sunday School at the school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 They had evening classes as well you said?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Who organised those?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
Well the schoolmaster. I couldn't say exact how many of us went. I counted seven or eight of us went. And after the schoolmaster left Horton his wife wouldn't stop in Horton cos her oldest daughter died sudden and she was worried about it. So t
hey went down to Churchill to live. So I and my mate, Billington, we cycled into \{ILLEGIBLE\}
 he left Horton at Easter time and we went down to see them at Whitsun. And we was down there at nine o'clock in the morning and had a second breakfast. And on our way down, we went up on the ? \{BLANK\}
 Downs I said to my mate, I said, There's a farm up there. I said, we be getting any and he says let's see if we can get a pint of milk so we did, we went up there and got a pint of milk between us and had a \{ILLEGIBLE\}
 some sandwiches who what we had in our pocket. Then we went on down to Churchill and had our second breakfast. Then we stopped to dinner then I and my mate, and Mr. Williams, we cycled on in, on down to Weston. And then we stopped there and went in the p
ictures down there and then we come got back and into Churchill clock was strictly twelve when we got back and we stopped the night there. And had a look round Sunday and I came back on Sunday evening.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How did you get your first bicycle?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well I bought it over at Wickwar. It had punctures but I didn't mind about that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How old were you then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh - I had left school. Thirteen or fourteen. When I bought me first.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you give your mother your wages?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh yes Had you any spending money?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
Nothing. Just the same after I got married, I never kept back a penny. When we did go to market see, the farmers always give me a shilling. Market money as they used to say in those days. Oh yes. If there was any fish about, see, in the market, well
 I would bring back some fish or if there wasn't no fish then I would bring back the shilling.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Which market was this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well Either Sodbury Yate or Charfield.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Every week would this be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh no, No. Only occasionally. I didn't like Sodbury 'cos that was, \{ILLEGIBLE\} alright for sheep \{ILLEGIBLE\}
 tied up alongside of the National Bank, \{ILLEGIBLE\} If you wanted to buy anything you would have a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3684052\charrsid7686223  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
look at the cattle beforehand, \{ILLEGIBLE\} just the same with the sheep and pigs and all of it. And I
 can mind a few months after that I took me wife up there. And had a look round and showed her all that. There was so much difference in between the first time as I went there and the third time, much alteration. Side roads. Then we come back down into Gl
oucester and I said we'll have a look round the shops and when we got down all the shops were shut. Half day. So I said, well, we went into a caf\'e9
 and had our dinner and then I said well we can go onto Stroud and have a look round there and darn it was just
 the same down there. And on our way see we had to wait at a level crossing, see, and we missed the bus then at Stroud and we had to wait another couple of hours. So we went into a caf\'e9
 there and had a cup of tea and I said to the waiter "Is there any pictures round here", "Yes", "he said told me where to go" and we went in there. And that was "Oklahoma" and when I hear that record then I know that I have seen that picture.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How did you first meet your wife?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3684052\charrsid7686223 Well, it }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 was her sister introduced her to me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 They lived near did they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, I knowed her sister beforehand.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How did you know her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
Well I had seen her down there in the street. And the funny part about it I was going into the Eye Hospital with my mother I had to go into the 
Eye Hospital once in every fortnight cos that eye ain't much good and a woman came out as we knowed and she said "Mr. Stinchcombe, we had a bad job happen last night." "I said "What was that?" \{ILLEGIBLE\}
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Had she worked in service at all?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh yes. She done, the main of her after leaving school was in service. Farms She went to three different farms.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 She was in service when you first knew her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes. But That was only daily. Were in those days of war Twelve month afterwards she went out to 
service. Then that wasn't far. That was still in \{ILLEGIBLE\} Then she left there, the fact of the matter the farmer sold up there and went up into Wiltshire to live. Then she went down to \{ILLEGIBLE\}
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Had you known her long before you got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Er, near enough three year.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What did your parents think of this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Happy about it. Yes. The fact of the matter, my mother died well before we got married.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How old was your mother when she died? You mustn't have been very old?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well, she w
as seventy-four or five. Cos In them days see they never had the old age pension, not before they were seventy-two. And I went along with her up to Stinchcombe, for to get her birth certificate. Well Dad, see was in Hankesbury, well that where he was born
, but the Registrar was in Horton Mr. Collins. He would do the registering for births and deaths see in Horton and in Hankesbury. Then when he died we came over here to Sodbury.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Who looked after your father then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 After Mother died, soon after see he went down along with his daughter. \{ILLEGIBLE\}
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 He lived until he was eighty-seven.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh that was a good age wasn't it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes. He was a cripple like meself. When I was along with Mr. Batten I met with an accident. With a tractor. I told the y
oung fellow as was driving on it, he had just been amongst some chicken coops, I said to him \{BLANK\} and instead of that he went like that and throwed me off. \{ILLEGIBLE\} because he could see I was down and \{ILLEGIBLE\}
 come across me ankle. One blessing it
 was soft ground at his time and I had to shout them lift them up again. And this was because we were just off to dinner so I hung on and helped them out with the milking and then I said to him "You had better ring the boss up" because he was away from th
e farm \{BLANK\} well I couldn't get out of bed. And I had the doctor? \{BLANK\} put in plaster. So I was in plaster then for, this happened in September, up to Christmas then I had to go and see Doctor \{ILLEGIBLE\}
 and I went in and it was nothing near so bad. \{ILLEGIBLE\} And we got talking about farming and he told me he had a brother who was farming out in Australia. And two days after I was listening to the wireless and the Radio Doctor come on, on about \{
ILLEGIBLE\} and said I've knowed this go back one, two 
or three generations and it's right. Because me grandfather had it as well and his sister married and went out to Australia. And one of her grandsons came over here and see I and the Mrs. twelve month before she died and he had it in both hips. It was war
 wounds in the 1st War.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And he could walk about as well as you. And he was seventy-one. And it was a near miss}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14703675\charrsid7686223 .}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223  I had back in 1913. Well Mum and Dad and me sweetheart as was didn't want me to go. So I \{ILLEGIBLE\} Else I should have been out there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Why did you think of going?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Because me aunt asked me to come out there. Help out with the farming see. \{ILLEGIBLE\}
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What happened when the 1}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \super\insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 st}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223  War started? Were you called up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No. Well \{ILLEGIBLE\} when I went and had me second medical down at \{ILLEGIBLE\}
 and he said "You'll get called up when all the rest is killed". \{ILLEGIBLE\} When I came home, \{ILLEGIBLE\} "Oh" I said "They are going to call me up when all the rest is killed" and that was it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How much were your wages when you got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Fifteen bob a week.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How much did the house cost you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 That was in to it. \{ILLEGIBLE\}
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Had you anything else from the farm? Had you milk or potatoes?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh I had me milk. And butter was only a shilling a pound. Farmhouse butter. I 
had to churn that. Sixty pound at a time. Made Cheese as well. That was all the go in years gone by, butter making and cheese making. So anybody as lived a bit handy, here cos I know one farmer see, he'd sell milk all the time. Well he did bring it round 
in horses, cart or house? \{ILLEGIBLE\}
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How did your wife buy her groceries and that sort of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
We had one that'd come round happen that was baker and grocer. We did have it all off him. That was Mondays, Wednesdays and Saturdays. That he did come with a horse and cart.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 That was very good wasn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
Yes. And all of it was good in them days. Ah. I know in several occasions in the Spring of the year when potatoes was getting scarce we used to have off him as much as fifteen or sixteen quarters of bread a week. For eight of us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Had you six children then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 I just want to go over the houses you lived in. I think you told Miss Sloan that you started off in a two up, two down cottage ..
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 .. belonging to the farmer. That was the farmer your father was employed by?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How many years after you were born did you live there? At what age did you move from there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 When (well?) I was married there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, you were married there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes. "Cause me, on
e, one died, see, and the other one, well, I couldn't, that was me mother as you might say, died, and me father, he, he didn't want to stop, so he went down 'long his daughter down to (..) \{BLANK\}
 and I said to him, we'll just, want get married and live here, and the old farmer, well, he agreed to it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 So you stayed in your first home with your wife was your own family home, and your father went elsewhere?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Ye-, ye-, ye- ye-.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 When you moved to the much bigger house, you told her about, was that in 1918?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And you were married in 1915.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 So you only had two homes until you came here, in your whole life?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no, I had a-, another up at Old Sodbury and I, then, well the reason why I had to come down, down here, not here, down (..) \{BLANK\}
 down to 23 was that the farmer wanted the, he was single at the time, and his sister (..) \{BLANK\} when his father died, well, he didn't know a great lot, so my wife asked the (..) \{ILLEGIBLE\} as did come round our way and, if, if he k
nowed of a place that'd suit me, I said, yes, he said, I'll let him know when I do come again, and, er, that was on the Thursday, and so he did, and I had to go over and see him so I made an agreement for to for him (?), that, but that was in, in February
, 38, but he never got over there for to live. I looked (..) \{BLANK\} there was somebody in, in the bungalow But (..) \{BLANK\}
 and they weren't in, but I was still a-working there, coming back and forward and then, then, when the son and daughter married, wel
l, the daughter, they, they lived away, they went and lived away, see. The son, he lived in th'house, well, s-sometimes not always, mother and daughter-in-law don't agree (..) \{BLANK\}
 husband has died, see, well he left her the bungalow and s-, so much land on to it, and asked me to get out so we got out and we were (..) \{BLANK\}
 see, and we went; down there to number 23, and I even kept on working up there, up till, er, thirty-, no, fifty-seven, I had to pack in then through ill-health. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14703675\charrsid7686223 It }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 was when I went i
n the PR I first of all 'twas, as we thought, 'twas haemorrhage of the back passage, but when we (?) went in un-, under, under anaesthetic, couldn't, couldn't find nothing out, so I had to have nine X-rays, five one day, and four the next. When me wife co
me to to f-fetch me home, I had sixteen days in, in the infirmary, when me wife come to, come to get me, come to fetch me out, she seen the doctor (..) \{BLANK\}
 said, we've done all as we can do, we can't do any more, he said, his inside's fairly wore out, he needs a long rest, so I had twelve month or more rest, got fed up (..) \{BLANK\}
 and then, er, I, I, I did manage to get in down at Parnell's (??) down (..) \{BLANK\} I was there for two years and a half, then I, then I become 65 I, I ..
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 If you could tell me, your older sister, I think you said was 92 when she died ..
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And that was about eight years ago, was it, or how long ago was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Ah, somewhere about that, I couldn't say exact.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Who was born after her? Who was the second oldest in the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
Well, there was, there was, er, er, a brother and a sister, with the, with the first marriage, then the mother died, see, and he married again. Then there was, there was three, three then, that was two, two, er, two girls and a boy.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And you were the youngest, the boy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And the two sisters, you had two sisters, then, did you, two, a half brother and a half sister, is that right?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How old were your own two sisters when you were born, roughly speaking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well (..) \{BLANK\} under the thirty mark, between twenty and thirty.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Between twenty and thirty when you were born, your half-sisters were?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And your full sisters were, were they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How old was your half sister?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well, all on 'em lived, to, er, a great age, the oldest one was 91, er, and, er, then there was one died at 74.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 When was that? How long ago was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Ah, that, in, er, thirty-, thirty seven.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 When you were born, they were really all grown up, were they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Ye-, ye-.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 There weren't even any teenage ones?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, not exact.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 But you don't know what the gap was in years, between you and the youngest?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, I couldn't say, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You said your father was a farm labourer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Had he always been a farm labourer?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Most, most all his life, he done thirty five year on the same farm as, as I went to.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 For your first job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Ye-. \{BLANK\} I, I, I was working on the farm, you might say, all me life, in me schooldays and all
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You used to work there in the mornings, didn't you, and after school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Had your father ever done any other jobs at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Nothing hand.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Just the farm work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes. 'Cause that was all as there was for anybody to ..
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 There wasn't much choice, was there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Do you remember him ever being out of work, as people were so often at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well, no, not out of work, might have been on the sick list, well, then, you'd only get parish pay, and t
hat was only 'bout five shillings a week, and that was (..) \{ILLEGIBLE\} up, s-, so much for one thing, so much for another.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 He was on that, was he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 A little bit, not much.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Do you know if your mother had a job before she married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes. She was a servant girl.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 That was all the girls could do, at that time, wasn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes, that's what mine, that's what mine was, (his wife) before we got married.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 I remember you said she used to make cheese.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Aye, butter and cheese.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 After your mother married, did she ever go back to any kind of work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Only, er, washing, going around to one farm one day, and another farm another, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How many days a week did she go?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 \{BLANK\} 'bout two or three.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Do you know about how old your father was when you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 I couldn't say.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 He was 87 I think you told Miss Sloan when he died.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How long ago was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 In '37.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And your mother was about 76, I think you said when she died.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And how long ago was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well, let's see, 1914.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 While your mother went out to do the washing, were you still a small child then, or were you at school by that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 At s-, school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 So she didn't need to get anybody to look after you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, no, in fact me mother, before, before I started school she didn't take me along with her,
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And what did you do while she was working?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Mm, I (..) \{BLANK\} yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you like going there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 While you were a child in your first cottage you lived in, did you have any relatives or lodgers living with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, one, poor old fellow (..) \{BLANK\} his son did live in (..) \{BLANK\} Park (..) \{BLANK\}
 well, he, he and perhaps he'd bring one or two of his sons out (to our) place have their dinner, and then go over on Inglestone Common s-, and have a s-}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14703675\charrsid7686223 ,}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223  his sister lived over there, and had his tea there, and, and walked to (..) }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14703675\charrsid7686223 \{ILLEGIBLE\}}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
 Station and gone back by train 'cause he was a, a porter on (..) the LMS at Bath, so he could travel half price (..)
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 He had a bed at your house, did he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did he have a room on his own or did he have to share?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes, ooh, he had a room on his own.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did your mother have anyone helping her in the house with the housework at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What about your elder sisters. When you were a child, had they left home by then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 So there was no older daughter to help her with her work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you ever help her at all with the house work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes, I'd do what I could, and get the wood and coal in, and help in, up in the woods, and get the wood, see, and bring it home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Were you expected to do it, or did you do it from your own choice?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, I \{BLANK\} do it on m
e own, 'cause me mother she'd come up and, and get summat when we was getting short then she did show me where to get it from and that, 'cause we never had far to go, see ..
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 To get the wood?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 In the woods, 'cause it's a big woods, it was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And you got all your wood from there, did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What about cleaning, did you do any cleaning for her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 I would help do it. She did show me how to dust (?)
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 I suppose you were the only one at home, the only child at home for a long period.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And your father, did he help, did he do any housework?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Not but very little, he had the garden to do.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And, of course, hours were so long then, weren't they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, and (..) \{BLANK\} when they got, older. I (..) did a main bit of gardening.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You did?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
When you were a little boy, about as old as your little great grandchild, there, do you remember your father putting you to bed or telling you stories, or doing anything for you at all, or did your mother do all that sort of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Sometimes one, and sometimes the other.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 He did do things like the mothering sort of things, did he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, I (he) told me (?) where (he'd) been doing during the day or anything like that, where he'd, where he'd been to
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 He talked to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did he ever take you out on your own?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes, occasionally.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What sort of places would you go to?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well, we, we had a, he had a S-, Sunday off, and I and him and got some other fellows see with a
 pony and trap from, take us right down to (..)? \{BLANK\} and back.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Just you, or did your mother go too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, only, only we three.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 His friend, you mean, and you and him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you enjoy that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did he do anything like decorating in the house or mending things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Nothing hardly.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What about things like washing up and making fires and cooking? Did he ever have occasion to ..?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes he might help with that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 He could cook, could he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes.;
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 When would he cook, for example?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 M-, mo-, more of a Sunday than any help out.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Some}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14703675\charrsid7686223  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
people have told me their fathers used to do the Sunday dinner. Did he do, help with that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 He would help out doing that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 When your mother did the washing in her own home .. she did it at home I suppose?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did she do it one particular day, or just when ..?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well, had to go according to the weather.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 She didn't always do it the same day every week?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Ah, no, 'cause she was out at washing, see, a couple of days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
When she did the cleaning of her rooms, did she have a routine so that she did one room one day, and one another, or did she just fit it in as ..?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 (..) \{BLANK\} She'd fit it in.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 When you were a child, you said, you had to be in by nine or ten. Was it nine or ..?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, oh, ten (?) it was mostly, well, all, it all depends on the, the time of year as well, well in the summer time (..) \{BLANK\}
 all hours, as we had to make hay while the sun did shine, as the saying is.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You were making hay, weren't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Working long hours, but in ..
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 But in the winter?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well, we were very often in bed at eight o'clock 'cause got to get up early, see, mornings, 'cause I had a, I had two mile to walk to scho
ol.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 I remember you said that you found your way by the little paths?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Ah.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 When you were a little boy, did your mother put you to bed, or did you put yourself to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 I'd go to bed myself.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 In those days, people have told me that they used to have one bath night a week. Did you have that system in your family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well, I, I, on, once a week, yes, and that was a galvanized bath then, in front the fire.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did she heat the water on her paraffin stove?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no, we didn't have no paraffin(?) (..) \{BLANK\} we had a (..) \{ILLEGIBLE\}
 what we did call (..) in the back kitchen where we did, where she did do the washing, and not only that, she did do, m-, make her own bread, 'cause we had the baking oven, join-, joining the boiler in the back kitchen.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Was the back kitchen attached to the house, or was it like a wash-house, separate?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, it was attached to, sort of a lean-to, like.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 When you had your bath, was it always the same night of the week?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well, n-, near enough.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What night would it usually be, then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
Well, Saturday, and also Sunday, all depends upon the time of the year, see, it was in the summer time, well, it would be rather late nights, by, by, un-, unless we was(n't) haymaking or anything, or (..) \{BLANK\} cutting, or (..) \{BLANK\}
 like that. If we wasn't doing that, well, it was on a Saturday night.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Otherwise it might be a Sunday night, might it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you have clean clothes on once a week, when you were a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 After the bath?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 That's it, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
I wanted to ask you about meals in those days, because people say that customs have changed quite a lot, with food, not all the foods that they have now. Where did you eat your meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 In the kitchen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 In that kitchen where the stove was, was that the one?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, where the, where the grate was.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 I see, you had a kitchen where you eat, and a kitchen where the stove was, separate, was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 We never had no stove, not then, no we had to do all (..) on the fire ..
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 On the grate, you mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, and there was a oven, see, under, I-, in the grate, see, where you could put the coal under and see for to hot, hot it up
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And then you also had one where you did the bread. Was that another one?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 There wasn't any front room in that house, there wouldn't have been the room?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 So you always eat in that same room?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you have a breakfast in the morning, before you ..?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Can you remember what you used to eat in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
Oh, sometimes, was, er, a boiled egg and bread and butter, or, s-, bread and butter and jam, that's what I liked and, er, also bit of toast.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No porridge in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 (..) \{BLANK\} Quaker Oats, if anything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 But not regularly, you mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Ah, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you ever have milk to drink?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How often would you have a glass of milk, do you think? because people tell me they had less then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well, I couldn't say exact, but, I, I'd have some occasionally.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 It wasn't a regular thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 So when you were a child, a schoolboy, would you have tea in the mornings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes, at me breakfast, and always (um, take our own?) some tea around lunch and dinner to school with us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You'd take your lunch and dinner with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What would you take by way of lunch?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, a piece of bread and butter, then dinner perhaps a bit of bread and cheese.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 When you had your breakfast, was your father and mother with you, or did you have it on your own?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, they was there, one or the other was there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And would your father sometimes have gone out earlier?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes, milking.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 When he went out earlier, would he come back for breakfast, or did he take something with him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, he didn't come back to breakfast.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 When your sisters were away, I think you said one or more was in service when you were a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did they come home sometimes for holidays.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Was no holidays then, they di
d come home occasionally, or else, or else, we did go and see them. I did mostly, no matter where where she was at service, I did, I did always find me way there.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Was she usually in this part of the country, or sometimes further away?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no (?) al-, always this part of the country, but you might say between here, Old Sodbury and, er, Cherrifield.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 When you had your midday dinner, did your mother have a hot dinner midday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, occasionally.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Not as a regular thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no, mostly nights.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Because you'd take your sandwiches with you, wouldn't you ..
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And did your father do the same?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 A-, a-, all depends upon where he was at work. If he was handy he'd have it home, if it was a distance away, well, he'd take it with him.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And if he had it at home, what would your mother cook then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well, summat of all sorts.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Could you tell me, for example, what things she might cook?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well, \{BLANK\} 'taters and cabbage and carrots or anything like that, all depends the time of the year.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What there was?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, and a bit of meat of some sort.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 I remember you said you used to get the rabbits from poaching ..
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 A lot of the farm people had to do that, didn't they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How often could your mother afford to buy meat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Not very often.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Would there be periods of, say, weeks when she would be dependent on the rabbits, or would she go to the butcher every week?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Ah, no, well, she, 'twas such a distance to go, see, my dear, you see, \{BLANK\}
 you might say, if we wanted anything extra, we had to come to Sodbury, well, it was four mile each way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 So she wouldn't go every week?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Ah, no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And the butcher didn't call then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Not very often. If we wa
nted him, well, we did, er, we (..) did take the message to the farm, see, and they can tell him for to bring summat or anything like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You know how nowadays, if people have vegetables, they always expect to have meat too ..
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 In those days it wasn't like that, you mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Your father might come home and have potatoes and carrots, and he wouldn't expect to have meat as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Just the vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Unless there was, what we did all like was a, a nice big piece of bacon, boil it ourselves.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Was that your own pig that you kept?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And you did all that yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you ever keep a pig for selling when you fattened it up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, well, if, if we did we did have a part on him back, as you might say.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You kept a part back?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 In the evening, did you come home for tea from school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Was that when your mother usually cooked?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did your father come back then too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And what sort of food would she cook then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well, 'taters and cabbage and, well, all depends what other vegetables there was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you ever have salad at all in the summer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Not much.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 I think you said you used to have poultry in your own home when you were married ..
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 .. did your father have poultry too, your father and mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, never had the room, not there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 So, did they ever have eggs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes, we could, we could always get plenty eggs on the farm cheap.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 So she used to cook eggs sometimes, did she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 I remember you said for breakfast, and did she ever make puddings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 When would you usually have them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Mostly of a Sunday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What type?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well, it's the sort what we did always like, spotted dog.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 With currants in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes. Boiled
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did she ever make a fruit tart, or didn't they have fruit trees?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes, we, er, we had currants and gooseberries and all, and plums and that, there, see
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 So they grew their own vegetables and fruit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did they ever need to buy any, or did they get enough from what they grew?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well, we'd buy some occasionally ..
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 But most of the time ..
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, we'd have our own.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And you didn't have any room for keeping your own livestock, then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No. (..) \{BLANK\} that'd be the front lawn, see (??) well we did (..) bottle a lot besides making jam (..) as that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You had bottled fruit, did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, then, er, we had summat for to (..) tide us over, see, when, in the winter time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
When you were a child, did you all eat the same food? Some people have told me that their mothers used to go short because there wasn't enough. Was it like that in your family?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Because there weren't so many children at home, I suppose, that's why.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, \{BLANK\} yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And your father, did he have the same, or did he have more?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no, all about the same, well, in fact, I didn't eat so much as some on them, not then, still (..) the food was good then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You think so?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Was grace ever said at meals at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Were you allowed to talk?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Could you choose what you wanted to eat, or did you accept everything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well, might ask me what I should like, and I did say, if it wasn't there, I had to put up with what there was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 If your mother cooked something and you didn't feel like it, you wouldn't have to eat it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And if she offered you some cabbage and you took some on your plate, and then you didn't finish it, what would she say to that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, her wouldn't say nothing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 She wasn't fussy in that way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Could you ask for a second helping if you wanted some more?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes, yes, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Was she particular how you sat and how you held your knife and fork?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 She wouldn't mind if you put your elbows on the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you ever bring a toy, when you were a little boy, to the table or a book?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, we never had such things, they was luxuries.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Could you get down from the table when you wanted to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You didn't all have to wait to finish together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Was your mother an easy going person?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, yes, very.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Was she a motherly kind of woman?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 If you were worried about something, who would you take your worries to, would it be your mother or your father, or both of them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well, I should, I should, um, tell mother first.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And she was easy to talk to, was she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 When the meal was served up, did she serve it from dishes on the table, or did she serve it separately?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, out of the saucepan.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Can you tell me how your mother and father expected you to behave at that time, because people say that times have changed in the way ..?

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, I was told for to behave myself and be honest.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Be honest, that's what they emphasized, did they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Aye, they believed in it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 If, say, a boy hit you, and you told them, what would they say?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, hit him back.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 They'd tell you to defend yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did they ever have to tell you not to swear when you were a child? Did they have any feelings about language, or didn't they worry?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, there wasn't much of that said. They don't believe in that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 But it wasn't a problem you mean at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Maybe it's more in the towns, perhaps.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes. Everybody gets their ups and downs, I know, otherwise, I, I, I don't believe in it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you ever have to be punished, or did you always do what they said?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Very seldom.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You were an obedient child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And if they did punish you what sort of punishment would they give you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Go off to bed without any supper, didn't have any tea.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You weren't ever caned by them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No hitting or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 When they punished you, can you remember how you felt about it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 I didn't cry.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Do you remember if you felt angry?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 These ideas yo
u told me, you were brought up to believe in honesty and that kind of thing. Did you get that more from your mother or more from your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Both of them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 They both took a hand in your upbringing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Can you remember if there were any musical instruments in your home, a piano or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well, no, we had a, the old man as was a lodger 'long with us, he had a v-, violin.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And did he play it to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, he did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes. When he died a farmer down in the village bought it
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You didn't learn to play yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And did you sing, or your mother sing at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well, I did mostly s-, sing a few songs what I'd learned at school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You did?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 But you didn't gather round when he played the violin and sing, or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well, you mi-, you might say wasn't old enough, see, for to understand all that and ..
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did your parents ever play any games with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Very seldom.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you have draughts, or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, that wasn't thought of.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 They did talk to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Some people have said that their mother and father didn't talk to them at that time, but they did talk?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you have anything to read in the house or was that out of the question, any newspaper, or ..?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
Oh, yes, we had a newspaper, and I, I had to read that, see, all the bits and pieces, you might say, 'cause neither on 'em couldn't, couldn't read nor write. I had to do that myself.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 So would you read aloud to them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you ever have any family prayers at that time? I remember you said you used to go to prayer meetings.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes, that was at different farms during the winter months. Well, the vicar, he'd come, come, com
e in, in a certain nights, see, well, we did (..) we did go to church, Sundays, and he did he did speak out in church where 'a' was going, and where, when, whereabouts and what time, and we did always go.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 But you didn't have prayers aloud just in your own family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 It was organised by the vicar?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 When you were a small child, a schoolboy, do you remember a funeral in the family, that you went to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 The only, the only one as I can remember in me school days was the old man as lodged along with us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 He died while he was lodging did he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Can you remember what it was like, the funeral, where there a lot of people there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Ah, no, nobody hardly.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 He didn't have many people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you have a funeral tea afterwards, or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
I remember you said how you used to go out with your father in the pony and trap, did you, I don't suppose you ever went away for a holiday, because they didn't have them, really then, did they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You never went and spent a night anywhere else?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you ever go out shopping with your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Where would you go for shopping?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well, if we wanted anything extra, 'twas, we, er, we
'd go down to Wickwar that's through the woods, or else come over here to Sodbury. We did, we did occasionally go up to Hawkesbury
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And that five shilling suit you said you bought with the money the farmer gave you, where was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 We came over to Sodbury, to John Morgan's where, where Jack Sandals is today.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you buy that on your own or did your mother help you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, oh, no I buy it on me own.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Going shopping for clothes, did you do that every year or more often?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no, all depends upon when (..) I for to get any money.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 But you bought your clothes out of your own money?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did they have bank holidays then you went out on outings for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Only with the s-, with the school, the, the Sunday School.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 A Sunday School outing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 That's when you went to Weston?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Were Saturdays any different in those days? You didn't go to school. Did you work all day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How old were you when you first started working for the farmer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, about, er, seven or eight. That was carrying the straw for to do the thatching.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 When you did that, can you remember what the first money you got for working for him was?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well, his mother, see, had always given me dinner and tea.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 That was the payment, was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well, that was part of it. He might give me a shilling or two (..) in and out
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 But you didn't get a regular sum every week?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no, oh, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You said your parents used to attend church? Did they both go?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did they go regularly or occasionally?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no, not regularly, only occasionally.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 But did you go to Sunday School regularly?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Were there any social activities to do with the church that you used to take part in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No there was nothing, nothing going on then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No socials, or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you belong to the choir?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And was there a Band of Hope or Temperance Club of any kind?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No. The only thing as I, done after I left school, I did ring the bells, ring the old year out and new one in.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And the evening classes where you learnt carpentry, were those attached to the church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no, that was you might say evening cla-, class through the schoolmaster as came there after I'd le
ft school. It was 'bout a dozen of us attended that, that evening class.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 That was after you'd left school that you went?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How long did you go for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 'Bout two ye-, two year I think 'twas after I, after I'd left school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How often?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, t-, twice a week I think.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Was it just carpentry you learnt?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no, we had, er, er, estimating different, er, different places by the road signs (???)
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And anything else?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And a, a bit of, little bit of 'rithmetic, adding up.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you enjoy going?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes, they did bring back memories of school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Because of course you were so young when you left school those days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, I was thirteen, and I got me school leaving certificate here.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What standard did you pass?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Up in, well, s-, six, I believe it was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 When you were a child, did your parents take an interest in politics at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 They didn't discuss politics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Do you know if they voted, your father, women wouldn't have had a vote?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well, if 'a' did, er, perhaps two or three of them'd go together.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
At that time a lot of men, I think this was particularly true in the country areas, people have told me, they often felt they risked their job if they voted, perhaps, they didn't vote the way their employer would like them to do.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Do you remember people talking about that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes, some of them would ..
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Feel they must vote a certain way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Was that true of your father, do you think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Ah, no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 There wasn't pressure on him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Were his views more to the Conservative or more to the Labour side do you think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well, tell you the truth, I couldn't say.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You just don't know?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 But they weren't active in politics, or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Were you yourself political ..?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes in me, in me older days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Was that more the Liberal, or Conservative or Labour?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Why, we'd say 'twas Liberals inthem days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You were active in the Liberal ..?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did your father and mother go out to any clubs or organizations at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Very seldom, might go}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid469200\charrsid7686223  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 to a Hankesbury show or anything like that, well, that was the last Saturday in August, that was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 A show?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 But they didn't go out regularly?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did your father go to the pub?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No. \{BLANK\} where it was on the farm, see, over there he always had plenty of beer and cider for to drink.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did your mother, then, did she not go to the pub?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did your father go to the races, or ..
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no, never thought about such things.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 So usually in the evening, would they be at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Do you know if your mother or father paid out to any clubs, for saving, like boot clubs or doctors clubs or clothing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 I don't think there was anything of that about then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
When you were a boy, you said, you used to go skating and make your own sledge. That must have been lovely. Whereabouts did you play? Did you play just at home or all round as a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well I'd set along with a couple of boys see, and have a game.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What kind of games did you play?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well, you might say we'd go fishing down in the brook.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did your father ever go fishing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you play any kind of sport, or wasn't there anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Not in, er, 'twas only in, er, late School days as we done a little bit of football, or played cricket.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you do that out of school time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No school time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You did it in the school time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Ye-, chiefly. We did some of us get together of a night and have a game.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you keep any pets?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Only the cat.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Was that your own, or was it the family cat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 I think it would belong to the lot.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you get any pocket money?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Not but very, very little.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What would you get for example, if you did get it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 'Bout a penny.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And not regularly?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Just when they had it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Aye.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You earned your own pocket money if there was such a thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Do you ever remember going to a concert or a music hall, a show of any kind, a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid469200\charrsid7686223 travelling}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223  show?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Only, only to, er, Hawkesbury show, that would be just a, just a \{BLANK\} a, a small, small show then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Was that mostly live stock and that kind of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no, no, not then, that, that, that was more a fair with cattle.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 At (..) Hawkesbury was a fair was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No that was a show, vegetable show that was, but the fair, see, was one, er, was one down at Higher Horton (?) that was March and 
September. Then there was another, er, up at Malmesbury, the fair, cattle and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And were there any things like the fattest woman in the world, or any of those things, sort of spectacles?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No entertainment of that kind?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 So you never saw a play or anything like that when you were a boy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
In those days, if your mother, you said she didn't have anyone to help her in the house, but if she was ill or anything, did she have any relatives nearby or neighbours who would help?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Ah, neighbours would come and help out, that was even, that was in the distance.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How do you mean? They were far away too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, of course, because you lived in an isolated cottage didn't you?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes, yes, er, you might say it was, what, two or three hundred yards apart (..) \{BLANK\} and farms was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you ever go for walks at that time, just for an entertainment?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, I'd be off, and get off on me own, walk different places.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Alone or with friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes, mos-, eight times out of ten on me own?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you walk long distances?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What for example would you consider ..?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 I do go and have a walk all in the woods.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you ever go walking with your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Not much.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, not much.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 So you were saying about neighbours, they were quite a long way off?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did the neighbours at that time, ever come in to tea or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 There wasn't entertaining in the home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And your own parents, did they ever go visiting?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Not very often.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did they have anyone they visited?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Only occasionally.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Who would that be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 That'd be perhaps somebody who's come and, and come and done a good turn for us we'd pay (..) they \{BLANK\} a visit, and help they out.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 But it would be a visit for helping, not sitting round eating or drinking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no, no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 At that time, if you did call round on somebody, would you expect to get anything
 at all to eat or drink? You know how nowadays people entertain to tea their friends, it wasn't like that then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Do you ever remember them visiting any relations? Did they have any family nearby?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well (..) Wickwar and Inglestone common and then the next one we, mother had would be living down at (..) }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid403481\charrsid7686223 C}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 helstone near Bath.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 But your mother didn't have a mother of her own nearby?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 They didn't have anyone like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 She, er, she, her birthplace was up at Stinchcom
be .. (Talking together here) (..) and, and, er, for to get the, er, er, certificate, he had to, had to walk to (..) and Coley Junction, see, and change there, see, for to go to Stinchcombe.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 That was for the old age pension, was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, and that was, that was seventy two then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 She was seventy two?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 That's what, that's what age you was 'fore you could get any pension, \{ILLEGIBLE\} 's time, and father's he was, he was born Hawkesbury.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You were saying your father was born in Hawkesbury.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
At that time, and still today, people divide society into different classes, they talk about the working class, the middle class, the upper class ..
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 At that time, did you think of yourself as belonging to one of the classes, or your mother and father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 They weren't \{BLANK\} like that, you mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 If you had to put yourself in a class, what would you put yourself in at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, the, the poor class, 'cause, all, all farm workers, 
you couldn't call them no more than poor class, because a, a wage, see, then was only fifteen shillings a week, seven days a week, that's what they was married on, fifteen shillings a week.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 When you were brought up as a boy, did your mother and father
 tell you to show respect to certain people because they considered them different in any way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes, yes, yes, yes. Had to put your hand to your hat.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Who would you do that for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, the, the, they vicar, and, er, and Squire Emmett and Mrs.
, Lady Emmett, that was, they was (..) at Horton Hall and, er, and Sir, (?) Sir, Sir Frederick Richardson, he was at Horton Court.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Anyone else?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 That was the chief ones.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What about, was there a schoolmaster?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What other people were considered important in the village, at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 They were the only ones.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Were there any shopkeepers in the village?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes, there was two, one, er, one did, er, keep the post office as well, and the other one, well, sh-, she was, er, only (?) a grocer.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Only a grocer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Grocer.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Would you touch your cap to them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 They were in a different class?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Was there a chapel there, at that time, or just a church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Ah, there was years ago. I c
an just remember, where there was two farmers used, used to specially as, as used to visit this chapel, not, not far away from the, from the school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What type of chapel was it, do you know?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Ooh, (..) Nearly like an ordinary house to tell you the truth.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 I beg your pardon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 (..) Nearly like an ordinary house, to tell you the truth
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Do you think it was Methodist, or have you any idea what denomination ..?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 I couldn't tell you.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 But you can remember two farmers going?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What other kind of people went, do you know?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 I couldn't say, I know they went.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Otherwise did the people go to the church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 When you went to the church, did people have their set places in the church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 The people that you touched your cap to, whereabouts would they sit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well, they do sit up handy the chancel.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And the farm labourers, what you called the poor classes at that time, whereabouts did they sit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, somewhere, anywhere, you might say. They had their own particular place.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 The shop keepers, did they go to the church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And did they sit ahead of you, or anything, or did they just sit anywhere?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, anywhere, anywhere.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 There wasn't a distinction made with them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no, no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Were all the farm labourers much the same, or were there some who were poorer than others?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well near about the same.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You were all about the same?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Were there any craftsmen, people like that, around, or was everyone a farm labourer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, there was one or, one or two craftsmen as did make handles
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Were they better off?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Not much, not much.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Were they considered to be superior, did they consider themselves to be superior? They didn't make distinctions?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, no, no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did your mother and father have the same attitude to, I've forgotten his name, Richardson, was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And the Squire and Lady (..) Emmett, did they have the same way of behaving?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Would your mother curtsey ever?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You actually saw her curtsey?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 At that time, do you remember people moving from one class to another, moving from the poor class up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Very seldom, very seldom.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You don't remember a case?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Do you remember anyone being described as a real gentleman, or a real lady?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, I (..) those you might say as come and lived in, was living in Horton Hall and, er, and Horton Court.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 They would be described that way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 If you heard somebody say, she's a real lady, what would you think they meant, in your mind?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well, got plenty.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 To you it meant money, more?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 At that time, do you think the police treated the poor people differently from how they treated other people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Nor a great lot difference.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you ever come into contact with the police at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No. Well, I did on one, one, one oc-, one occasion. I was going home from evening class, and coming up (..) Nights }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid403481\charrsid7686223 \{ILLEGIBLE\}}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223  h}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid403481\charrsid7686223 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
ll as I did, as we did call it I heard summat in front of me, and sort of stopped. I couldn't see, see, 'cause I never had any light, and, er, (..) had a torch in, in me pocket and pulled en out and switched en on (..) \{BLANK\}
 that was a policeman. I said, I thought I heard somebody about, but wasn't certain.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 So that was as much as you had to do with them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 The farmer was your landlord up to when you, you were in that house, wasn't he?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 But you didn't pay a rent, is that right?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Then he wasn't really like an ordinary landlord?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did he do repairs for you, that kind of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, the, it, it was the estate is to do that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What was the name of the estate?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Musgraves Estate.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Was the farmer anything to do with that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, he was, he was a landlord, and, ooh, he was a tenant, see, of the, of the estate.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 He was a tenant of the estate too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Ye-.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 So that cottage didn't belong to him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, only, only to the farm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You mean the farmer who employed you was a tenant farmer, was he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Who, was it a Mr. Musgrave, then, or who ..?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 It was, it was Miss Musgraves, but after she died, well the estate was sold up, and some of the farmers bought their own, but the main 
of 'em, main of 'em, n-, never bought it. That was, 'cause, er, some of the farms was larger than another and he was split up.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And your farmer never bought his?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, no farmer, farmers (..) as I worked for last in over there, see, one is I used t
o do some jobs for in my schooldays, well, well he bought, he bought what we did call, what I should call Hard Riding Farm, well that was (..) forward the house see, where I lived, and, and part of the, part of the farm where the, where I used to work for
, beforehand where the cottage used to belong to.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And when you were there then was it somebody from the estate who would do repairs to the cottage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, oh, yes, well the carpenter, he had up, all the doings with the repairs.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 There was an estate carpenter, was there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
Yes, well he would, he did do all the repairs with regard to the woodwork, but there was another fellow over here at Sodbury, see, he's a mason, well he did do the masoning job. Then, er, during the, during perhaps three or f
our a year where the timber is, was cut down, well that was took up to the old saw pit, both manors, Musgraves Mannor and, and (..) the Manor that was, was when, one Manor was put one side of the road and one manor the other side of the road, all the timb
ers was brought to the old sawpit well, it was years ago, I can just remember where they used to saw it up by hand with a (..) \{BLANK\}
 saw, one (..) down in the pit and one up on top, that was a dead (?) job and hard work up to the (..) circular was come in
, then we did, then they a, a farmer he's, he's had a circular saw and engine see, see, well, he, he'd do the threshing in the, in the winter around the farms, and when the threshing finished, see, he'd come there, see, and do the, and cut up all the timb
er, such as the timber for the gates and the posts and all, all such things as that, see, and, and slabs outside for, for the repairs of the sheds.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You were talking about the farmers, and saying they were all poor at that time, do you remember why you 
were still living with your parents, feeling that they had a struggle to make ends meet? Do you remember thinking this at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You were conscious of it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How did you feel about it? Did you have any views about it at all?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
Well, I knowed, I knowed how much they was getting, see, I knowed they didn't, couldn't have much, in fact they, fact when they died they was in debt and I had to stand to it. Thank God I got through it all right. 'Cause the poor dears, see, 
didn't understand the figures and had, perhaps, had too much ...
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You mean because they couldn't read and write?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 When your father was on parish relief I think you said once, did that make a difference to how you lived, much difference?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, we had to be, scrape, then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What sort of things did you cut out then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well, such, such as meat, we couldn't have none of that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And what other difference did it make, can you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Cut out on a bit of bread
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 So you really had much less?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 That relief, were you inspected before you got it at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How did you get relief?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 We went to see the doctor.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, through the doctor?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Because he said you couldn't work, was that it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Do you think your father felt he was decently treated over the relief?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 He had no, had, couldn't say nothing, see, my dear.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Because some people have told me with the Guardians, they felt insulted the way they were trea
ted by them, and all that. Do you remember if your father felt that at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, I, you couldn't say nothing, that's what it was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And he just accepted it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You don't remember him saying anything against them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 When you went to school, you started at five, didn't you ..
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 .. and did you always go for the full day, right from the start?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 When you walked along that two mile walk, did you go on your own, or did anyone go with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no, I'd go on my own (..) I'd pickup some other, other school mates, along me road.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 But you start off on your own?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 The very first day that you went, did anyone go with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes, mother took me, and the funny part about it, I'
ve seen, er, seen the girl not so very long ago, but she didn't, she didn't recognize me, and I couldn't recognize she, for her, for she was in the same shop as, as I one day, and the shop keeper called her Miss Pullen (?) ..
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 She was one of the ones who used to go with you was she?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no, sh-, she lived down in the village, that was, she was a farmer's daughter, see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did some of the farmer's daughters and sons go to the same school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Were they much better off?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, no, all treated alike.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did they have better clothes and that kind of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes, they had bit better than rest of us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 But they weren't treated differently?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And did they mix with the other children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, oh
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 The children didn't make any difference?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Not a bit.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You didn't have a school uniform, I suppose?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What sort of thing do you remember the teachers telling you were important, in your manners and that kind of behaviour?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Used to tell us to behave ourselves and that, see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Were they fussy, for example, about how you spoke, or didn't that worry them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well, might tell us off occasionally, but not very often.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And things like punctuality and tidiness, did they worry about that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes. Yes, and specially, specially, er, being late or anything, and I shall always remember it, closer to church, further from heaven.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 I've never heard that before.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 They that live handy is always late I've noticed on many a different occasions.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And they used to say that, did they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you find that the jobs you did before school, did that ever make you late for school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And when you said you used to go in and light the fires for the teachers, did you get any money for that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You did that just out of kindness, did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Your parents couldn't read or write, did they have any interest in your school work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did they ever meet the teachers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Very, very seldom.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 They didn't visit the school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Do you remember if there were any gangs in the school? You know in some schools they have little separate gangs.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 I don't, I, I All 'bout the same.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You were?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did everyone leave at 13 from that school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
Well, there was, there was (..) two opportunities for boys, not girls. He could, er, he could have, um, I think 'twas from May till October for the work on the farm, but he'd have to stop on up till he was 14, well, I, I ..
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You didn't do that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 I didn't do that, I, I carried on and finished.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How many boys did that? Did a lot of them do that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Not a, not a great lot, one or two.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You mean May to October of that last year?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 That was the only other chance you had?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you ever think you would like more schooling, or didn't you ever think about it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, I was glad to get away.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And yet you went to evening classes afterwards.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 When you went to the evening classes, did you see the boys you had been at school with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 (Mr. Stinchcombe contd.) It was, there was about a dozen of us as, as went to evening class.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 All from the same school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Do you think you benefited from going to school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 In what particular way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well, learning more.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You write a nice hand.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you like writing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Your very first work you did, you said you were about eight, did you say? Your little part time ..
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Your first job that you had after you left school, I think I'm right in saying was at Wootton?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 It was at Kingswood, Wootton.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Kingswood, Wootton?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 That's at Wootton-under-Edge?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, it's up there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And that was three shillings a week?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Was that the general sort of starting pay for a boy at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well, had to have that or nothing, see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 People didn't get more when they started?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 When you left him you went to his father, is that right?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
Yes. Well, that was handy home. I know, I know 'e wasn't that was the, his father, see, but this was, it was a biggish family, but there, was two o-, two oldest sons, one, one went, er, struck up a farm Li
ttle Sodbury, struck up a little, er, farm over at Kingswood Wootton, and I didn't go over there, see, but very often we did have the pony and trap and go mornings, see, perhaps I did clean out, clean out the cows for his father when he was getting ready,
 then we did go then. Then when I finished for 'e, see, I'd come on for his father and I got five bob then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You mean, when you were working for his father, you were also working for him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Is that right, or did you leave him when you went to his father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Aye a-, afterwards.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You did leave him afterwards?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you leave him because you were getting more money?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes. Well, fact of the matter, he never had enough farming to do for to keep me on.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 There just wasn't enough work, you mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What did you think of him as an employer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 All right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 He was all right?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 When you left school and started to work, did it change your way of looking at life at all, do you think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no, no. I was so used to it, see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 It wasn't such a change as it is for children now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 I think you told Miss Sloan that you gave all your money to your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You didn't keep any back?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Have you always done farm work all your life?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Ye-, ye-.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you ever think to yourself that you would have liked something different, in the way of work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 When you were doing the carpentry, you didn't think you'd like to do that all the time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you ever belong to a trade union?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you feel at all that the farmers, you know, the employers and workers had different interests, or think along those lines
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well, (..) some were more interested in one job than another.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Some farmers were, you mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
But, did you feel there was a conflict, a difference of ways of looking at things between the farmers as a group and the workers as a group? Did you think of them as being on different sides?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes, some on 'em, were.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you find any of them difficult to work with, the farmers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, specially one as, one as I worked for.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 When was that, before the war or afterwards?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, before the, before the first war.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What sort of a man was he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, he was a devil, aye. (..) But still you had to eat humble pie them days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You had to eat humble pie.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You did. One blessing I only had eighteen, eighteen months 'long with him. That's why I went from seven, seven shillings a week; to 
eleven. I mean, I had more hours, and he was, he had three (..) horses to look at, besides milking.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 So the man you didn't like was when you were getting eleven shillings, was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you go straight from seven to eleven?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 In what ways was he difficult? Was he a hard man?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Ah, he were, was watching on see all the blooming time. I didn't like that. If you can't be trusted I don't know, what else can ye do.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well, it's an insult really, isn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 It is.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 When you started work you still lived at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You never went and lived at another farm?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Do you think when you started work, did it change your relationship with your mother and father at all or were you just the same?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Just the same.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you spend Sunday any differently? Did you still go to Sunday School when you started work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Not \{BLANK\} not then, 'cause you never had much time see in between whiles.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, because you worked the Sunday, didn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What sort of hours did you work on a Sunday when you were working for ..?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
Ah, that depends upon the time of year. In the winter we had to put in more, more hours of work, see, on account of the, besides milking we had to do the cleaning out and the feeding.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Because they were indoors, you mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 So did you ever go to Church, or didn't you have the chance?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes. We, we'd go the evening, more so than in the, in the morning.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Was it at that time, round the first world war, that you took an interest in the Liberal party, or was that later on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Ah, yes, during that time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you work in any of the elections round then at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Do you ever remember going to a political meeting?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, because 
we, we was so far away from everything, see, and on, er, er, on one or two different occasions we had to come right up, up to Old Sodbury for to do our voting up at Old Sodbury school. You might say, what, near enough eight mile.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 At that time a lot of the farmers were Conservative, was the farmer Conservative that you worked for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And did he know that you had Liberal views?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 I didn't care whether he did or not.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You didn't care? He didn't say anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No. No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 He didn't threaten you at voting a certain way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, no.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Some people ..
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 .. in my part of the world have said the farmer expected them, but you weren't treated like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 So you did as you pleased in that way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you go out in the evening and enjoy yourself in the evening, or were you always working?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Very seldom we, we come over to Sodbury and get a hair cut. We was never very interested in going anywhere, see, in them days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you meet any new people after you left school, or did you keep up with your old friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Near about my own lot.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 If you went out at night after you were working Were you still expected to be in at a certain time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no (..) Depend on where you was going that would be the difference. Never, never, never very late.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did they like to know where you were going?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You said you'd met your wife, you'd known her about three years when that chance of the cottage came up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Can you tell me how old she was when she married you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Er, 20. I was 19.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did she also come from Horton, was she born there?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no, Yate. It were in Yate Fact of the matter her father tell me she was born on Inglestone Common Shifted about, they did, see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
When you asked her to marry you, you told Miss Sloan, when this chance came up, did your parents know that you were intending to marry her sometime?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 They'd met her, and all that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 When you decided you wanted
 to marry her did you tell them as a special kind of announcement, or did they just know she was your sweetheart?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, they knowed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You didn't tell them like an announcement?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no, 'cause she did very often come up to my place, 'course cut
, cut across the fields, see, take short cuts, like I did when I was, when I was a-courting of her, and perhaps sh-, she'd have one or two of her own friends come and meet me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you go for walks then, you and she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Nobody fussed if you went around together alone?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you have any kind of wedding party after the wedding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Nothing like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, couldn't afford it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You didn't have a honeymoon, I suppose?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 I know these questions sound silly, but we've just got to get the answers, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Up till then, had she been in service, up till the wedding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did she go on working at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, not after.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Never? Did she ever go back to any kind of work in her life?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You didn't join up, because that was your health, was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Were any of your children born before the end of the war, 1918?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 When the first child was born, was it a boy or a girl?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Boy.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Was he born at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How did your wife manage? Did she have a relative in to help her or anybody?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Her, her, her sister, as did live, as was married and live handy. When I said handy, what, three or four hundred yards away.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 That's quite a long way. That's not by country ways, is it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did she have a doctor or a nurse?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Only, only a nurse, and she had ee on her 21}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \super\insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 st}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223  birthday, and that was, that was because I \{BLANK\} fact, I met another, 'nother lad down at (..) \{BLANK\}
 when he had to go down and have his second medical and the chaps said to the fellow on the door (..) \{BLANK\} and I asked what I'd get for, oh, you'll get called up when all the rest is killed (..) \{BLANK\} open the gate and come in (..) \{BLANK\} dro
pped. Nurse was, nurse was there in the morning (..) \{BLANK\} nearly three weeks.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 So he was early, your boy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How much longer was it after he was born till the next child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Twelve month.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Was the next one a boy too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Girl.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 So you had a boy and a girl first. I was interested, you told Miss Sloan you always gave your money to your wife?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Is that usual round these parts, because in some parts of the country, it's very unusual ..
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes, but I always did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did people think it unusual or strange? Did they remark on it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 I didn't tell 'em.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Do you think they would have done if you'd told them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Never, no. I know some on 'em don't, some on 'em (..) have \{ILLEGIBLE\} ways bad with their wages.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 .. And keep too much for themselves. Did your wife give you some back when you gave it to her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no, unless, unless I wanted it, if I wanted anything (..) \{BLANK\}
 I knowed where to get un. Just, just the same when we, we, when we did go to market
 (..) with the cattle. The farmers always give us a shilling, see, and if there's any fish in the market after he'd sold the cattle, I did bring some fish home, if (?) there was no fish well I did(n't) give her the shilling and when I get home I didn't go
 without myself.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
When you were first married and you had your fifteen shillings a week, were your meals similar to what you'd had before, or did you eat better then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, they were about the same.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 When you had your children, and you were bringing them up, at that time did you talk about the way you were bringing them up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Not, not, not very often.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, you mean your wife just knew what to do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Had she had brothers and sisters herself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, oh, yes, there was twelve on 'em.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 All lived, did they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, but (..) \{BLANK\} dead now bar (?) (..) \{BLANK\} two boys and two girls.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What did you expect of your children when you brought them up? Do you think you brought them up like you were brought up ..
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you follow the same ways?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you and your wife have the same ideas about bringing up children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, we did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 When they were very little, before the end of the war, did you ever manage to go out at night and leave them with anybody?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, one of us, one of us be there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Was her mother living at that time when the first babies were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 She wasn't living? But your mother was still?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes. 'Cause, er, I can, I can mind when me wife's mother died 
in childbirth I was going in, in my then, and my mother (..) went into a certain house and this person, well we knowed her and, er, she said, you had a bad job happen last night, lady 'cross there lost her, lost her life (..) and left the twelve of them.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And you remember that, and then you married the daughter later on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And she couldn't remember that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 So your wife's poor mother died in childbirth?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 But you never left them with your own mother, the children and went away?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no, no, no.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Was that because you felt it would be wrong to do so, or did the chance not happen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Chance never happened.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And your wife never went out to work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 If you were worried about the children, or your wife was, did she ever worry about them at all, or did everything go easily?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well \{BLANK\} it did go all right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 She didn't have to go and ask advice from anyone about bringing them up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did she ever go to a clinic, like they have now, to get advice about feeding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you have a newspaper when you were married in your first home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, oh, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Can you tell me in those first three years of your marriage, 1915 to 1918, did you ever go out together and go visiting or anything 
like that with your wife?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Occasionally we did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Who would you visit, for example?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Perhaps visit one or, one or two of her sisters, as were living over at Sodbury.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What day would you go there, then?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well, of, of a Saturday night or a Sunday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did your wife cook mostly at midday or in the evening?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Evenings.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Like your own mother had done?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 When you got married and you didn't live with your parents any more, except for the fact that life is obviously differen
t when you are married, did your life go on in much the same kind of way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 When you were first married, before you moved to your big house, did you have a lodger there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 .. Or any relatives living with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, not then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did your wife have anyone helping her with the housework?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How did she arrange her day as far as the cleaning was concerned? Did she have certain jobs on certain days of the week in the house?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, not particular, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 She just fitted it in, did she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And did she do washing on a certain day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, well, it all, all depends, see on what she had to do.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 When did she usually do her work on the sewing machine? What time of the day would that be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, evenings.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did she read?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 It was the people of the older generation who didn't, wasn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did she ever read in the evenings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Not much.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 When you were first married, did you help her at all with the housework?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What sort of things did you do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Help wash up.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Any thing else?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Help shake, shake the carpets, 'twasn't carpets then, 'twas these here, er, mats.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you ever cook?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 She was ill, expecting or just had her baby, I, I should do that, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Could you cook anything you wanted to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You knew how to do it all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 After she had your first child, did she stop in bed for a few days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How long was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, sometimes a week, fortnight.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How did she manage for washing, then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Her sister'd come and do it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh the one who came in to help?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You didn't have to do washing yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you help at all with the children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What sort of things did you do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Especially nights.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What did you do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 See they wasn't short of anything such as in the clothes line. Oh, she had to come to Sodbury (..) he had a gramophone, see, and well 
I put the records on, get the children up round the table and listen to it and sometimes they'd go to sleep like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 While she was out getting what she needed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You had a gramophone, did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 When did you get that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, I couldn't be, ten, eleven year old.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 When you were about ten or eleven?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, when, er, in 1910 or 'll. I was, I was 'bout the first as had one.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, I was going to say, that's early for one, isn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes. "Cause I can remember taking mine up to school with evening class.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you ever actually put the children to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 When would you do that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 On nights.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Regularly?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Only only if Nan was away.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Only if she was away?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you ever take the children out when they were little?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Would you take them out in the pram?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, aye. That's the only thing we had.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You had a pram?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes. Pushchairs wasn't about then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you ever tell them stories?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you do anything else like any handiwork in the house, or repairing or was that done for you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
Oh, there wasn't much of that to be done in them days, and all the washing you had to do 'em by hand. No washing machines or wringers or anything, well we did have, I did get a wringer for to help her out see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You got her a wringer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Can you think of anything else you used to do with the children? When they were little, for example, did you ever feed them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes. yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You'd do that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Were there any things you didn't like doing for them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Not as I know of. I'd do anything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Even change them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 It's very interesting because .. Do you think when you took the children out in t
he pram, was that a usual thing to do, did other people do that too?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Sometimes, me brother-in-law did occasionally, they, they only had two, and \{BLANK\}
 see, his, his youngest didn't know when the, when the water did boil had to come down and ask mine, and used to come up and show her.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 It's funny the things you take for granted, which you have to learn.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you continue having the weekly bath, like you'd had in your own home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you bath the children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, I did if she, if Nan was out.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Was she quite often out in the evenings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no, only, only occasionally.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And if she was in did you give her a hand?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, yes, 'cause we had to hot, we'd hot the water, see, in the boiler.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 So it was quite a job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
Oh, yes, 'cause the boiler was just inside the d-, just inside the front door, as you might say, what, what a lot on 'em'd call in the hall, or what we'd call then in the passage, and, and we, I had to car-, carry it all me own, all, all me (..) \{BLANK\}
 especially, from the farm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, of course, because there were no taps in the farm area.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no, and (..) \{BLANK\} we had a, we had a pond, see, where I did get the water for washing or swilling down, aren't much of that done
 today, swilling down, after washing and that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What is that exactly?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Ooh, (..) Pour a lot of water down and, and, and get your broom to work.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, because there'd be a mess on the floor, you mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How often did you fetch the water, then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, every, every day for washing, for drinking.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You fetched it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did she ever fetch water?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, because it's heavy, isn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, 'cause well I had near, what, 150 yards to carry it, and a short cut at that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 That's a long way to carry water.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
Yes, and I know on one, on one occasion, well, I had a, I had a surprise. We had a dry time, then come a lot of rain, and when we were waiting for to get a drink of water, for to have a drink myself i
n a glass, well, when I got it out the tap, well, it was a case of throwing it away, 'cause the reason why, well the water from the coal yard and the lavatory, well, 'twas open (?) (..) drain. Had to sink (?) back into the well, 'cause the well wasn't abo
ve ten yards away from}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11999753\charrsid7686223  i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 t.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You might have got very ill if you hadn't realized.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Aye. (..) \{BLANK\} us, us, us a warning (..) \{BLANK\}
 I never had none (..) Day after, I went up (..) to my brother in law's and got it (..); Had to walk a bit further bu
t I didn't mind about that, long as I had some decent (..) stuff I'd rather have it out, out the little pond and that was land drainage water that would have been.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did your brother in law live quite close?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes. Somewhere, somewhere (..) on the same distance. Little bit farther of the two (?)
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Was that your wife's sister's husband?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
Yes. Oh, I and he worked together, for over twenty year, nineteen year on the one farm and I worked along with, him on other farm (..) along as before I had to go in the army.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And did she, that would be your sister in law ..
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 .. did she and your wife help each other out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes. yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 What sort of things did they do for each other?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 When they were having, having babies, see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 That was the sister you mentioned?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
Yes. (..) Although there was another person, see, as, as lived next door, then there was, that was one house in two, joining one another, then there was a little cottage close by, well, they come and help out any time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Were they related too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Ah, no, they was no relation, see, but they, they had a family well, three on 'em, but then they was, they was (..) \{BLANK\}
 my age and older, 'cause we went to school together for ..
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 I forgot to ask you, when you married your wife, her mother had passed on, hadn't she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Was her father still alive?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 When you wanted to marry her, did you go and ask her father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Oh, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Was that the custom then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes. "Cause she wasn't of age, see (..) \{BLANK\} and he had to sign the form.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And that was all right?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 How did you get along with him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 All right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Was he an easy man to get on with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You said in those days you didn't have enough money, you didn't have a party at the wedding like they do now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Who were the guests at the wedding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Well ..
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 You were just telling me, I was asking you about your spending money, I think, and you were going to tell me something. Do you know wha
t you were going to tell me?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, I was going to say (..) \{BLANK\}
 what we'd had this week's we had to pay for it next week, and (..) that's how we'd know how much 'tis we got to pay.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 I don't quite follow you. You'd have your wages on a ..
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes. Well, we, we, er, carry, only carry on the same, now as we started on and (..) \{BLANK\}
 the groceries we'd had this week, we know how much 'tis for me to pay next week, you see, that's how they carry on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And you started off like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you ever belong to a library?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, no.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 
You were just telling me, I was asking you about your spending money, I think, and you were going to tell me something. Do you know what you were going to tell me?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes, I was going to say (..) \{BLANK\}
 what we'd had this week's (..) we had to pay for next week, and (..) that's how we'd know how much 'tis we got to pay.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 I don't quite follow you. You'd have your wages on a ..
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes. Well, we, we, er, carry, only carry on the same, now as we started on and (..) \{BLANK\}
 the groceries we'd had this week, we know how much 'tis for me to pay next week, you see, that's how they carry on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 And you started off like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8593187 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 Did you ever belong to a library?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13439349 S  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15617501\charrsid7686223 No, no.
\par }}