{\rtf1\adeflang1025\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\adeff0\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang2057\deflangfe2057{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}{\f38\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f39\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f41\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f42\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f43\fbidi \froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}
{\f44\fbidi \froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f45\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f46\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f48\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}
{\f49\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f51\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f52\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f53\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f54\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}
{\f55\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f56\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden 
Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs20 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}}
{\*\latentstyles\lsdstimax156\lsdlockeddef0}{\*\revtbl {Unknown;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid798420\rsid1141354\rsid1198299\rsid2370612\rsid3504647\rsid4195682\rsid4524907\rsid4683543\rsid4988994\rsid5709036\rsid5785297\rsid7484140\rsid9402170\rsid9643939\rsid12544460\rsid13370131
\rsid13787969\rsid13982660\rsid14353490\rsid16392620\rsid16462126}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 11.0.0000;}{\info{\title Information about interviewee}{\author SEENU}{\operator lhorto}{\creatim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min10}
{\revtim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min10}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords49950}{\nofchars284715}{\nofcharsws333998}{\vern24613}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 http://schemas.microsoft.com/office/word/2003/wordml}{\xmlns2 urn:schemas-mi
crosoft-com:office:smarttags}}\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1800\margr1800\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0\ltrsect 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\donotembedsysfont0\donotembedlingdata0\grfdocevents0\validatexml1\showplaceholdtext0\ignoremixedcontent0\saveinvalidxml0\showxmlerrors1\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace180
\dgvspace180\dghorigin1800\dgvorigin1440\dghshow1\dgvshow1\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\splytwnine\ftnlytwnine\htmautsp\nolnhtadjtbl\useltbaln\alntblind\lytcalctblwd\lyttblrtgr\lnbrkrule\nojkernpunct\rsidroot13787969 \fet0
{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}\ilfomacatclnup0\ltrpar \sectd \ltrsect\linex0\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ltrpar
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid16392620 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\ul\insrsid16392620\charrsid16072257 Information about interviewee}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid16392620 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid16392620\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tx2057\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid16392620 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392620\charrsid16072257 Date of birth}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392620 
   \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392620\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392620  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1141354 1892}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392620\charrsid16072257 

\par Gender}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392620           \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392620\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392620  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1141354 M}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392620 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392620\charrsid16072257 Marital status}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392620 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392620\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid16392620  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1141354 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392620\charrsid16544153 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392620\charrsid16072257 Occupation}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392620 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392620\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392620  
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1141354 Foreman}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392620\charrsid16072257 
\par Geographic region}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392620 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392620\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392620  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1141354 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Gillingham{\*\xmlclose}, {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}Kent}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392620\charrsid16072257 {\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
\par }\pard \ltrpar\qj \fi-490\li518\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin518\itap0\pararsid16392620 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Could you give me your full name please?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. Frank Lyle Victor Waldegrave.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 And your present address?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 435 Canterbury Street, Gilingham, Kent.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 And you're a married man?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh I should think so. Very much.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Could you tell me what year you were married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. August the fifteenth 1915, on a Sunday. Which is our - our anniversary is a fortnight's time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 And the year you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I was born day after my wedding - I mean in 1890 - in 1892. August the sixteenth 1892.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Could you tell me where you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes, I was born in the parish of St Mary Stratton, Portsmouth.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How many years did you live in that house where you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh - I was - moved from there when I was a baby.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How old?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh I don't know really because I - my mother was a daughter of a Naval - Naval officer who h
ad transferred at the time - my father was a local employed dockyard worker and my mother had gone up to her parents in Wales and took us and I think when they returned from there they found a new house or new home for us to go to. In }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13787969\charrsid2370612 P}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 ortsmouth. In - in t
he same area really. But - came back to Portsmouth so I could have been anything I suppose perhaps eighteen months-two years old when I left that first house. But came back into the same area so it doesn't really signify a thing from the point of view of 
addresses because they may not even exist now anyway. No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How long were you in Wales?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh only - only a short while. About - perhaps a year - nine months or a year perhaps.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Where was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Holyhead.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was that with relations in Wales?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
No, no, my mother you see. That's where my mother - I was a child in arms when you've got to visualize that, and therefore I have not the slightest recollection whom we stopped with but - you know what I mean for some lodgings or - accom}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13787969\charrsid2370612 mo}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 dation of some sort my grandfather found for - for my mother at that period.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Then you moved back to Portsmouth, somewhere near where you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes, yes, now of course we can come back to that now in a more substantial manner in as much as I lived i
n this area for about - eight - nine years. Yes, about eight years. And we moved to the outskirts of Portsmouth which was rather rural at that time, a place called Millton, on the outskirts of Portsmouth that is now all embodied into Portsmouth as a whole
 
but - that particular movement took me into a - a sphere of life totally different more or less from what I was you see, in as much that as a child - going to school there, in the original home and then going out into this rural area, coming from that - I
 had to come into Portsmouth again to another school which was nearer to my new residence - my way of life was changed as a child from being - what can I say - more or less a street }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13787969\charrsid2370612 arab}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612  or that sort of thing of playing round the streets and so forth into and becoming acquaintable with the countryside and - amateur cho}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid13787969\charrsid2370612 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
rboy in the old Milton church which doesn't exist any more and - also I - began to play football. Just prior to that I decided to learn to smoke, I - I had fag, that's - that's one of my - one
 of my bad points. Yes. But then - that - that was until I was - until June 1903. That happened in the 1902/03. I was just ten and bordering on eleven years of age at that time we moved from there to Plymouth. Our first transitional move. But during - may
 
I say this - during my early days in - as a child - in Portsmouth I had one - we - my - my brother and I, we have one very outstanding, what can I say - look - on thing we looked forward to and regularly every summer holiday was spent with our grandparent
s at Cowes in the Isle of Wight.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How old were you when you went to Milton from Portsmouth?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Near enough I suppose, nine - eight - eight - between eight and nine.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 So you weren't many years in Milton?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, no, before we moved - moved away
 from - my father went abroad you see - to - to the Cape and when he came back he was transferred from Portsmouth docky rd to Plymouth }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13787969\charrsid2370612 b}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 ackyard which was the Naval - the Naval town, of course, you'd probably know all about that anyway. Well - anyway - when
 he - he she promotion with in his own sphere, there was no vacancy when he came home from the Cape at his home baged yard so he had to choose between Devonport dockyard and Shoerness dockyard, that's where the two vacancies - vacancies were and he should
 
have chose Devonport dockyard which is now all embodied by Plymouth. It is Plymouth. And - he - of course we naturally moved with him. And that was where - I - my education went further - were further on you see, went there in 1903 - in June 1903, I didn'
t
 start school until the end of the - summer holiday which was the end of August. Oh yes, I had goes long holiday. And - I went to a - a - of course beard schools we called them then, they wasn't - they weren't, you know, secondary day, secondary and all t
hat sort of thing, they didn't exist. No. In on years - probably as Technical school would be secondary school. Anyway -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Where did you live in Plymouth?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Where did we live then? Well I actually lived in Cecil Avenue at first near to the school I w
ent to and then we moved out to a new part of - development of Plymouth to Old Park Avenue, Old Park Road I should say which was on the Old Park Estate. That was being developed, about time, having new roads. And - I suppose I lived in Cecel Avenue, what 
- two years, eighteen months - two years at the most. And then I found it more convenient to get a - furth}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13787969\charrsid2370612 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
r afield and that was that. That's where we moved to. And then if - from there I came to Gillingham Kent. But still, in between times you'll want some more information won't you or will you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How long did you stay in that house in Plymouth?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Nine and a half years roughly. In October 1912 I actually left. I knew that. Either - either October the sixth I think 1912.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Then were?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I went -
 we came to - to Gillingham. My father and I went into lodgings. He was - further promoted to come to Chatahm Dockyard you see so we - he - he and I went into lodgings whilst the rest of the family were - waiting for us to find - father to find a home for
 
them and I come - I had the - left school obviously at that time and I was employed as a employed in - as a ship, yacht and beat builder. I had a shop first and - I - found employment, well I had already got employment already placed for me on the River M
e
dway, at Rochester. So when I - that's why I came up with my father from Plymouth ahead of the others, of the others. And - that - started towards my tenty - twentieth year then you see. 1912. Right. 1913 I'd be twenty-one - I remember my twenty-first bir
thday well. Anyway - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 So you stayed in lodgings?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Yes. Yes, the family came up several weeks afterwards anyway, a very short time, it doesn't really mean a thing does it. Not in that sense. There's a - got a lot of elimination to do here you 
know. Anyway, coming - coming down to other point of view of movement - of course they all had to go in lodgings when they first came, then my father got a house near our park and we all moved up there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Could you give me the address of that house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Yes. I was going to say, 32 Cleve Road, I believe it is. At that time was, you know, very well - I was going to say very strongly connected in political - local political world he was at that time, no not that time, yes he was, when I got married he was
 but not when he moved there of course. Became a town councillor but - of course, I'm a - I'm bringing my father into it now because - because you see he was a man of vast experience and - in public life one way and another. I've moved - I've moved from P
lymouth to Gillingham, I've told you were I've lived in Gillingham.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Then you got married from that house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 From that house, well from my wife - from that house I went about ten mile for the church.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Where did you move when you were first married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Well I took my wife up the Naval base up in Scotland where - up there. I got there before she was, I came down to marry her and took her back with me. I was up there - oh a good twelve month.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Where was that base?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I actually - the Invergordon mail base on Murrayfirth but we lived about two and a half miles outside, a place called Thorpefirth.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You were there for one year?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 We were there for one year. We lived in a - in a crofters cottage, walls about that thick you know. Pump ou
tside to pump the water. Just over the roadway which was the Great North Road and into the - into the firth and that's how we were situated. We got a - a little cottage, single storey you know. And eight years ago that was still there but had a tin roof o
n it and that was a garage.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You went up to see it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Sentimental. Nostalgic. Anyway - and that is - this is - finally.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 And you stayed there for a year?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 A year. Now the wife was having our first child. We came back, she came back before 
me, I stopped on a little longer and I came back and joined her and - and I - back into Chatham dockyard Naval dockyard. After that - of course we were in the midst of - first world war, 1918. Whilst we were there, up at the Naval base we saw some results
 
of that war in as much as we saw one of our cruisers blown up. H.N.S. Natal. We saw her come out of the water - lift - oh I don't know - half of the crew were lost, there were a party of children from the shore, I suppose there was a hundred and fifty chi
ldren and - young people and children aboard having a Christmas party. We - we saw it happen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 It must have caused a terrific stir in the village?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well they - it did so because I - I was working up in the - up in the King George V another battle s
hip further up the harbour. We heard this terrific bang you know and - three explosions actually. We gazed down the Firth and we could see this - plume of smoke rising, then we saw this ship go up in the air and start to heel over one way and then go righ
t
 over and - we were on a floating dock up there, we had to sink the floating dock down to water level to - to - nothing should happen, the battleship was in it and we got ashore and I chased off to see how mother was, my wife - and - I passed people in th
e village being taken down to the jetty to watch, get what information he could, he was stopping at the big house but - oh - no, doesn't matter anyway -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was it a party of local children that was on board?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes, yes, yes. They were there to entertain the local children from - Cromarty.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 It must have been a terrible blow?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
It was. Yes. Yes. Anyway it was put down to spies you know, some traitors. Anyway that - that's what they thought and I still think it could have been because some of the things happened, not only there but in other parts of - Naval bases. However -

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How long did you stay in Chatham after you'd gone back there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Chatham. Well - yes I'd been to Sheer - I had - being war time and one thing and another, I went to Shee
rness for a period just for a month or two doing work I was moving myself round with others. Mother, wife, still remained at home. I had to go to various other places where my - services were needed and - including - I came even this way, right at the end
 of the war I came this way to Harwich on the - what they call the Harwich Patrol out of Harwich Port on repairs and that sort of thing. But anyway that's - and that led me up to 1919.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Where was your wife living during that time when you were traveling round?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Oh we had our own home, yes, that's right. We - we - we - first of all of course naturally when you're - when you're first married you've got to find somewhere to live and - we had rooms somewhere, well of course that doesn't matter really, 
would be such small concern. We were able to get a house, somebody who had lost his wife and his - was emigrating abroad and letting his house for a short while, eighteen months and then we moved up to - took a house on the - Watling Street on what is now
 
the A.2. And - we had from - 19 - 1918, so from 19 - 1915 - Scotland, 1916 I worked Gillingham but we moved out of Gillingham across the road into Chatham, now that - this is one of the peculiarities of boundaries you see, there about a pavement outside t
h
e curb is - and the lamp, street lamp outside, all - oil lighted mind you - no it wasn't - they used to pull the - pipeline for the gas come up through the - the mantle - and - they used to do outside of our house, the lamp, well that came under the borou
gh of Gillingham which we'd just moved from into Chatham. So - one of the pecul}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13787969\charrsid2370612 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
arities of boundaries. But - anyhow, that is something that - that I come to now to a stop because 1918/19 as I say I was at varying degrees of employment, I wanted to get away 
from four walls of the dockyard I wanted to get experience further afield and I went - I went in the Marine Service in 1920 - early 1920.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I just want to got some details about your family.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh - what my family as they are now? My - my father and mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You've told me why you made most of the moves you did but why was it that your parents moved out of Portsmouth into the outskirts?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh because - the - well the environment wasn't all that - it's more like going from the - Shellhaven near 
- meanest streets of Colchester and comin}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13787969\charrsid2370612 g out to the suburbs. Became su}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
burbia that's what I mean, that is the reason why, oh you see father bought this house and the one we were living in apparently was rented so he bought this one which was near to Ports
mouth football ground actually and all new estate thereright on top of football ground which I used to scramble in sometimes free of charge when the policeman wasn't looking. Anyway -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 So he was providing a better place for his family to live?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Ye
s, yes, that's right, yes. He - he - you see, he'd attained promotion. Obviously his income was - was increased so he - able to - buy or - or install us into a better - in the better type of home really. That is what boils down to. The old - terraced type
 of home that you got in those days where you - where you walked off the pavement into the - into the front room was gone then, you go the bay window and little bit of front gar}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13787969\charrsid2370612 de}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 n you see, which all came about added the rough look to the place.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How many brothers and sisters did you have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I - have - I know eight of us in family so must be five brothers and three sisters. Four brothers and three sisters.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Five boys including you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. Five boys including me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I want to know their names and the order in which they were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Oh well - I may - I told I've you I've got five - I had five - I had six brothers but one died, I remember him dying when we were youngsters, when we - I was about - he was about five and I was about six or seven but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I'd like to know where he came in the order of the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes, yes, within - within the order of sequence. My brother - let's see -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 The oldest?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Now you know you've got a hell of a lot of writing to do here, this is the day
 of age - of age when they used to give us host names for Christian names. I mean - a number. So had the wife and all too. We've got three each my older - older brother and my - myself. Well he's alive and he's - he's eighty next - in September And he's s
ix foot three, very athletic but - quite likely, yes, yes.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13787969\charrsid2370612  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes, now - Horace Albert Harry. H.A.H. H.A.H. Horace Albert Harry.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 He's the oldest?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 He's the eldest.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Who comes next?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yours - yours -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How many years were there between you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 A year and - ten months roughly.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Who came after you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
I always argue this with my sisters as to who came between us because Bertie having died and my other brother that I told you died when I was about six they - I take - I - he must have 
been older than my sister Gwendoline but - that's what I think. I only know him as Bertie and that's as far as I know because as I say dying as a child.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 So Gwendoline came next did she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. Gwendoline.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How many years after you was she born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 They were all - on - on dates of birth now dear.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Gwendoline was about three years younger than you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Who came after Gwendoline?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 May. May. May would - she'd be much about - very much about two years between. I - I thi
nk you can say almost a cycle of two years really, the family came along. I think - say she'd be - she'd be about - she is still alive - she's - she's seventy-two I think. And then - come my - brother Harry.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Another Harry?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, well you see that'
s the - the composition of that first name of my oldest brother - my elder brother I should say - is such that it involves actually - three family names. My oldest uncle - my father's older brother was Horatio, he was called Horace. My father's called Alb
ert - Albert Edward. An my mother's only brother was called Harry so you - you have - obviously the first son that came along - Horace -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 And they repeated them later?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. Yes, they are because Harry - Harry is - repeated after that as a first nam
e - first Christian name. Yes. Anyway - he - he's seventy - seventy-one. Yes, seventy-one last birthday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Then after Harry?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Reginald - Reginald Fred. Reginald.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 And after Reginald?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Alec. And - and after him Cicily - Cicily Irene. God knows how they got that name but still - yes. Got the lot now.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How old was your father when you were born, do you know roughly?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Now let's do a bit of arithmetic shall we?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Do you know the date when he died?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I know the date when he died 
and I know he died when he was seventy-six but I also know a better date than that. It was nearer to his birthday which was early April 1925 he was sixty. Now you take that and do your arithmetic on that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Where did he come from originally?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well he was a Portsmouth man really. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 He'd been born and brought up there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Yes. Of course I could come back further in the background and I can go back to 1790 but - but thereby hangs the tale you see, I saw something yesterday in Colchester that rather shook me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
What do you call window, glass window in St Botolphs Priory in the church, priory church. First thing we walked in the porch was glass panel there was my name at the bottom.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Your own name?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 My name. Waldegrave.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did your family come from round here originally?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
We don't know. Waldegrave were mentioned in several publications by Alice Seaton. I think it is - following the Pilgrim Fathers when they were going across the water to - and she was from
 - well this - the heroine was a - a person who was being brought up in a household where there were certain other bodies you know and of course they were more or less Puritans rather than anything else, the pilgrims. You've still got that on haven't you?
 
Anyway - but - that - that name of Waldegrave occurred several times in the book and - they say there - and young William Waldegrave hadn't turned up to - for the dance you know, they were going to give this dance for the harvest or something like that an
yway and led me to think that either Suffolk or Norfolk, in that area. But - of course the - the family - the family name exists and - Teuton Mendip is the home, family home in Somerset. And - and funny thing -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What is the tale you said hung}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13787969\charrsid2370612  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 by the 1790?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Well because - my - my great grandfather's name was William. William. And it was given the name of William Waldegrave - a male. They didn't give birth certificates or marriage lines or anything like that. They just simply entered it in the regist
er as a birth and the male Waldegrave. There were no parentage. And it would appear - my great grandfather could have been illegitimate chold because at that time there were - there was Naval Captain by that name, there was also another Waldegrave, a youn
g
 Naval office in the - in the - in Portsmouth, part of the French Navy over, that period round the French - the Armada time, not the Armada, no, the - the - Napoleon Bonaparte time and - they were building up a fleet at Portsmouth by that time and these p
eople were - that name wasn't known to be there, amongst - at Nel}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13787969\charrsid2370612 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 on}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid13787969\charrsid2370612 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
s time see. And - I have - I had an uncle who tried very very much to go into this and I have a screed at home, about that long, and he - he did this because when he retired from G.P.O., t
hat's one of my father's younger brothers, when he retired from the G.P.O? he was a - cashier of - Post Office saving bank and also con - a certain controller and - he went in as a - boy clerk and came out top of a - and he - and he spent his time trying 
t
o trace - the family name. And as far as he could get was back to the 1790's to this - I've mentioned now. You see it could be - as he said, what's in a name? There's the query. Now that's how he ended it, with a query. And he - in his - coming through th
e hall of the - from his, well he knew his father and his grandfather.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I'd like to know the details about the jobs your father did?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 My father - yes, well - going back really my - my great grandma, he was apprenticed into the dockyard as a shipwri
ght. My great grandfather. This is the one I'm talking about, the start of our family, you see. And from him - my father's grandfather you see, now - my father - apparently the generations from then on went into the dockyard because that was a natural emp
l
oyment area into a Naval - Naval station and - he - he went in as a - a smith. Not - not necessarily a blacksmith. No, a smith meant steel - steel bars and all that sort of thing you know, generally known - it was only the craft of smith - smithing. My fa
ther. Of course, as I told you - he - he was quite a - quite an energetic man. Of course he always wanted to get ahead, well he - although he stuttered he was good a elocution, he was a gold }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13787969\charrsid2370612 
medallist}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612  at one of the societies in Portsmouth in his time but - 
and he won quite a few prizes for elocution although he stuttered. When he got excited, mind you, that's when he stuttered - mainly. But, however - that's what he became, an apprentice in the dockyard. And then I - apprentice smith, yes. Then from that - 
he - he - I suppose in those days they may have had what they call school education, further education, inside for apprentices. This - I know they've had it all the time I can remember in my lifetime so I expect they did in his lifetime, perhaps it's pur}
{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13787969\charrsid2370612 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 ue
d a little stronger now well they call it college now rather than a school but - yes, I expect the - must have passed his - as I say, he was a go-ahead man and he was into everything and - he went recording which meant to say that from - manual labour he 
w
ent to a white collar job you see. And that meant going round the various - works in the yard and taking times of - and numbers of the men employed and their hours of - to - taking the various jobs. What they call recording the work. Still - to compute th
e wages of the men. And - and assess the value of the job they're doing. And -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Had he served his time as a smith?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes, oh yes, served his apprenticeship you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Had he been a smith for sometime before he became a recorder?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I think he
 came out - must come out a journeyman you see, an apprentice must finish his time. You see. He come out as a journeyman and then you get his - as these }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13787969\charrsid2370612 opportunities}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612  occur and you - keen enough to go for it you go for them. Anyway that's what he did and -
 and then later stage when he became old enough to take it, I suppose round about the middle twenties, he must have taken his examinations for - for - inspectorship you see, which is a dockyard officer which is equivalent to one stripe in the Navy if you 
like and you go round - deputing the work to people and so forth and tell them how to do the job too if necessary or they got charge of them under him who should know and could tell the charge}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid13787969\charrsid2370612 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 man - he would pass on his technical knowledge to his - to his u
nder - understudy who would - then - you know, give it the workmen. Well anyway - that - that's what he became you see. And that's when he became - and he had then to go abroad because no vacancy for self in Portsmouth. And the - this vacancy came abroad 
so he took it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Where was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
In Capetown - Simonstown Dockyard, the Cape. South Africa. And - he was only out there a short time because his health suffered, he had malaria badly and they invalided him home, well as I say, he came home and ther
e wasn't a vacancy at Portsmouth, still wasn't a vacancy so he had to choose another yard because I told you about the offer of Sheeness or Devonport. And - my - grandparents, my maternal grandparents were - although they - he had been - as a Naval office
r he had been at Sheerness - he advised my father, no don't take that because - Devonport's a much bigger yard, you'll get more chance there and of course that's where we went. That's how he came there. All clear?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did he carry on doing the same work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Oh he - yes, he had passed in the meantime, had taken another examination for further advancement but - the vacancy hadn't occurred - 'til some time afterwards. Because you have to - dead man's shoes really you wait for you know. And - anyway - you ge
t recommendation marks. He'd only just been }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13787969\charrsid2370612 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
n his job, what - eighteen months when he took this examination and - and fellow who was booked to beat him - well they thought would have the job, got it because he'd been holding the other job for substantive 
rank below for so many years that he automatically more or less had to go up on recommendation marks. My father had to wait. Then he became master smith at Chatham. That - that was when we - when he came to Chatam.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 So he went back to smithing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Well he - he was still - still - still in charge of smithing, it was all smithery. Oh yes, all the way through, but of course he'd been up the coalfields North - working on mineralogy and - coal and all that sort of thing for the Admiralty. No, as - for a
 sideline more or less because of his knowledge in this sort of thing and they - sent him away on these sort of jobs which they do. All sorts of things you can get with - if you go into the services with the right approach.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You can develop in any direction?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Yes. Anyway - that's - and he retired from that job as I told you in - April 1925 which you've got there. And that makes - that takes him back to what - 1925, sixty - makes him about 1865, that it. You got that worked to have you? Well twenty-f
ive and forty.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did he have any part time jobs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did he - oh he was mainly voluntary. Oh he - yes, he did, I suppose you call it part time, not part time in as}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13787969\charrsid2370612  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 much as - that - he would - he was - secretary of they call it Chief Ranger of the Forr
esters, which was a - one of the orders. I expect he got - well I know they do get paid on - application basis. Now I mean to say - the Odd}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13787969\charrsid2370612 -fellow}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 s and people like that pay their secretary application although he's - that's only a sideline.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 So that was a job in that sense?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Yes, well it's a big job too because - if you're ambitious say as way my father was you went into it, you know, from just an ordinary member you go up the tree and you put all these decorations on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Your father sounds a remarkable man.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
He was. His name is still well recalled by a person who was down in Portsmouth, last year - she - talking about it only a few months ago, he says, I saw your father's name on the big board in such and such a hall, you know, what he was f
ollowing after it. He was with the - with the Odd}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13787969\charrsid2370612 -fellow}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
s. At the same time he was also, I'm sorry to say, I don't know whether this - an Orangeman in Worshipful Master - and Orange Free Lodge. How he come to be a member - I - God only knows, you know, I don't. And then - this is interesting you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You said he had difficulty finding work because there weren't vacancies for him, was there ever a period when he was actually out of work?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. No, no, no, he had to remain static.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 He had a job all the time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
All the time, oh yes, he wasn't out of work, no. No, he never knew what unemployment was. I'm the - I mean to say, I'm the only one that ever knew what unemployment was in my family at the present time anyway.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How old was your mother when you were born, do you know how old she was when she died in 1941?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
I think she was seventy when she died in 1941 - she was sixty-nine wasn't she. Let me see - seventy - seventy - no. And forty-one. '41 - yes, '41, I think that at least twenty-
nine years off of - off of nineteen hundred isn't it, so must be an odd one somewhere, be about - seventy - 1871. She was a lot younger than my father you see. Well they did marry young in those days didn't they really. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14353490\charrsid2370612 Marriageable}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612  age of women were - wer
e more notable in those days - young - from sixteen onwards. Was - weren't they really. It seems to change - change like a graph isn't it, goes up and down. It travels.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Your impression is that you were married younger then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh I think so, yes, I think they did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Where did she come from?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well - I suppose she must have been a Portsmouth woman because you see her father was a Naval - L}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14353490\charrsid2370612 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 eutenant in the Navy you see and - I suppose they went wherever he went you see and in those days when th
ey used to do seven years commission abroad and china and places like that not though they do now and can fly home in about two days, some on a - on a sailing ship. Or sailing and steam for that matter, yes, but - he was a grand old man too, grandfather C
ripp.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Would she have gone with him as a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. No, they wouldn't have gone - on no they wouldn't have trave}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14353490\charrsid2370612 l}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 led with him, oh no, families never went abroad with 'em. As they'd done in the - in - in the - what can I say, in the - ordinary trai
ning line but not in - in R.N. - Naval first. They might have if they were posted to a station where there was a shore billet. Now might - one of the family - one family might join 'em on a shore billet but coming on a trader of some sort but they would n
ever travel with them.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 So you think your mother had stayed in Portsmouth all the time as a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I should assume that. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did she work at all before she married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. Yes, she did. Of course work then was a totally different c
haracter what it is now. Dressmaking. And can put that on a comparison with hairdressing, really, as I look at it. The }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14353490\charrsid2370612 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
 dress}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14353490\charrsid2370612 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
maker's wanted everywhere, you made up - you made your own dresses, you made everything you wanted - you - created fashion}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14353490\charrsid2370612 s yourself. Where - where - whe}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 reas now the other - on the other foot now, you can buy all that readymade so you've turned to hairdressing and make that your fashion. Now isn't that a - is a fact. Yes, I think so.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was your mother a dressmaker?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 She was dressmaker.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did she work at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
No, I - I - no she worked for Handley and Page as far as I remember, being told. That was where she used to work, Handley and Page in Portsmouth or in Southsea which is quite a - you know, notable place. One of 
the fashionable shops and of course they did all their - all their work in those places. I don't suppose, they went when they're about fourteen I suppose.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did she do an apprenticeship do you know?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes. Three years I think.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did she stay there until she got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I should imagine she did. I should imagine so.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did she work after she was married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well I don't think she had time. Do you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Before she had her family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I don't think so. I - I rather fancy - I think my
 father had the same thought I had, I thought my wife when she married - my wife used to play the piano for dancing and that sort of thing you know and I - when she got married she - she was asked to play. She asked my permission, I said, I'd rather not. 
So - I - in other words if I couldn't keep her well nobody - no more dancing. And father had my approach, I - I had my old chap's approach you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You don't remember her working later on in life perhaps at a part time job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, no, she took - sh
e took - not part time, not for employment anyway but she did take interest in my father's - functions and that sort of thing, in as much as she became - attached to - I believe she was President of the ladies branch of the Oddfellowes - the Forresters an
d then in later years after that of course she holding in the various capacities on the committees and that sort of thing, But other than that, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 She didn't take in sewing or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh no, no, no. Not to my knowledge. Mind you I wouldn't say
 she didn't have enough to do in sewing. Now when you've got a family coming up you had to make - you know, you had to cut - what they called cut-me-downs in those days, you know, I suppose they would call it - reference is to it made sometimes these days
, we had to makeshift with the clothing from one to the other.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did she make all the families clothes herself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I should imagine she'd make quite a bit. Yes. Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 But she definitely altered them for the younger ones?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh, she may have done, I don't know, I wouldn't know. I wouldn't know about that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 That's what you meant by cut-me-downs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well yes, I should say probably she cut - cut down some of father's old trousers to make us a pair of knickers you know but - well being - 
being in the line and of course it saves - save a - the - the wages and - housekeeping money.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You moved around quite a bit didn't you, I wanted to concentrate on one house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes, well -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Which house do you remember best up to school leaving age?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
That's difficult really because - although I was so young I remember particularly about the time that Percy died our - back of our back garden fronted on - came on to the school playground and we used to get over that wall into the playground you
 know as kids. Now I remember that well.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 That was the house in Portsmouth?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 In Portsmouth.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Shall we talk about that one because you were there up to the age of eight or nine weren't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. Well - yes, yes, yes. We - that - my schoo
l life particularly I can remember then going to school as a child, going down the road and going into the gate and - standing in the playground and - white wings they never grow weary, one of the tunes they used to play you know, and you used to have to 
d
o your drill to this. And - about - each - each school had a little fife band you know, to play music for - for - for - well - we used to have little marching. I - I know we used always play football in the - in the playground because - it - was a boys pl
ayground you see, always had - on school}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14353490\charrsid2370612 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
wall, it had it chalked out, I'm able to picture it now, on both ends and a - no matter how many played it was always - always two or three balls there to kick of some sort.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14353490\charrsid2370612 
 Was all the hard - all hard as}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 phalt playground. But sill used to go over you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Let's talk about that house then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well there you're trying to -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Can you remember how many rooms there were in that house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well I suppose there must have been - must have been three bedrooms, must have been three bedroom}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14353490\charrsid2370612 s. Extremel}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
y small. Extremely small. And yet I had diphtheria in the back bedroom, I remember that because the doctor come out to me on the Christmas time, I had the - you know, they had the Christmas tree downstairs and - and - t
alking about it you know, I used to see it - the Christmas cracker came off the tree you know. I can - I can remember that. But - and also - it would be a school wall, the wall of our gar}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14353490\charrsid2370612 d}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 en, the school wall when they - closed, us youngsters got my younger
 brother and tied him by the leg pulling him up the wall and we found it out and I - well I often thought Cedric could have been - what bought on this brain damage - yes. That' - that's what I often thought since, couldn't - not necessarily so but could h
ave been. And just hanging there and pulling him up bay a rope round his ankles, pulling him up h}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14353490\charrsid2370612 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
ad downwards up over this wall. But then you - but then let - probably let him go, I don't know whether they did let him go or not but I always remember that e
vent because we - because we used to scramble over that wall you see so much and living in this house as I say he died in there and I can remember just before the funeral when - of course it was a white coffin you know, white coffin. And - and on trestles
 
in the - in the front room, a big black dog came in through the front door - the door - front door was open - and se - I can see that black - big black dog come running - now I - I can picture it even now. I told you that - the terraced houses opening on 
the pavement you see. Yes - so - you see that is - that's the style of life I led.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You said there were three bedrooms in your house in Portsmouth?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Must have been three bedrooms because after all there was - there are four - four children, two of
 each sex. No, five children really, one of them carrying one and - five. Now what I meant to say, at that particular time before we had moved on. You see two were born in Devon you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How many receptions rooms were there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well I suppose the old fashioned front room where the grand piano, it wasn't a grand piano, only my - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 There was a piano there though was there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, I don't think they had a piano. My father used to play the organ a little bit. And he had an old cottage organ. A
nd my mother used to - used to have a go at it and peddle away. Anyway - yes, now I think of - of coming back to be front room. On either side a kitchen and a scullery as far as - if you call it by on those terms these days. Of course kitchen becomes a di
n
ing room and dining room becomes a scullery doesn't it? Kitchen - kitchen is a scullery in those terms of those days where the cooking is done and all the other chores. You had a living room or dining room and a front room. So really I suppose it boil dow
n to a six roomed house. And as far as I - I remember, no indoor sanitation. No bathroom of course, obviously.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Would the W.C. be outside?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 There'd be an outside toilet you see. I don't mean up top of the garden so much. Around the back - adjacent.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 But there'd be one for each house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 There would be on what they call a - a back addition wouldn't it, these terems of building - back addition.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did anyone else besides your parents and brothers and sisters live in the house, any relatives or lodgers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Not at that time, no. No, not at that time. I can't think of anybody anyway.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Were there alter on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes, there was later on. When we went to Plymouth for a start. One of my - one of my father's sisters, who was a spinster and we t
ook her with us when we went to Plymouth because she was - she had no home. My paternal grandmother had died. And - my father undertook to look after his sister as well as his own family, which was a strain in a way because our family had grown and -

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 She wasn't working?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
No, she wasn't working, no. No, she - not too intelligent really. She lived with us - she lived with us all the time in Plymouth and until we left Plymouth and we found we couldn't really - or mother couldn't really see the sense
 in keeping her and for a time - one of the others had her and they found a home for her in Port - back in Portsmouth. She was back m}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14353490\charrsid2370612 ore or less amongst her own - a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 lthough she'd been from such a long time but - back amongst her own people. That's only by the by 'cos that's intruding on the other - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 In that house in Portsmouth did your mother pay anyone to help in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. No, money wasn't all that - forthcoming in those days you know. Yes, yes, yes well there wouldn't - there wouldn't b
e day line no, because the generations are very very much apart. There's no doubt about that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Sometimes people had people in to do the washing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes, I know, well of course there again you see unless you were in the position you couldn't afford t
his. I suppose a - you have a person in to do washing it'd be - two - couple of shillings }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14353490\charrsid2370612 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612  eighteen}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14353490\charrsid2370612  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 pence or two shillings, so - sounds a devilish little but - a lot in those days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 So your mother did the washing at home did she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes. Yes. Oh wasn't any machine then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 But she didn't send it out either?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well - there were laundries of a sort I suppose but I don't recollect anything like that. I should say no, she did it herself.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You say your mother made some of your clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 She made - she made some, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 When she bought them did she buy them new or second}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14353490\charrsid2370612  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 hand?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Oh she bought them new. Yes, but only on rare occasions. Like a Norfolk suit you know for me or - well I suppose we were small and that she used to make - 
sailors jumpers you know with the collar. Of course you - you got to - you've got to take a line back if you can pictorially to the - to the children of that day, how - how best can I describe it in Queen Vic's late day you know you see children, or somet
i
mes on - if you've got picture postcards relative to that particular date or in something - publications have been made of sixty years of Queen or - all that kind of thing, you will probably see how we used to be dressed those days. And they give you some
 idea of what and how - they were - able to come by them.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did your sisters wear pinafores for instance?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes, yes, yes. Yes, they did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did your father make shoes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, no. No. There's no need to have that, round the corner a forge fo
r the horses. No, but - no - no joking. No. The shoes were - of course they used to wear out pretty quickly I suppose when - same as they do with everything but - they were - fairly reasonable as I remember in prices even as a - boy of ten or twelve I wel
l
 remember boots and shoes were very very reasonable. You could go and get a pair of boys boots from - well, get a pair of man's boots for four and eleven, you see, so - when you look back on that or - my - my father did repair them. I've - I've repaired o
ur family shoes for years, I did, and I got fed up of it and - well circumstances became different and - we - they had to go out to be repaired or else we - we'd have to buy ourselves new ones.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 He had the material to repair shoes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh you could th
em then you see. You could buy - you - well I - I haven't been in the position to want to do this more recent years but I used to go and buy a pair of soles, leather soles and I nail the on and - and trim them round and get heel ball heel ball and - and w
ork it round, make a nice smooth finishing coat you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did most men do that do you think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
I think the men - it was quite common, must have been because you'd never kept pace with time or the money would never come to it would it. You had to do
 it. And he put - boot protectors on you see. Because I know jolly good thing for kids to run around with boot - new boot protectors on and kicking the pavements to make sparks.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you do that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I expect we did. Of course that's some of the - some of the things that happened you see in childhood days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 When your mother bought clothes where would she buy them, in a local shop?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes. Yes. They would be local shops. Some of the old firms I have seen very recently Oliver}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14353490\charrsid2370612 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 s. I suppose the
y came from - from - Kettering way and all round Northampton, which is Northampton main - bot - boot and shoe place in England isn't it but - I think some of those firm}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14353490\charrsid2370612 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 , I know walk the Barratt's way is all right but - some of those firms are the outcome 
of the older firms and were nowadays only just become more or less amalgamated and they've left - just beginning to leave the old names behind rather than to be - work under old name I suppose. Because, fashions have changed. As you know, we import many m
any fashionable shoes from Italy and - I suppose the Italian market have got quite a hold. And there's the - there's the Czech market.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 In those days it was all local?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Just made - made in England. They weren't - they weren't imported, that's obvious.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did your father help your mother with any jobs in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
No, no, no, you see you've got me in a cleft stick there you know really inasmuch that - I look back - on the day and I - since I've been very much man of myself and I always maint
ain I would not - I said I would not leave my wife so much to herself as my father left my mother. You see, his - his attachments to all these functions whatever he went, he was secretary of that, chairman of this, you know committee man on that, you know
,
 and all - on all activities you can think of. It's amazing you know. We no - no sooner moved out from Milton than - he was away and the vicar come round to see us and we were in the choir and then father - father was taking Holy, Holy, Holy at the chance
l. He was he got the people locally going with their brushes and doing the whole church out with - with wash you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Your father did the paining himself did he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 He doing - no, my father - smith. But he was - he was doing the Holy, Holy, Holy, o
ver the top, painting that in, it was already there you know, just filling it in. But anyway, that - that - that's one of his - if we went anywhere in - Sunday school outings he'd - he'd take the ice cream and go down the town you know and get the ice cre
a
m and pack it in the freezers, 'cos you had a pack a little tub you know all ice round it, that's how we - carted around in those days, ice cream, get some - a couple of gallons of ice cream and they had a little glasses you used to have, never used to ha
v
e cornets and wafers then, little glasses with a - scoop out with a wooden spoon you know in the top and - ha'penny each you know and then - he used to go to the wholesale sweet dealer down the Arundel Street, people he used to know, I suppose they could 
h
ave been on - connected with the Forresters, go down there and get boxes of sweets and of course they were four ounces a penny those days you know. Even as far as - much as six ounces a penny. Some particular types. But four ounces a penny was quite a rea
sonable sweet. Of course you didn't get all these and that things you've got today and of course - they were not wrapped, that's obvious isn't it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did this mean that he didn't have much time at home at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well he - seemed to be always to to - 
to this that and the other you know. Mind you when he was home he was busy all the time you know, be doing, you know, secretarial work at home and - or - or slogging up some information, for his way you know, books. And he - he - you know, used to like bo
oks. He could recite poetry too. Yes. Tennyson Dreamlands and all that sort of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 He didn't do any cleaning of the house then or cooking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 On his retirement he did. Oh yes. Our - I always followed suit. And Michael does likewise. I say Michael does likewise.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did he ever do the washing up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I expect he did. Yes, I would say he did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You don't actually remember him doing it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. Well of course you don't take much notice you see when you're a child do you. I say he would, yes, 
I say he would. He'd take - he'd take the weight off when he was at home. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Would he be in charge of the fires in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh he - he would be very keen on that. Very keen on fires because - having so much to do with smithery work - he woul
d be aware of dangers of fire and well as the - as well the necessity of fires you see what I mean.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Do you remember if he was the person who always saw that it was in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well I think he - I think he always got it - I think he always got it - clean
ed out and - I'd say he would because he would - he would - it was his perfunctory way of doing things you know, he would have it done. He was an obstinate man you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Would he do repairs on the house do you think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. I think he would. I think he would. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 And improvements?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well - perhaps she wouldn't approach it. No, perhaps you - perhaps there wasn't any real improvements - let me see, wait a minute.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 That would apply more when he moved to his own house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. Oh yes, yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You think he'd be more likely to then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
He'd be more like - but of course he'd gone - he'd only just come into the house, we'd been there about eighteen months as I said before he went out to the Cape. But - he'd taken on this church j
ob you know as sides-man of the church and general orgasiser of this, that and the other at the church that -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How about dealing with the children, did he dress or undress the children when they were small - was he that kind of man?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I don't think
 he would - he might, he might - he - he's funny - was funny in some respects. Mind you he was - what can I say - I have called him some names in my time but - very strict. He was very strict, yes. He - he would - oh he'd take us for walks. Yes, I remembe
r him taking us for walks round the Milton shores for walks on Sunday afternoon. With mother of course. Yes, oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did he ever take the children out without her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Not necessarily - I don't remember that because as I say - we would - our - our ho
liday time as far as we were concerned was August. The other time we left more or less to ramble on our own and - holiday time we went over to the Isle of Wight were my - maternal grandparents had retired, from the Navy here and - had a lovely little home
 
in Cowes. We used to go over there for - such as for this next three weeks like, Cowes regatta week and - and all the pertinences of bank weather, all the fun of the fair, all the royalty of Europe there. All the big yachts of - of all nations in Cowes Ro
a
ds. I used to go down when we used to go down to grandfather to the royal yacht squadron which has been much in the news today when Ted Heath not had - hadn't quite got elected, not from now 'til February, he - he stays down there with one of his old ship
m
ate who was the steward of the royal yacht squadron and we used go down and stand by the flags standard. The steward used to say, come on son. And we used to - and out past the bunk and up the - get ready flag five minutes before the start of a race. Eigh
t
 o'clock in the morning. 'Course all those - have you been to Cowes at all? No. Yes, well - did you go round by the royal yacht squadron? And saw the - saw the canon and the royal salute - twenty-one - they all used to be fired by touch - with a touch lig
h
t you know, manual - manually applied, not - not that are now from an electric button up top but - they were all fired you see, stand and we used to think that was fun you know. Well they were our holiday and we come home with a pair of boots each, ready 
to go back to school. I do remember that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Were there special times of the year when you were bought clothes like that?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well that - that is - that is - the one - one example of what happened you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Can you remember your father telling you stories?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
No, I - I can't remember him telling us stories now you want to ask my - my wife about that - her - her father used to - tell them - tell them story after story.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did your father read to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes, now he - now he would - stand t
here and recite poetry to us, yes. Yes. And he could sing a song too. You know, the old type of - come into the garden Maud. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you have musical evenings as a family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, I don't - I don't remember, no, -o. No. I don't think we really had 
a - a wasn't really enough time and family - we were growing up and growing up all the time and - I suppose the pressure of that sort of thing, looking back on it, must have been tremendous on mother you know, that those sort of things couldn't really hap
pen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did she ever get a chance to go out on her own?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes. Oh well, I say oh her own - I should - I should - must have done. I suppose so. Although I can't see how -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 If she did do would your father have looked after the children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I k
now what you're getting down to, who looked after us. No, I can't remember any aunts coming in to look after us. Actually I can only remember two aunts on his side. And - of course -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Your father certainly wouldn't have you don't think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I don't t
hink - as I say one of them my father took - took charge of when - when the - her - his mother died and came with us to Plymouth. The other one, she was a young person. She may have come in. She may have come in. I don't quite remember tell you the truth.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I was interested in case it was your father looked after the children when he went out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
No, I've got no specific thought toward that because - I'm afraid that we - my brother and I, we used to get out - ourselves, not late mind you 'cos we were never allowed out late but - we would go down on Southsea Common and \{ILLEGIBLE\}
 football or play football in the season, well in or out of season actually, or else go up Eastley say and just swim in the summertime, or bathe - I couldn't swim in those days but bathe.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you have any tasks you had to carry out regularly at home to help your mother and father, can you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Just sometimes go and do a bit of shopping. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You didn't have special tasks like cleaning things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. No, no, not - no, I never had - no. No. No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 When would you do the shopping if you did it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Well - I remember going - we used to have a little trolley cart, you know, one of these home made box things with a couple of wheels on, used to go down - 
right down into town and be the main Commercial Road of Portsmouth, go right down there to Pinks, and they still exist, Pinks, Pink Brothers, the family grocers, go in there and getting large pots of plum jam, I think they were three or four pound jars, I
 
should imagine they were. I know you could get for about a shilling or something like that you know, tremendous. Difference in price of jams and that sort of thing but - I remember that sort of thing and getting - and going round into Flatten Road and the
 - the greengrocers and that and getting vegetables for us - my mother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you go on doing that when you moved?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 'Cose we - we only lived in the two houses - the two houses I can remember in Portsmouth.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you carry on doing the shopping all through your childhood?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Well - I suppose we had our one or two - of course we mustn't forget that - well the girls weren't all that after me either were they. No, couldn't. I would say that I'd got sisters coming along but they - they were - not qu
ite so mature as us were they. Let me see. I suppose we went down into the town even room there. From - did you know Portsmouth at all? Now can I - put it like this - did you know Flatten Station? You don't. It was quite a - quite a long way. It's more in
 
the country when we lived there you see but of course it's all built up now. They've got Jesus Training College right where I used to be and all that type and all that sort of thing quite handy to where we were but - anyway - no, well I can't quite explai
n it but anyway - I daresay it was a - mile, mile and a half which to - it was to - to us was - was quite a distance.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You did it at Plymouth as well?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. I can faithfully say that because when I was the higher grade school at Plymouth mother us
ed to ask me sometimes to bring up some kind of butter from the Maypole. And I used to get it at school time - school break - when we went - when I went home, I would take it home. And we lived well out then. Quite a - quite a walk out.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you go on doing the general shopping though when you were in Plymouth?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, of course you must visualize this, that I was then growing a bit and the girls were also now becoming a little older were they not.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did your brothers and sisters have their special jobs which they did?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Well - brothers and sisters, let me see. I suppose my sisters had various jobs, must have done 'cos I suppose my mother must have struggling my elder sister in - interested in - sewing because my - she was - lovely needlewoman my older sister who died.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 But you can't remember them having fixed tasks which they did?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
No, I can't, you see we - when you're young you're in between ages aren' you, like neither one thing or other and - at school, as I say, this - I - I was onl
y in this board school for - the period of the autumn tern and then I passed my, what would be termed these days, 11+ exam, I passed to go into the higher grade and went the higher grade there in the following January. January the fourth I can remember, 1
904. I remember dates up to a point. I stopped there until the - August - end of July beginning of August, starting the holidays in 1907 when I was in my seventeenth year.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You were quite old then when you left school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh I was. Yes. I had the opp
ortunity, my father offered me, although we - I'd got six behind me, brothers and sisters, well if you like, he said, I'll keep you at school if you want to - I'd got really good marks for - for science and - inorgan inorganic chemistry and that sort of t
h
ing. I said, I wasn't interested so much in - too much of the maths you know, like that, but chemistry I - I was really; interested in and I got good marks over the country from the results that came through from the Civil Service examination that I took 
a
nd - he wondered whether I would care to remain - I'd already got my sights set for this exam, I was mature enough to think, if you stop at school you may fail and could possibly have repercussed with in the family circle at a later date. That - that's my
 
reaction to this. I said, no, I'd soon go - have - have a job. He said, right, he said, I'll get you one. That's when he got me an a - an apprentice, Cross and Cole. Then across the other side of the harbour in Cornwall under, you've never been to Plymout
h
 have you. No, well, of course Plymouth is divided from Cornwall by the River Tamar and - that's the boundary line of Devon and Cornwall and just on the further side as you go out Plymouth Sound is Mount Edgecombe so and that - manager of the estate and I
 - ship yacht and boat building yard there and I - learnt the craft of that. But anyway that's coming - that's dodging the point - the issue. And -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You said you felt in between ages, not quite grown up but not a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes, yes, that - yes, sayi
ng about whether I - I was carrying on doing - I would think so because I was - I was - shopping - I was stopping on late at school, coming home late at school. I was - later going back to school after tea and it was quite a walk from where I was - I shou
ld say a twenty minutes walk backwards and forwards each way to get to school. No, I should say no, I don't suppose I did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You mean you don't really remember it or the rest of the children were doing it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, I wouldn't - I wouldn't because I - I would say say more self interested. Put it down at that, one of my characteristics.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Can you remember if the older children in the family helped the younger children with tasks, can you remember helping your younger brother and sisters?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh - oh I
 think I - I - I can up to a point but - I remember taking them - taking them out in a pram, they called mail-carts sometimes in those days. You have, well remember - and tipping them over.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 On purpose?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, no, no. God forbid.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you dress them or undress them do you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
No. No, I wouldn't do, no. No, I think they were getting, they were pairing up one with the other, while - of ages I suppose really - pairing up sufficiently enough to be able to help one another at that age.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Do you think Gwednoline and Mary helped with the younger children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh I should say they did. Yes, I should say they did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did the little ones help the older ones?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Help to give then excitable house sometimes. No, I don't - no, I don't expect they did. I doubt it. One way - one way traffic.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 When you were at school was there a certain time when you were expected to go to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Nine o'clock was our bedtime in a way but we were allowed a little extra but my father was stickler for ti
me. Bedtime and - bedtime it was but - if you had a - a subject you know you got stuck on it, maths wasn't all - wasn't my great furore in anyway I - I thought myself - and I used to puzzle over this, now am I doing right, perhaps I might spend half an ho
u
r extra on particular problem but - other than that - I never did - I - my father's - an advanced teenager - an advanced teenager, well you put that down because that - that is when we started going out and taking an interest in what father was doing. Joi
ning the Junior Imperial Constitutional League
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was there an extension on your bedtime then later?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Well of course there was you see there was always a - an excuse was there not finally because when we - my father - I told you politically minded, h
e was very - very friendly with a lady Asquith - Lady Aston and all that - Lady Asquith before he inherited his title. You see he was the Hon. William Waldorf Aster and he became candidate for the borough of Plymouth. Well my father was the agent for the 
T
alasop division of Devon that's where the urban part of Tavistock came into within the boundary of Plymouth for Sir John Spear, he was the agent for Sir John Spear and - and - my father organized the - these mass meetings in Plymouth for - for Astoth and 
w
hen he put up for Parliament and - they got very friendly, as a matter of fact, they took great interest in my father and - one way and another. However, what I was going to come down to was this that - we - founded the - room in the borough - a branch of
 
the Juniors Imperial Constitutional League whose founder was Viscount Castlereagh, Irish man, yes. Well, anyway - we became the first - the initiators of it in Plymouth. I was chosen for ward captain, my brother was ward captain somewhere else and - we go
t - got our meetings together, all young fellows you know up- up to the early twenties.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 This was after you left school was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. Affer. And - we - of course boating is very interesting down that way - you know, the West Country, in fact the - 
any organisation has got a boating club attached to it. See we thought, well we'll have a boating club. So - ask the girls for five pound note, he said, well get yourself one. Five pound note mind you. I've been - I've been up to apprentice recently to th
e
 boat building trade was deputed to look for one. Second hand one of course. So - and I - I started to look round and I heard of one up the River Tamar, an old ex-Naval boat. I got all my committee together and we went up and had a look at this, I don't -
 
you know, about that much clear of the gun-whales, it was all full up with water, the boat itself, which is a very good thing from - from a maintenance angle because - because you should always take the plug out of a boat and let it sink when it's got to 
b
e left idle. Never pull it up a shore it's got to get it cover it so that you get the weather comes in and attacks the - attacks the planking. Oh yes, keeps off. Well anyway, I said, well - the person that was selling and I said - well - how it is for tig
h
tness? He said, oh it's all right. He said, I'll get a couple of buckets and go out and bale out, you'll find she's all right. We did. We pulled it in alongside, got these buckets, baled it out and got it - got into it and - we found that - well we didn't
 
know how much we'd left in of the water really but we left a little drop in I suppose, but she didn't seem to be lacking any water for - for a little while so we decided she would - would be all right with a little bit of repairs by yours truly etcetera, 
h
ave a look around it. So he said, well going to have it? I said, yes. Two pound ten. Fifty shillings. I said, right. I said, well what - what about - what about paddles, you know, oars. Oh he said, yes, here you are. And a boathook. And gunmetal rowlocks.
 
And then - oh - yes, the chap off the lion - the - off the H.M.S. Lion, one of the old battle ships and he'd got the plaques on the barrel you know. Anyway they were brass. Anyway, we got in and we pulled about two and a half - three miles right round Ply
m
outh Hoe right round up the river Plym from River Tamar right round up the River Plym. We stood up there alongside the electricity works and - pulled her up high and dry and then we turned up. Next day we went down in the evening and had a go at her. Appl
i
ed a nice thick coat of black varnish, that's tar you know, and - let that soak in, then I carried out a few repairs that were wanted and - next Saturday we were afloat. All - all marry bright going out towards the breakwater. But anyway that - that - tha
t - well that comes back to - we were - what we were doing. You know, when we broke away from the strict father. How did I finish up like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 We were talking about bedtimes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes, going to bed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You said you went to bed while you were still at school at about nine o'clock?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 About nine.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did your mother put you to bed or anyone else or did you go up yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Not - not in those days my dear, I became a little bit too old for that, mother putting me to bed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What age did you start putting yourself to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well I suppose really we was probably sent to bed and we put ourselves to bed but I expect we slept two - two in a bed - the boys.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 The boys would share a bed would they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes, yes. Well I mean to say the rooms weren't necessarily big enough were they. Way I described them to you.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Can you remember in that house in Portsmouth where you said there were three bedrooms would the girls have had one bedroom together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. Well of course there'd be only two.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Two girls then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Would your parents have had one room?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 They would have one room.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Would all the boys be in the other room?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I expect so.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You can't remember exactly how it was?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No I can't, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Which room would you have your bath in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh I suppose we stood in front of the kitchen fire. The good old faithful way wasn't it in those days. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How often did you have a bath?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh good God. You don't know do you. These are reall
y ticklish questions aren't they, it's bad as - bas as mathematics, become a problem. Yes, now how many. Usually Saturday night. Yes, yes. You could say Saturday nights or Saturday evenings after tea you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Would that be just once a week then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Be once a week, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Would the family take it in turns to have a bath in the tub round the fire?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
I expect we - that would be a family concern really in - inasmuch that - you couldn't keep water continually on the go although you'd probably hav
e a range - cooking range - the old coal fire cooking range with perhaps two or three big saucepans on it you see. That's the only obvious way of getting your water because it wasn't piped hot.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You would perhaps top up the bathtub?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How often did you have clean clothes to put on, when would you get clean clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Oh - well - no, I couldn't - I expect we had them - to put on from our - after the bath you know or - ready to put on in the morning after you'd had your bath, probably we went to bed after we'd had our bath when we were younger.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 As you had your bath on Saturdays it's likely you'd have the clean clothes on Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. Yes. Oh yes, oh you always had clean clothes - always had clean clothes and best clothes my de
ar in those days. There was no - no going out in your jeans Sundays and - and Mondays you know. That's right isn't my dear?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Where did the family eat, where did they have their meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh mainly in the kitchen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was there any occasion when they'd eat in another room, in the front parlour?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Well I suppose - there'd be - perhaps on a birth day or - might have something - a special occasion when we had aunties or uncles visiting or anything like that it might, I'm only saying they might. The 
children might not be invited in to have it. The adults might have it on their own. On the other hand - you could say that front room could be more or less - a sanctum not invited until you were told you could. All right?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Do you remember an occasion when you could go in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
No, not particularly, no. No not particularly, all I know is that you - you could say - Christmas - Christmastime you'd have - you'd say probably have - would be open.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Where did your mother do her cooking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 In the kitchen. Where the range was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 She cooked on a range, she didn't have a gas stove?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh no, no, no gas - no gas then. Oil street lamps you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 When was breakfast eaten by the family?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh - at various times I expect. Where was it eaten When? Well I suppose just-just in time the - half what got up in time to go to school.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did your father have it with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh no, no, he was earlier, yes. You must remember that they started - they started work in those days at seven o'clock. Some - so
me started at six but - some working class people started at six but the average workman or craftsman started at seven.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 When you had breakfast which members of the family would be there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well I suppose - now what age are we referring to now. At 
school. Well I suppose there were those that were already old enough to be going to school as well as me, I should think that would be logical way of answering that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Were the younger brothers and sisters present, the ones who were not yet at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 They - maybe, yes, could be because they may be sitting up in the - the - the baby chair you know, with a tray on it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Would your father make his own breakfast or would your mother have got up to make his breakfast for him when he went out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I should think my father would make his own. Same I do mine.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What did you usually have for breakfast, what did you eat and drink?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh in those - these - those days, well I suppose it was - mainly bread and butter. Mainly bread and butter, no such
 things as cereals then. May have been - I suppose it could have been the old fashioned oats but I don't remember that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Do you have an egg?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh I suppose on rare occasions.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Would that be on Sundays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Quite possible, quite possible. Then
 not always, no. No, you might - you might sometimes even have a - a little bit of fried bread in - in bacon fat, you know, which was rather favourite. Which would be - which would be a Sunday. Sunday thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What did you drink for breakfast?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well I suppose - water. No. No. tea. I expect it was te, I - milk wasn't so prevalent with us, no, not like it is now.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You'd have something special for Sundays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh for - for dinner?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I was thinking for breakfast.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well no, I don't suppose
 really. I don't think you would really have any. As I say - mother and father might have - a rasher of bacon or - much as ever, much as ever, there wasn't - there' wasn't the type of thing that - the working people had in those days. I tell you what - wh
at was favourite though amongst working classes was bread and dripping.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You liked it did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh I - we still like it now don't we with - pepper and salt on it. You get the right - right beef to make dripping or pork.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Do you mean that your parents sometimes had different food from the children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
I don't think so, I think it's more or less communal you know as far as - far as we were able - according to ages I suppose we were given food that they thought was sufficient for us and - with e
nough nutriment and - I suppose they probably had something a little more I don't know, I wouldn't say.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What time did you have your midday meal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Midday meal would be - well if - it was - a school-day, it would be - of course father wouldn't be t
here, naturally. School-day I suppose would be well after - as soon as we've all got out - home from school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 That would be soon after twelve?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Soon after twelve.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What sort of things would you have to eat, can you give me an example of your midday meal, would you call it dinner?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 It counted as dinner, yes, not lunch. That's only a fabrication of a meal that is.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What sort of things would you have for your dinner?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well I suppose we had - mutton because I know I didn't care for mu
tton in those days, I suppose we had mutton because that - that's something that does - otherwise I suppose we had - beef - poultry or anything like that was a rarity of course. I suppose, beef could be said as one of the staple meats of those days wasn't
 it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Would you have anything special on Sundays for dinner?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Well there again you see, pork could be a speciality because pork wasn't all that - easily come by or bought in those days was it. Pork was a - a meat that - people used to look upon as
 a sort of a - a change from the ordinary hum-drum beef. Now it's beef that's - quite the reverse isn't it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Would you have a sweet as well at dinner time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Might do on Sunday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 But not during the week?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I don't think so. Might have a rice pudding - might have a rice pudding.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Would you have savoury puddings for dinner?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I suppose we had meat - a meat pudding.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You'd have a tea would you when you came home from school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well, yes, I suppose you would say we had tea but yo
u know teas in those days - with the - with youngsters were more or less run about tea wasn't it. Piece of bread and butter and jam in hour hand or not - perhaps - no butter on it perhaps, bread and jam. No, I - I'm not joking. Bread and jam, I say butter
 was a - could be a luxury in some cases couldn't it. Yes. Yes. You'd run about perhaps and have it and - you - 'course father wouldn't always be there anyway so it wouldn't matter because he wouldn't be home from work.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 For the children would the tea be the last meal of the day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Yes, I - more or less it would be, yes. I suppose in some families they might have a biscuit to go to bed with but - I'm doubtful whether we - whether we had any. Might have a glass of water, we might have had a sweet or m
ight have had - you know, anything like kids will have you know, that sort of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you drink tea at teatime?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Would your father have his dinner in the evening when he came in?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, I think - well - now that's a moot que
stion because - dad started having canteens in the dockyard in those days you see. So he would have had his meal I should say, midday meal, in the dockyard. Of course now here's the point where those sort of things happened where parents used to send the 
schoolchildren to the dockyard with their father's dinners tied up in a red handkerchief, you know, the old spotted red handkerchief, like old Bill Sykes. Well anyway, that - that's a fact isn't it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Would the mother put meat and vegetable in it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes, yes, yes. Yes, otherwise the father would take sandwiches in the morning it being bread and meat.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you ever do that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I never had to. Never had to. But I do remember it happening, I've seen the people there, even - even in latter years
, I've seen it since the - since the first world war.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 When your father had his midday meal in the canteen what would he have when he came home in the evening?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Bread and pud. No, I wouldn't know really. I don't suppose we - of course we as boys, 
when you get a family of youngsters like we were, you wouldn't be noticing these sort of things really you know. There - there - it may happen where there's one child in the family might see all these things - sort of things with a certain amount of - rep
ercussions later. They say, well daddy has it, why can't I? You know, that sort of thing you know. We didn't notice it. And no beer. My father was a teetotaller.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Completely teetotal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes, he wore the blue ribbon.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was your mother a teetotaller as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Yes, as far as I know. Not - not - not in later years was she, she had a glass of stout, later years. And she used to have burgundy too didn't she, she used to have burgundy always, yes. My father was a teetotaller and a non-smoker.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was that for religious reasons?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Well I thought he - I think he was brought up in a very cloistered - not cloistered, I was wrong word - very wrong word - his mother was a - rampaging - Wesleyian. Yes. Yes, yes. Grandmother Waldegrave was really a bit 
of a tartar and I remember visiting her as a youngster, you know, about so high, she'd sit in that chair you know with her laces and - and - and of course my father had a certain amount of that austereness about him in that respect of that sort. But - and
 
now you're coming back to this, you're also bringing me back in relationship to, when I was mentioning the Wesleyans. Now I went to the Wesleyan chapel, I was only that night, and they took my brother and I one evening to a revival service, they wanted to
 go down and pray for forgiveness and God knows what and frightened the life out of us. Us kids of about five or six year old you know. Ridiculous. And - it was - wasn't so very long after that you know we sort of packed up.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Your father was a Wesleyan when he was young?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was he still a Wesleyan when he moved to Milton?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
To Milton. Well I suppose he was anything really, I suppose whatever - whatever his conscience dictated because - I told you he was a Protestant - an Orangeman,
 you see. Now he - he - whatever - he didn't care two hoots what it was as long as he was in something.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did your father or mother bake their own bread?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. No. Not to my knowledge, never. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did she make her own jam?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes. Yes. Hom
e - jam was made very much in those days. More so probably than today when you - although you could buy it very cheaply mind you, when I say cheaply I - I thought I said the other day - earlier on - you'd get jam about three - three pound jar for - for le
ss than - less than a shilling, you know, that sort of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 When she made her own jam would she buy the fruit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh she'd buy the fruit, oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 So she made it even when she was living in town?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did she bottle fruit or vegetables at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I don't ever remember recollect her bottling anything. Not really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did she make pickles?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, no, I don't recall that. I - I'm the only that's ever done that since my married life I've bottle fruit and I've bottled - made 
- made pic}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4683543\charrsid2370612 k}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
les, I do pickles onions every year, every season. Just a couple of jars so we got something - just for - myself or anybody comes in like a pickles onion well there you are.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you do that when you were first married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. No, no, no, that - that's when I got -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did she make wine or beer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. No. No, as I told you we - we were more or less - teetotal family.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did she make medicines for the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well, no, wouldn't make medicine although I've know my father make up }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4683543\charrsid2370612 
sarsaparilla}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612  which is - what was type of - - laxative I should think as well as being a refreshing drink and some kind of - jellup. I don't know - I don't know what it was but he}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4683543\charrsid2370612  - he - he used to make a concoction}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612  with pearl barley and that sort of thing
. For - for - a sort of a - you know - a medicine of sorts. But of course, in those days - sulphur was one of the things mainly used to give children, sulphur tables and that sort of thing you know. Because it - th}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid4683543\charrsid2370612 ey could suck them, they were s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 ets.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You liked them did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well I suppose we had to like them, I don't suppose they were all that tasty.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How did he make }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5709036\charrsid2370612 sarsaparilla}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 ?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well, there you are now, I don't know what the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5709036\charrsid2370612 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 ngredients actually was. I couldn't tell you, tell you the truth. You may - be able to look that up in some - some documentary evidence of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5709036\charrsid2370612 
sarsaparilla}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 , I believe it's - could be - Italian. It sounds that way to me. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5709036\charrsid2370612 Sarsaparilla}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612  it's spelt I believe, it's s-a-r.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 When you lived in Portsmouth were your parents able to grow their own vegetables or fruit at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
No. Not - not in Portsmouth itself. When we moved to Milton, I told you my father was very energetic man, we had a little allotment way out towards the marsh. And - he grew some then, of course, only 
for a short while you see. He had - he had to go abroad you see. That's only - that's only occasion.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 When you moved again to Plymouth were you able to grow things there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, well - he was rather fortunate you see. I told you in the supervising c
apacity and some of the men under him used to bring him in - bring him in what he - what - I suppose, not to curry favour but - I suppose little jobs he might went and they could do and bring him fruit and vegetables at times from various places.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Would he feel indebted to them if they did that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Well - I suppose they felt indebted to him rather than - rather the reverse, because probably he'd put them on piece work or something like that you know. One can say it was wheel within a wheel. That's r
ather personal isn't it really in a way because - it's one of those little things that - you don't like to think that you're - well, living on charity although you're not. Re - repayment for - for perhaps a service rendered in a - in a backhanded manner.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You mean that way they were able to keep their pride?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Do you think that was quite common?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh I think so, yes, I do. I do think so. I mean to say, you'll find - you find that - well, it's more like a question of barter isn'
t it rather than - rather than payment. Payment in kind.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 It's rather curious in the work situation isn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes, in - in that respect, yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 When they weren't growing their own they had to buy it, apart from gifts?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did he receive any other kinds of gifts of vegetables or fruit from relations?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
No, no, I mean to say - he had his - my old dad had his - had his pride and - of course as I said before he had that dogma that - that he was number one and if he was right he was right which has -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Do you remember having tinned or dried vegetables or fruit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Oh they weren't known them days. No. Oh tinned fruit might have been known, I wouldn't - I can't - I can't say it wasn't but I don't know but - I - probab
ly there were - pineapples or something like that dried - or tinned I mean, not necessarily dried. Oh you had dried apples. Apple rings and apricots or prunes. They were - they were really a - a commodity you could buy practically in any grocers shop. Eit
her a little sack or in a little box.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did your mother used them a lot?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Oh - I don't know about a lot, I suppose whenever - perhaps on a Sunday we had stewed prunes, something like that, you know, as a sort of sweet. Of course - and then of course you had dried fruit like }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5709036\charrsid2370612 raisins}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
, currants and that sort of thing which you make a - a roly - spotted duff as we used to call it, a roly-poly pudding you know in a - in a cloth and you could have slices of that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 That was Sunday food?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Mainly Sunday, yes. I - I can't - I wouldn't like to say we had it particularly on - on any other day than Sunday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Were you able to keep any livestock at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. No. When I say no I say that }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5709036\charrsid2370612 reservedly}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612  inasmuch that my father obtained - a young goat whe
n we moved out from town in Plymouth out to the outer part, I told you went further out - we went further out towards the country, somebody gave him a goat. I know we used to take it out to graze. But - awfully smelly thing you know, so we - he got rid of
 it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You weren't able to get much milk from it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I don't suppose it was ever milked. No, I don't think it was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 The children would look after the goat would they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 That's what I tell you, we used to take it down - down to a pot of - plot of grass and let it graze a little while.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How many times a week would you say you were able to eat meat in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well - it's difficult to say because - when you're going back, what - sixty-five - seventy years you know - of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5709036\charrsid2370612 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612  after}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5709036\charrsid2370612  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 all - I
've got a fairly good memory but - you know it's a long long while isn't it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I wonder if you have any sense of going without meat on some days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I - I haven't a sense of that really because - I've sense of knowledge of this much that I - we had v
ery little money because wasn't often we only had - wasn't often we had a ha'penny. That would be at the end of the week we'd get a ha'penny perhaps. You know, not - not pocket money. A ha'penny - well - that's run - running errands - running errand for i
t. A neighbour perhaps, might get a ha'penny from another person.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You never got pocket money as such?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, not as such. Not - not as - not as children do today. Not at all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You didn't get the ha'penny from your parents ever?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. Not like - not in that sense.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Would they give you a ha'penny if you did a chore for your parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh they probably would. Probably would. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Do you remember anyone ever getting a rabbit from poaching?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. No, I don't - no I don't, now we - we weren't - we hadn't reached that point of starvation.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5709036\charrsid2370612 That was quite a w}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 idespread habit in the country.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes, it probably would be. Probably would be.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Do you remember seeing your mother having less food so that the family could have more?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
No, I wouldn't say because after all's said and done we were - an expanding family - of children. I suppose we was - we had what we were given and that was that. We wouldn't take notice of other - I know my father carved the joint and - on Sund
ay and that was that. As far as we were concerned that was our - our meal and - and the meat ration if you like to call it such and - I suppose if we were hungry we'd have a slice of bread and jam or something like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Do you remember noticing whether your father got a bit more?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
I wouldn't - I wouldn't think so. No, I wouldn't think so. He would share it. I say, otherwise he wouldn't have been the character man that he was. That's my opinion now, you're asking these questions, I can talk wit}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5709036\charrsid2370612 h }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 h}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5709036\charrsid2370612 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
m - what can I say - the with the knowledge of past with the present system of life. I say and not being a drinking man he didn't go out spending money in the public house you see. So we would be that way. And he would - he would buy - perhaps a Sunday - 
you know, sweets - weekend sweets for the children - for us children. So that - so that'd be instead of a ha'penny, see. A quarter or half pound of sweets. I mean to say when I told you they're four ounces a penny you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 During meals were you allowed to talk?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
I don't think so. I - I - I should say my father was strict enough to say, speak when you're spoken to, you know, or something like that, that - that type.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Could you choose what you wanted to eat or did you have to eat what you were given?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Oh we had to eat what we were given really. But I - I didn't care for - I can - visualize some dinners I had not at home with my own parents but when I used to go to my grandma's - my grandparents - I never liked mutton. I believe I did. I di
dn't like that but - if you don't eat that you don't get any apple pie or plum pi}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5709036\charrsid2370612 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
 or whatever it was. That was their approach to it. In other words - a threat. And - and then I think I made a - I made a - a gesture.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you always eat up your mutton?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Well I did more or less, it's only in later years, and I'm not all that keen on lamb and mutton even now. Well I say, I have - we all have a preference for - for a particular kind of meat.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What was your father's attitude if you left food?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh I suppose he would have said, well, you can't eat that, you'll starve. Oh yes he would.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 And your mother was the same?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well of course }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5709036\charrsid2370612 w}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 e'd have to - let father have his say. I don't say she was dominated by him but - I s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5709036\charrsid2370612 h}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
ould say he was the stronger character.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 If there was something on the table you wanted like the salt, could you ask for it to be passed to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Could you ask for a second helping?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I think it was always sufficient not to have to ask anyway. I can't remember.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Can you remember if you were expected to hold your knife and fork in a certain way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
No, no, I don't think so. Table manners were up to a point but - as we looked upon it these days and - looking back on it I suppose we - we were 
more or less, what can I say, taught the normal table manners that any respectable household would - would have them. I wouldn't say we would be - capable of holding our own exactly in - in the highest of company but we - we could. You develop these thing
s
 in later years, I mean to say, by force of habit rather than foreknowledge. You see, if you can visualize what I mean, as you go out into the world and you - amongst company of someone in a higher sphere, not - not that - I - I say I'm as good as any man
 
personally, I've always said that, I - my - my way of life is as good as any other persons. My pocket might - may not be so large in spending capacity but - I would say that I can hold my - my own with these people. I wouldn't emulate their manners entire
l
y and - of course today you know, children they could learn a lot from the children of the past believe me, in table manners even because I - I - I'm on a Board of Governors at a school, I've been down there when they've had their school dinners, the chil
dren I mean, and you know, it's - it's sp}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5709036\charrsid2370612 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 lling really. Of course, that's the type of household they're brought up in.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You were definitely taught how to behave at table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 We were taught how to behave. And had to ask to get down from the table too
, that's another thing which a child doesn't do so much these days you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you have to wait until the whole family had finished eating?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh no, no, you probably if they saw you fidgeting a bit they'd say, well you can get down now if you want to.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 But you couldn't do it before?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
No, you couldn't do it before, no. Only if you were asked you know and were given permission. But that is - that is the - essence of childhood in those days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Were you allowed to bring toys and books to meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Oh no, no, no. No, that's one thing that - well I do it occasionally at home now even I have certain amount of - you know - thought about whether I'm doing right or wrong. Just - have the paper on the table, in that - case we're talking about b
ooks, no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 When the whole family sat down for meals did you always sit at the same places?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Oh yes, I think we would - we would observe that. Insmuch as, of course, various chairs were of a different character probably and - those place for father and place for mother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 During the week you wouldn't be there fore a meal at the same time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. Only on Sunday. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was your father not there on Saturdays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well you - you see, working days ended at - in some industries at twelve o
'clock on Saturday - I'm talking about the industrial world you know, and some cases at one o'clock. Now I - I - I used to start - when I - when I came as an improver to my apprenticeship I started at six in the morning and I didn't kock off 'til one on S
aturday. Half past five. Six 'til half past five and done o'clock on Saturday.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 So dinner time on Saturday you probably wouldn't be all together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Probably not. Probably not.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You said your father carved on Sunday, but for}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5709036\charrsid2370612  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 normal meals would your mother serve?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Oh yes, yes. Yes, I - she would serve because - because father wouldn't always be there normal days you see. He wouldn't anyway be there at midday which was the main meal.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Would she serve the food onto the plates and then pass them round?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Oh yes. Yes, yes. No, do it - oh do it at the table. We - you have the vegetable dishes and everything on the table and you serve from that onto the plates.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 So she wouldn't serve it out in the kitchen and then pass it round?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh no. No, no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Can you remember where your younger brothers and sisters would sit before they were old enough to feed themselves?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well they'd - when - if they were going to have a meal - a meal which they could digest I take it they'd sit in t
heir little - chair with the tray on it, you know, the hinged tray. High - called high chair.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Who would feed them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well I expect - one - I expect mother did really, I suppose as a child was able to lift a spoon it would feed it self, with a big.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Do you have re}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5709036\charrsid2370612 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 memories of the eldest of the girls feeding the younger ones?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
No, I haven't. No I haven't really, I - I wouldn't - venture to say what she would do because I expect she was involved in - in some of these little - you know, domestic things and duties.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was your mother an easy person to talk to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes, she was all right. Yes. O.K. Yes. Although - although you know we had no reason to go.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You didn't take your worries to her you mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. No. I suppose we came i
n with a broken nose or - fighting or anything like that, she'd do for us to control us and so forth but - we were always t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5709036\charrsid2370612 h}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
ought to fight our own battles. That was father you see, you know. And I suppose mother took the opposite view and say, well poor little devils, they can't - can't be expected to fight. I expect that is it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Would you go to her with your personal problems?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, I don't think so. I don't think so. I think we were rather inhibited you know in that respect. And of course I'm talk
ing now, you're expanding, growing - in - in age into - into more or less out into the school world and - and beyond, so we go out to 1918 don't forget. Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was she the kind of person to show affection?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes, I - oh she was quite capable of - of that sort of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was your father an easy person to talk to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well - now, I wouldn't say easy. I wouldn't say easy because - his dog}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5709036\charrsid2370612 
 - dogma}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 tism and the manners in which he - as I say - said before, this is reiterating I believe, but h
e - he would - if he said no it was no, you know, that's why you - if you had a problem which I don't think we really did have problems, what - what - were - they weren't problems other than the fact that something happened you'd got to get over it and th
ere you wouldn't - wouldn't ask him unless you - something relative to - perhaps to sport of anything lie that might say what about so and so dad you know. He might say, oh well, you come along - or - I'll show you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 But you wouldn't go to him with personal problems?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, I don't - no. I don't think personal problems really arose in that respect. Not - not being at that young age.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How did your parents expect you to behave towards them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh with all the circumspect possible you know. We always were taught to raise our caps to our elders for a start.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Even in the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Oh wee, I always did because it was - was so you know. That - that is one of the things that - gone by the board, well as a matter of fact they don't wear caps now 
so they can't very well raise it can they. But - I wouldn't - I wouldn't say - go so far as to say that we would say sir or - always mum and dad you know, that that approach.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did your parents bring you up to behave towards your brothers and sisters in certain ways?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes. Yes, yes, yes. I mean to say you - you were taught to be tolerant t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5709036\charrsid2370612 
o the youn}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 ger ones.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What was the attitude to quarrels?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Our quarrels. Well I suppose we had our quarrels out of - out of the way when they weren't about - I should assume anyway.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did they say that you should hit back if another child hit you or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well I said just now, my father told us to fight our own battles but that may not be quite within the same scope of this question.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Do you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
No, of course, I - I've been a bad boy, I used to throw stones the same as any other youngster. And - the result of one here on my eye. Last the rest of my lifetime. But anyway that's how it was you know, you - you fought your own battles, that was that.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What kind of people do you think that they hoped you'd grow up to be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Heavenly twins. No, I - no, that's - by the by. No, I don't think they - they expected us to make the best of our lives, that's the only - same thing - looking b
ack on I suppose when my father, as I've told you before, last time, when He asked me if I wanted to stop on at school and take my - go in for this chemistry and science degree I said no. Because - there was - five or six children behind me. And - I was g
etting mature enough to think, well the time I earnt my own living because whe}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5709036\charrsid2370612 n}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
 - when you're in the seventeenth year and you've got no income of your own and your pocket money is very very small indeed, I mean to say, if you got three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5709036\charrsid2370612  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 pence - you were - yo
u were quids in and - I didn't do any better even after that when I started my employment if you come back for that point because - if I'm jumping the gun - don't - don't tell me - I mean - tell me because this is one of - of of the points that I would ve
ry much like to have jammed home to people search - researching into this employment business of the past. I started apprenticeship when I - as I say - in my seventeenth year I was then, from school, a ship, yacht and boat}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5709036\charrsid2370612 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 builder apprentice. My indentures,
 I was indented for six years. First year, one shilling a week. That is - that was my pay. I paid out of that shilling I paid sixpence ferry money across the harbour from the mainland - from - Deven - Devon to Cornwall, see. That was a - that was - that. 
S
ixpence I think. That was the - that was the ferry money so - I had sixpence. Now I didn't couldn't recompense my people, for my - earlier costs to them in anyway whatsoever so I - they still had to keep me, second year apprenticeship, now this id the rem
arkable part about it, second year apprenticeship I got sixpence rise for a whole year, I have to work for one and six. That's after doing - one year of the early part of the trade which is a very - well more or less running about t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5709036\charrsid2370612 y}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 pe, you know, you've got
 to find your way around and do as you're told. Then you begin to learn after - after the first year. And my third year I had another sixpence rise, so I was on two shillings a week, two shillings a week and then end of that third year I was - expected to
 be able to build a boat. Build it - build it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Do a full man's work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Doing a journey}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5709036\charrsid2370612 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 man}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5709036\charrsid2370612 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
s work. For two shillings a week. And we did. I got - I can quite a case in point, another lad started three weeks before me, he and I were put to build a si
xteen foot dinghy. We took three weeks over it. My - my wages at the start - in between that time I had come into my fourth year so I had a shilling rise then, so I went from two shillings to three }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid9643939\charrsid2370612 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 hillings, he was also in the three shilling stakes so we 
- it cost us - cost the firm there sixes, eighteen shillings to build that boat in labour as far as we were concerned. Of course the black - the blacksmith had to bu}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9643939\charrsid2370612 c}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 kl}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9643939\charrsid2370612 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
 the - had to do his portion and - the sawmill and that sort of thing had to cut the wood but - anyway, that is by the by. But it does - does give some indication of how people were - were paid.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you feel at the time that that was very unfair?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, I didn't. I didn't, not at the time. I still felt the - the fullness of - can I s
ay - of financial pressure - putting - I'm putting it now in more modern language than I would have thought then but - I wasn't able to recompense my parents. That's - I'm still feeling that at the back of my mind and the - whilst I was on this - of cours
e I'd had a - I'm one of - well I was practically one of the only youngsters in the place that had had an education. And then they used to leave school about thirteen and a half you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Were the other apprentices much younger than you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh absolu
tely, yes, yes. And - and as I say I had that higher school education - higher grade school education and - and the young boss's coming in - would I go in the office, they're back behind - they're behind with their - month - quarterly bills I went and hel
ped them out. Then go there }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9643939\charrsid2370612 and working out the cost of tim}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
ber, you know, tubing - tubing timber and that sort of thing and - it was cost - costing - costing the job you see. They - and they give me - they gave me two shillings a week extra for that. For th
e month or two I went in the office. I come back to my - to the bench again and start again and then - then they - just before I left actually they took me into the office and - the manager undertook too train me as a draughtsman. And I got - but that was
 only a sideline, they still wanted me to do this other work, clerical work under the cashier so the - you see, a wheel within a wheel - for them. And I was getting two shillings a week extra for that actually.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did the other apprentices feel badly done by?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Oh no, no, no, no, no, of course they weren't - now what can I say, they were - right lad of - right - won't say mob of boys - they didn't mind doing a little bit of stealing you know and - they'd take bits of timber up through a hole in the ro
of and take it along the country lanes and build a boat out at Corsham on the - on their own.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Have a boat out of stolen timber?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes, they would you know. Well they'd - the keel and st}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9643939\charrsid2370612 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 rn they'd - they'd do that in the dinner time at work and 
then they'd put that up through the hole and - that - well they came from crowd of smuggling families, right out - right out on - where you look out towards Edistone Lighthouse, Colsham Bay, probably that's where the big liners come into Colsham Bay well 
Colsands was a noted bay for smuggling and - and these lads came from that village, a fishing village. Oh there fathers worked there before them. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Were they ever found out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, well - whether they were or not I expect they - I expect the firm
 knew what they were getting cheap labour so they didn't mind I suppose. Yes. A lot of those fellows I've met in latter life - being war}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9643939\charrsid2370612 r}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 ant officer in the navy and - you know, passed their - through their tests and so forth. But they were darned good mech
anics. They were really craftsmen. They were craftsmen. And that's why I say craftsmen were never paid really the rate of pay that - we would expect them to pay for what they produced because - for one thing, I've just - I've just now explaining the reaso
n why money was so - so small. If you go in the engineering line you'd be expected to pay a premium of about forty pounds. You pay. Them. They don't pay you, you pay them. But they hand you back in - one shilling, one and six, two shillings, you see.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you have to pay a premium?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, I didn't have to pay a premium, no, I didn't have to, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Do you regret having left school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, no. I - well I regret - I regret in a way that I didn't further my education at that particular period. I - I
 - I've gained experience - that something - of s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9643939\charrsid2370612 omething that would never have o}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 ccur}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid9643939\charrsid2370612 r}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
ed to me otherwise because my - all my brothers went into the dockyard as apprentices. They started off - my old - oldest brother he started on four shillings a week. I s
tarted on a shilling. And I was older than he was, he went in at fourteen and a half, I went in - in my seventeenth year. And there's that two years difference between us and - I was that three shillings short of his pay in the first year.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 At the time did you feel you hadn't really gained much by leaving?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
No, I don't think I - I don't think so, I think the - the urge to be - out in the world was - was overcoming that - I suppose at times I - I may have fe}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9643939\charrsid2370612 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 t, at weekends probably when I was assoc
iating with other people in the town. I told you about the boating club and that sort of thing. I hadn't got the money that they - they were earning, most of them were - well I say most of them, several of them were in the dockyard, perhaps third and four
t
h year apprentice getting about eight - ten shillings a week. I'm still only getting about two - two to three shillings a week you see. And - some were - perhaps white collar workers in insurance office and that sort of thing. Of course they were only - t
h
e pay of those people was only eighteen shillings a week, we used to ridicule - ridicule white collared worker in those days because - a journeyman came out of his time, he'd be a - thirty - to thirty-three shillings a week, as - as against a guinea a wee
k for a clerk. Only twenty one shillings. And same - same - same - yes, yes, in age level, yes. Of course, they could - they would have to keep themselves more or less circumspect in clothing and way of - it didn't matter so much about us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 So you could save on that as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Only overalls and that sort of thing but we could -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was there a great difference between the craftsmen who had done their apprenticeship and the ordinary workmen who had not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh well of course there was no - grading 
of labour inasmuch that a craftsman was a craftsman, a skilled man therefore he got the money and he was entitled to it but a - a labourer, anything from eighteen shillings to a guineas.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 He could never hope to get more than this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. No, not rea
lly. Only by favour. Or perhaps by brute force. No, I mean that because - if a man was exceptionally strong, he was able to do work which was not capable to be done by the normal man for instance well I suppose you'd call him semi-skilled in some respects
,
 and yet he's only a navy or a - a labourer. But he got perhaps a few - shilling or two more. He could get extra. Somebody like - comparing the dockers isn't it in present day - present day and age, they're - they're skilled up to a point aren't they, to 
enable them to sling cargoes and that sort of thing but they - they're not responsible people. They - they - they've only learnt that trade or that - skill by application.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you feel there was a difference of interest between the craftsman and the labourer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, I don't think so. I think he mingled very well. Yes, I think he mingled very well, looking back on that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Can you remember what your parents thought of swearing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes, oh yes, we - I - we wouldn't swear. I say - I might say d
amn sometimes but - no, that's by the by you know, just one of those exclamations that slips out and - but there wouldn't be any swearing. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 If you did swear what would have happened?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well I think we'd get a clout.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 When the grown ups were talking were you allowed to join in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Now you asked me that question before. Oh at table. Oh no. We wouldn't be allowed to talk - we would only be allowed to speak when we were asked questions. Or to pass a comment of our own if we're asked for it. B
ut we weren't allowed to enter into a debate as a child. Or the general conversation in the way, whether in the home or outside.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 If you did something that your parents didn't like what would happen, what was the form of punishment?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh I think my father}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9643939\charrsid2370612  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 would be tempted to perhaps cut so off a length with the cane perhaps. A - a cane was in every home I think those days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What kind of thing would merit the cane?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well I suppose if we were very impudent for a start, which we could be. I wo
uldn't say we were but we could be I think but I - I say the sort of thing that would rile him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Can you remember any other punishments that you had?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes, yes. Sent to bed. I remember that - you know, sent to bed without any tea or something l
ike that you see. That could - that would be a form of punishment, because you'd want to get out to have a game of football or something.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Can you remember any time when that happened?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. Not really, no, I can't, not - not - no specific time. W
ell, yes, I can remember one instance, this is - where it comes back. I daresay I smoked when I was a young - youngster. Unfortunately my older brother he - he split on me. We had a row, well - well - we didn't agree over something, all right, I'll tell d
a
d you've been smoking. And my brother I told you he never smoked or anything like that. Well, I know my father said, well - he'd told him you see - I understand you've been smoking. Clay pipe and plug tobacco. Had this pipe - and he cut it off in lumps yo
u know and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9643939\charrsid2370612 tease}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612  it up. You'll smoke that 'til you're sick.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 That was the punishment?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 That was the punishment.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You did it too did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well I - I had a go at it but I believe I turned yellow.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did that stop you doing it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. N
o, didn't stop me, it might have just temporarily, yes, perhaps, not - not entirely because I believe I - off and on I smoked for a year - I've smoked all my life. Off and on. I used to stop smo}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid9643939\charrsid2370612 ki}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 ng when I was training for any run or anything like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Would you say you received the ideas you had about how to behave from both your parents equally or would you say that one was more important than the other?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well I think father was more important. Yes. Oh yes. Yes, I think so.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 When you had a birthday would it be a different sort of day from other days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Difficult to say. Difficult to say. I say - mother may have - may have made a batch of buns or something like that for all I know. Most probably did, you know. But we wouldn't have parties like they have these days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Would you have any presents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Oh I think we would have presents, yes, I think - even if it's only a question of buying a new - new piece of clothing or something like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Can you remember family Christmases?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Oh yes, I think we had our little Christmas tree you know. I think we had that - might have been a few bob on - hanging on it but - you know, as long as there was something decorative and - little packets of - chocolate in silver paper, there were four 
- four little squares, flat you know, Frys chocolate. Five I think, four or five little - that is the half of - about eighth of an inch thick all wrapped in silver paper. They used to sell them like that you know in those days.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How much would that cost?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Oh I suppose about a penny. About a penny. Of course you could - you could get a nice slab of Frys chocolate you know for a penny. Four - I suppose four by four and about - say sixteenth to a quarter of an inch thick if you can visualise that I t
hink that is.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Would you have special food on Christmas Day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh we alw}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9643939\charrsid2370612 ays - always had a Christmas pud}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 ding, yes. We may have a rabbit or may have a goose. But I - I think tha}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9643939\charrsid2370612 t more or less you know - turke}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 ys were}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9643939\charrsid2370612  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 not so much known in those days, they were a rarity, as far as I can remember.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you have a chicken?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Occasional - we wouldn't - only about that time of the year, we wouldn't have one during the year otherwise.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you have any members of the rest of the family in on Christmas Day, did uncles and aunts and grandparents come?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I don't remember. No, I don't remember.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You said you had an organ?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes, we had an organ. What they call an American organ, very upright and had mirrors on either side and a bit of - re
d plush adornment and - my father and my mother, my father often used to on a Sunday morning I know often used to have a tune on that organ.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did he play hymn tunes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes, mainly I should say hymn tun}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9643939\charrsid2370612 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 s or - or - I don't know whether he played fro
m music, I - I've got my doubts rather. My mother may have played from music because she was brought up with - she had two sisters and I know my - her younger sister was an organist over in the Isle of Wight, one of the churches over there but - the other
 one, she was a dressmaker. I think they were all three dressmakers but that's only as far as my mother's sides concerned which leads me to think that my mother played from - from music.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did they teach any of the children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. Definitely no. Neither my brothers nor sisters or myself played an instrument
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 The organ was the only instrument in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Would anyone sing - would you sing with the organ?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I think my mother might do. I think so. But I - I don't know whether us youngsters - I can't remember to that extent.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You probably would remember if you had?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Yes, I think we would have done. I - I know what you're trying to think of - musical evenings sort of thing. Yes. No, I can't remember that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did your parents play games with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
I think - yes, I - I feel I'd be right in saying yes, to a certain extent. I expect father'd like to kick a ball around, the same as all fathers still do -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 He was keen on sport wasn't he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 And you were as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you get that from him do you think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Oh I think we did more or less develop a like for sport and athletics, he was a runner. My father was. My oldest brother and myself are both runners. We're both footballers, my father 
played rugby and we played soccer that's the only difference, we both like - well I - I liked - I like rowing and boating, my brother liked cricket or hockey. You see, so - my younger ones - next brother younger than me, he was not so very much involved. 
H
e played football yes, but he - to my knowledge he's never gone into anything deeper than that but - the younger one still Reg, he was - he was the same a - the same mould as us. He played soccer, he played cricket and he also ran. Of course father got tw
o
 twenty and four forty but - I - I still - still like my own way of life in that respect. I - I enjoy my running, I - I've rowed twenty-four miles in an afternoon, or a whole day I mean, not afternoon. Twenty-four, yes - twenty-eight miles out of Edistone
 lighthouse and back in a two oared skiff. Two of us - pulling all day practically speaking out into the channel. And we got lovely blisters. And on - an on your seat.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How old would you have been when you did that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh I should about - see - eighteen. Eighteen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Were there any books in the house when you were young?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
My father had quite a - quite a nice little library, as far as libraries were concerned in those days he had quite a - quite a selection of books.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You said he was fond of poetry?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes, yes. Yes, Tennyson and Wordsworth. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did he own copies of their works?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 He would recite from their works. Yes. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Can you remember any other books that you would have had?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9643939\charrsid2370612 Encyclopaedias}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 . Dictionary. A }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid9643939\charrsid2370612 Bible}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
 would be there definitely. I don't - I - I have a Bible of my own but - I - sorry to say I've never read it and I think it - I - I would think looking back at - back on it with mature mind, I think I've missed something. I do really. Having read histo
rical novels and biblical novels - in the connection in which they've been written makes me realize there are passages in the Bible which would be fascinating to read. I must say you might not believe in the religion in relation to the work.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did they have newspapers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
I suppose he did. I suppose he had his ha'penny Herald. Only a ha'ppenny in those days. I know we - we - when we were youngsters - in - in my early teenage days, we used to go and get the - the football Herals on Saturday evening for
 a ha'penny, you know, scan the results, see how Plymouth Argyll got on or - or Portsmouth.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did your father have any magazines or your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Mother may have had - oh dear - Family something. Oh dear, it's hard to think of the name of it. One o
f these periodicals you know, weekly periodicals. Woman}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9643939\charrsid2370612 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
s World sort of thing you know. And - I believe a little later, in our earlier stage - no, later stage really, about fourteen or so - he - father used to buy us the B.O.P. Boys Own Paper. Which was a 
- which was the - I suppose would show that he had an appreciation of -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Do you remember your mother or father reading aloud?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. You asked me that before.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Not at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. Not at all, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Do you remember a funeral in the family, you told me about that earlier?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes, my - my young - my young brother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Who came to that funeral, do you remember that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. I mean, when you think I was only about six years old. I couldn't say who came. I suppose - I suppose my mother and 
father and - may have been an aunt or uncle - or aunt more than an uncle.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Do you remember wearing mourning clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I expect we - I expect we wore - black armbands. I expect so.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Would your mother have worn mourning - full mourning?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh
 - I expect so. Yes, I should say she would because - mourning was typical in those days of - of any funeral. 'Cos cremation wasn't known was it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How long did she w}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9643939\charrsid2370612 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 ar them for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Search me, I wouldn't know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Were you taken out visiting neighbours, friends or relations?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Oh I don't know - whether we - having any particular - relations to visit. No, I used to go and see my grandmother Waldegrave occasionally, I remember going there, I told you what sort of person she was. That's about the o
nly - that I can remember some of my uncles and aunts getting married you see. And - and going - not going to visit them tough, I can't remember visiting them after they were married.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Were you taken shopping as a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well I suppose they had to take us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You don't remember about that?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Do you remember any other occasions when you went out with just your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, I don't think so. No. Only - only occasion which I can remember us going, I told you my father member 
of the Ancient Order of Forresters. My brother and I were two Robin Hood's and my two sisters were Maid Marion's and we sat - we sat at the back of}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9643939\charrsid2370612  a landau you know with our hunt}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 ing horn and in - in our green and - we - in a procession round - through Portsmouth you know. That - that's the only time I can remember being taken out for something specific.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did that happen more than once?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, I can only remember that once. I can even smell the velveteen now. I can now that's - that's funny isn't it.
 Because there's - there's a smell in velveteen or cord and - I can smell that now really - when - when I mentioned it. Or imagined it - that's all it is, imagination.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was that a sort of junior section to the Forresters that you belonged to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh I thi}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9643939\charrsid2370612 nk we were all in - enrolled in}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612  it as juveniles. Yes, there was juveniles.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did they have activities which you took part in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Ah - I don't know of any others. No, I suppose my father used to pay the subscription for us to be members and that 
was that as far as we were concerned, we only participated perhaps in the - on this occasion, on this procession and in the - oh annual outing. They have an annual outing. Yes. The Forresters always did, over to Seaview one year, I know that was one. By l
aunch across from Portsmouth to the Isle of Wight, to Seaview, I remember that particularly because -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Would that be a big party of people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes. Yes, yes. That was the juveniles taken over by the - the elders of the society - adults I suppose. 
And - some - once or twice to Ronan's Castle. Now that is a - I should say several miles outside of Portsmouth. Havant way. Hayling Island or Havant way. If you know it at all. Well you co}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9643939\charrsid2370612 m}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 e out of there - Hayling Island - inland.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you go an any outings with just your parents like that, say at Bank Holidays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Only - we had a choir outing - well - no, we had Sunday school outings when we went - when we went out to Milton. We had these choir outings - choir outings. And Sunday school outings more
 or less combined. That was a - Ronan's castle also. That used to be a favourite place.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you ever go away for a holiday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. No. Only as I told you on the Isle of Wight to my grandparents, I told you about - where I - I learnt to - yes, and 
I learnt to scull a boat there as well - row. Looking after the yachtsman when they - when the crew came ashore to get fresh provisions. I suppose, you know - we used to be down at that - one of those jetties that just out and here - there you are, take h
o
ld and catch hold of the rope they go up have their pint while we sat down in the boat. Practising - practice rowing you know. And it was real fun, then they come back and give us a couple of coppers for that. We had pleasure with - paid pleasure sort of 
professionals you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you go regularly to the Isle of Wight?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How long would you spend there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh about three weeks. About three weeks.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 That was just you and your brother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How did you spend Saturdays when you were a child at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Well - depends upon the time of year. I suppose mainly on Saturdays we would go and watch football of some sort during the football season. Summer - playing - taking summer as a whole I suppose we wandered around the c
ountry lanes. Birds nesting perhaps. I was a bad boy. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you think that was bad?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
It wasn't considered bad, it wasn't - of course you see - got all these protection societies that look upon it as - oh well wastrels really for doing such th
ings. They didn't think it was natural for a youngster to want to know what was in a nest and catch hold of the egg and then start to collect them because, you know, to vie with one another, how to get the best collection.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 That would be considered quite a good thing to do as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Oh that was normal - always went out with a little tin - put a bit of moss in it, you came across an egg - nest, and there's some eggs in that you hadn't got you'd take one and - put a - just put a pin point either end 
and then blow it and blow the yolk out. Put it in amongst the moss.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Would you be careful not to take more than one out of a nest?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You might take two, I wouldn't say you wouldn't. I know it's bad practice - I - I would condemn it now, in my - in my mellow days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 On Sundays did you have different clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. Oh yes. I think I told you that before too.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Were you allowed to play games on a Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. I don't think so. I - I can't remember, I don't think so. I think it was verboten you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Would your parents think it was wrong to work on a Sunday as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well I expect work in the house wouldn't matter, I mean, they'd go to work the men.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Some people for example wouldn't do any cooking on Sundays.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. Oh n
o, no, no, no, no, it was - cooking as - as cooking - anything requiring chores - normal chores on Sunday within the household. I can - I can vouch for that because I know my father, as I say, would help sometimes he'd look after the oven. Mother was busy
 on something else, he'd have look in see it was all right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You said your father had changed from Wesleyan to Church of England?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Church of England. C of E.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Because that was what the church was when you went to Milton?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 That's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did he stay C of E after that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 That is C of E, Church of England.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did he stay C of E?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Yes, father - far as I know, yes. Because - let me see. Of course he must have done, must have done. When we went to - we moved out from the first hous
e in Plymouth out into the more urban area - we were - that was expanding area and there was a mission hall attached to an existing parish church. That became a parish of it's own eventually. St Gabriel}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid9643939\charrsid2370612 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 s. Well my father formed a football team there straight away. This is his - his ardour, so we - I know I played for St. Gabriel}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9643939\charrsid2370612 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
s football club, my brother played for them, we were very very interested in that. My father used to score all the goals we didn't on the touch-line because he was such a nervous te
mperament that he - he'd kick - go on, shoot. Yes. Well that - that's the -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Would both your parents go to church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Regularly?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes, very regular, my - mo mother went to church right up - almost up to - well I say - fairly 
regularly I suppose that was, say actually every Sunday but fairly regularly right up to time she died.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You went to Sunday school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes. Yes. And I went to Bible Class.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 And you had Sunday school outings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes, yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was there anything else that they organised that you belonged to, the Primrose leage was the political one?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Because it's coming within the teenage scope now aren't we?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You belonged to the choir didn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I was in Emmanuel church choir at Plymout
h. I was - first of all I was a boy - I was a chorister at Milton church. Plymouth, I - when we moved out urban I joined Emmanuel church choir which was the fashionable church in the outlying area. I was in that choir until I left Plymouth to come up to -
 
and - there - that is where I can say my - I developed a - a sort of longing to go to church. Honestly. I - we still go - we still - we - we're not regular goers to church because of - well have the family commitments but - oh we'd long to to church. And 
a
ll any - all my married life when I've been away from home I - I had two years in Bermuda, from first week I was there I was in the choir at the church there 'til I left there and - a; church in Bombay I went to cathedral there, I went those places, alway
s went to church. Well I - I maintain that Sundays was a different day to the rest of the week.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 When do you think it was that you developed that feeling?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I couldn't say, I couldn't say. I loved the music for one thing. I think church music is be
autiful music. That is one thing. I don't know where I inherit that; from. Although my - I told you my father used to warble and - I've done my share too at times, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Were there any choir activities that you took apart in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Mad}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9643939\charrsid2370612 r}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
igals and so forth.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 That was outside the church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
That's right. And - of course - of course coming outside the age now, I'm getting too far afield, I was going to say I - used to go all round and the music go all round the i-lands singing in the male voice choir. Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you say grace at home at meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 My grandfather did, but I don't remember my father saying it. I don't remember my father saying it My grandfather always used to.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 And your grandfather said it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Were you taught to say prayers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Yes, I suppose we were. I suppose were really taught to say it, I suppose we expected to say it, but I don't suppose we said it at father's or mother's knee but - well I suppose we did say it normally as a - as an act of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid9643939\charrsid2370612 g}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 oing to }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9643939\charrsid2370612 b}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 ed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Do you remember who taught you to say them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Well I suppose it more or less came in the curriculum of schooling perhaps or Sunday school rather, rather than - Sunday school, we'll put it - I'll put it down as Sunday school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Not hour mother but the Sunday school you think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
I should think - I think it'd be - what can I say, the - the pressure of Sunday school would be more likely to put it on your mind and make you think.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you ever have family prayers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You told me your father took an interest in politics, could you tell me a bit more about that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Well, you see - as I say he was - agent for Tavistock Division of Plymouth. He also organised the mass meetings of the elections. From there - he went Germany on one of their fact finding commissions with the people concerned in that part}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9643939\charrsid2370612 icular area when they were argu}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
ing about the fiscal policies, black bread, German black bread as opposed to our own white bread in this country, 1910, I'm talking about now, he wen
t over for - many - many of the towns. Three weeks you know they had to get leave from the Admiralty to do it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Is this because he held some kind of office in the party that he was chosen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. Well I suppose it was actually. He was Chairman, as I told you he was Chairman of our }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid9643939\charrsid2370612 Ju}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 nior Imperial League. Also an ardent member of the Conservative Association. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 He was a unionist?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 He was a unionist.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Why did he hold those views particularly?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well I suppose they came akin inasm
uch as the Conservatives is known as the - it is - or was known as the Conservative and Unionist party, the two - two were more or less amalgamated, only I suppose split difference between them - towards - Toryism as opposed to - to the }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9643939\charrsid2370612 wig}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 . Because wig - wig are - all Liberal has become Labour. Those - those two are akin. In - in various factors.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I what sort of way would you feel that they are?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well - those are - Liberal - Liberalism is applied in many ways in the Labour policy.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Because they've become the main opponents to the Conservatives?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes, yes. Yes. They - they have - have common ground.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Why do you think your father was a Conservative?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I don't know because after all if he'd been brought up as a Wesleyan he would - sho
uld have had - more Liberal - Liberal mind, I mean to say John Wesley was a Liberal mind as far as - as far as}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9643939\charrsid2370612  the church was concer}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 ned wasn't he. Yes. All these things, you know, you're teaching me something you know. You're making my mind you're activating my mind to the extent that I'm visu}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid9643939\charrsid2370612 alis}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 ing more than ever I realized I could think of before. You wouldn't think that would you?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Do you think there was a special experience that he had to do with his life or his work that made him Conservative?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
I think - I think somehow it was inherited. I don't know from what - from what source but it was. He had to be - he had to be a guiding factor. He had to be the organizer - had to be - the one to put things right if they were wrong, you know, that - th
at was his - that was his approach to everything he touched. I'll give you just an example. He'd look at something - put that right. I've got an eye like a stinking eel. That - that's the expression he used, an eye like a stinging eel. I don't know what h
e
 meant by that. But - that was the reaction. And that's navvy gravy out. It had to be correct. And that's his approach. Oh he - he was a - he was a great - great righter in his way, he wrote to the press, he wrote things you know, he'd been a great - he w
as - great mover towards amalgamation both of Plymouth, when Plymouth amalgamated }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9643939\charrsid2370612 th}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 ree t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid9643939\charrsid2370612 o}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
wns of Plymouth, Plymouth, Devonport and Stonehouse. Well they became the City of Plymouth. Well when we moved there - that - that was after we moved from there but hi
s - some of his work became an actual fact, it was published and - for years before he died he would write to the press and saying what they should do to amalgamate across the Chatham and Gillingham which were all three Medway towns all butting onto one a
n
other and merged into one another in - in - as far as boundaries are concerned and - the - it's the obvious thing and here they now battling for it now, they've missed the boat in some - in - in one way because of this new - boundary they're going to set 
u
p within the - break up of the country in the areas to be governed. Well that - that's the sort of thing he - he's always fighting - always fighting for the - Chairman of the - founder of the - an Allotment Association during the - during the 1918 war you
 kn}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9643939\charrsid2370612 o}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 w and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes, he had a - he had - he had an allotment and gr}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16462126\charrsid2370612 o}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 und he - and he said, well come on, let's all get together, we'll amalgamate, we can buy our - buy our - fertilizer and all that sort of thing, lime and so forth bulk.
 Bulk, you know. Get together and have a little show Garden and Allotment Association. That - that's the t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16462126\charrsid2370612 y}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
pe of thing, anything - anything took his fancy.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Can you tell me a little bit more about when he was the agent for the elections?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. I -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Can you remember that yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Yes, well you see this - this was a - see, he was a dockyard official, dockyard officer and he had to - he had to get permission to enter into this particular object of doing work in a - in a - in the general ele
ction. He - as I say he had organized the whole thing, he had to set up his own committee rooms on behalf of the candidate, you see, all round. He would probably start - get everybody on the job alloting them their particular part of business - I know, in
 
this 1910 election I I was allotted a nice limousine, took me right out onto Dartmoor, had to fetch in sme - warders who were on the register of voters for Plymouth into Plymouth to vote and take them back again, you know, jolly good at the Dartmoor priso
n, they didn't keep me but - anyway, that's - that's only by the by. That sort of thing and then when - when the result was declared we - we youngsters took the horses out of the - out of the land}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16462126\charrsid2370612  y}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 ou, pulled our candidate round - round the town, with - wit
h trace ropes you know. Oh yes, in triumph, yes. Of course those sort of things don't happen these days.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 It's not the passion is it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was it difficult for him to get the time off work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh he stood into the dock - he wouldn't -
 he wouldn't - yes, he would - he would sacrifice home as well as - where his own home feelings. During the campaign, oh yes, yes. That's why - that's why I said to you I vowed I would never take up public life. Having seen so much of his - his - }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16462126\charrsid2370612 diving}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612  into public life.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 In some places at that time men felt they risked losing their job if they voted a certain way, do you remember that applying?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I think that could only - that could only apply in the - in the country areas. It wouldn't apply in - i
n the towns. There were too - too much on top of one another to worry about that sort of thing because you wouldn't know - you wouldn't know whether Dick worked for that fellow or worked for that fellow. To - to the extent that he would - he would - motiv
a
te him to vote in - in - in for a particular - because after all's said and done - 'cos you've voted many a time I expect in your - since you've been here anyway, you know very well as well as I do that the secrecy of ballot is there, you have your ballot
 
paper, you put your cross, you fold it, you show the - show it the presiding officer of those - the official stamp to say that's the right paper that he gave you, you drop it into the - ballot box. Nobody knows how you've - they could find out mind you, y
ou know that don't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How's that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
The serial number that is on your counterfoil, your counterfoil. Of course I have fifty years of this you know. I've - I've taken part in practically every general election as a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16462126\charrsid2370612  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 presiding officer at the polling
 station since 1918. So that's - I finished last year - I - this - this is the last' - last year is the last time I did a county council and a - borough elections.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Your father was so active I wondered if he was at all nervous about the fact that he }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16462126\charrsid2370612 showed}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612  his politics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh no, he - he is - no, because I - I can tell you - tell you in}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16462126\charrsid2370612  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 fact - somebody reported him to the Admiral of the dockyard but he was - you know, actively connected. And the Admiralty asked the managing - manager of the departme
nt about my father's activities, he said, oh no, he said, it's quite all right, he said, as far he's concerned, his work is competent, his - he said, what he does outside the; dockyard, he said, I'm not concerned with.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Do you think they would have fel}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16462126\charrsid2370612 t the same way if he'd been a w}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 ig?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Oh I don't know about that, I wouldn't like to say, I - I wouldn't like to say. No, I think - I think there was an open mind there anyway. If - if an employee, irrespective of politics, is a good - good individual -
 if an employee is a good individual and worth it to the firm he would never be subjected to any - discrimination of - for - for view of political bias.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Do you remember your mother voting the first time she got the vote, do you remember her using it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I was away from home. Yes. I was away from home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was she interested in politics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Oh yes. Yes. She was a member of the Primrose League, and as I told you, she was treasurer of one particular party at the time. 'Cos she had - she had to more
 or less fall in line with father you see. So - so they could more or less go out together, when - when the functions are on you see. That - that's one of the things I would say that - where we would be left on our own devices. They could both go out. 'Co
s that's when we're - older children.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
You told me your father was interested in sport and very much engaged in church activities and he was a gardener because he was involved in the allotment association can you think of anything else he did in his free time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Oh yes, he organized train trips - Plymouth Argyll supporters club or - what it did - he organized the railways to take supporters from Plymouth and Newcastle he ran a dockyard excursion committee it was called and he organized that as - as C
hairman and - and see I - I remember the name of the secretary, chap by the name of Lee. My father }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16462126\charrsid2370612 was Chairman and they - charge}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 d these trains to run a cup-tie crowd up from Plymouth up to North of England and - and to London on another occasion, they ran
 several during the season, supporters train, you know, like they have now with Manchester United, you know these supporters. But that type of thing. But you had to guarantee so many seats you see, five or six hundred seats you had to pay for, whether the
y
 were filled or not you had to pay for the train you see. But - and he was - he was chairman - he was chairman at that time. On the Devon Minor football league, on the Devon country football association. Something else you see. He was into everything, yes
, you couldn't keep him out of it. Of course we - in a way - I I have inherited a little of that. I - I'm, on the Board of Governors at school, I've been - I organised the parents association prior to that I've - I've been on various trade}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16462126\charrsid2370612 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 union committees 
- connected with trade union work, not trade union - precisely trade union but - something similar and - I've been twenty years a football referee.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Your mother had this Primrose League activity, did she have any other interest our}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16462126\charrsid2370612  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 side home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I 
think she - I think she had little bit of helping at the church once apon a time but - I think that faded out you know. I think as she got older it faded out.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 But during the time we're talking about what would she do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. Yes. Well I suppose she went round like a sort of mothers union - I should imagine that's what it was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did she ever go out to enjoy herself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, I - wait a minute -, no - I - I'm almost sure she didn't. No, almost sure. Oh - only with - now going out politically like
 to - out to Tavistock or out to - some of these - garden fetes you know, that sort of thing. Yes. But outside of that, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What time did your father get in from work, that was after your tea in the evenings wasn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. Yes, well you see you
 have asked this before but - because of the meals. But - there - there were times when he was working lat hours. The wreck of the Montague was one. In the - off - in the - off Lundy Island many years ago and he had men working day and night in that and h
e
 was supervising and he'd often be there all night sometimes. I know he came home one day with - when he had - he had a full - full girth you know, beard and - beard and moustache and he came home once - one side of his moustache all burnt off where some 
hot metal had splayed out and burnt him down - didn't - didn't sear his flesh but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 So it was quite risky work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well it was, they - they were building what they call camels, now that's not an animal either, it's a - a huge tubular construction wh
ich is airtight and they fill that with air, oh no, they don't fill it with air, it - it is already filled with air but they - they've got means of sinking it with water, getting it in position under the object they want to lift then pumping that water ou
t so it becomes }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16462126\charrsid2370612 buoyant}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
 and lift you see. They were doing that to try and get the mongue off the rocks of Lundy Island. And build - making these things.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Were there emergencies like that quite often?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh no, no, no, didn't happen quite often but t
hings like that - there would be little emergencies arise whereby he would have to more or less stop behind to supervise the men that were doing the job you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Lundy Island is quite a way from Ply}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9402170\charrsid2370612 m}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 outh, would he be away for the night?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. No, 
not - not necessarily except when I told you he was - he was super - super - asked to inspect some of the coal deposits up in - up in the coal fields which the Admiralty were buying to get his opinion of the quality of it, I think that's more or less what
 it was, and - that's something else, you see. 'Cos as I told you he studied metal and - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9402170\charrsid2370612 metallurgy}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
 and - oh he was very keen man, no doubt about it, extremely keen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 With all his activities how many evenings a week would he be at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Very few. 
Very few. Which only makes me further reiterate the fact that I would not - and I stress that - I would not take on these sort of things. Yes my - my oldest son is doing it you see. My oldest boy, he's - he's - secretary of trades and Labour Council of - 
t
he three towns, Medway towns. And he's always around on - he's coming - he's been up to Oxford for - for these trade union sessions you know, and he goes to these - meetings and annual does they have. Blackpool and all over the place, Harrogate and - you 
know. He - he'll never live to be my age I don't think.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did your father ever go to the races?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Never?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. I say no, never, I wouldn't like to know whether he did or did not, I don't think - I don't think it would be in - no, I don't
 think it would}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9402170\charrsid2370612 n\rquote t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 - interest him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was he a betting man?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. No. Otherwise - otherwise he would never have undertaken, as I told you, to try and - bring sports from professionalism to amateurism.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did either your father or your mother belong to any savings clubs, like boot clubs or sick clubs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
That I wouldn't like to say, I don't know. I don't think - I don't think my mother would want that type of thing. And I don't think my father woul}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9402170\charrsid2370612 d tol}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 erate it anyway. 'Cos it - a woman does that 
sort of thing you know without the husband knowing even - even these days - the husband doesn't know half the time how the - how the wife is committed in respect to - hire - hire payment - purchase do they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did they have any kind of insurance?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh I expect they - although I - I - I think our insurance more or less was covered through the Odd}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid9402170\charrsid2370612 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 fellows medical benefit you know that sort of thing, because you had to adopt - all this sort of thing within the order of those benevolent societies, is embo}
{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9402170\charrsid2370612 d}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 ie}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9402170\charrsid2370612 d}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
 in the same - isn't the doctors and the benefits to go with it are all - all part and parcel of the order.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was there one of your brothers or sisters that you felt particularly close to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. Not really, I think we all more or less - I suppos
e went our own ways. I - I liked them but then of course they were girls weren't they you know, you look at it from that angle as a teenage boy - and girls just growing up - and they're girls.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 It sounds as if you and Horace did a lot together when you were young.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
We - of course being akin as regards football, that sort of thing, we were fairly well together but then you see I've got a nature which is not the same as his. I love nature, I love the life of the countryside. My father wouldn't give a
 penny for it I don't think really. He - he would rather go to theatre or - I wouldn't, I'd s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9402170\charrsid2370612 ooner go out and round the cliffs}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
 and - and feel the breezes and the sea. I - I've got a totally different nature to him in that respect.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 When you were a child would play mostly with your brothers or would you play with neighbours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Well we - we'd be grouped, when I say grouped I mean to say my brother would be perhaps with the oldest boy next door but one and - then his younger brother would be with me an
d we'd perhaps be a little group together. You know, that type of amalgamation of - of youth.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Whereabouts would you play, in the street?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 In the garden and in the street. No, you know we had a favourite in game in those days, called kick tin. You
 put a tin - tin in the middle of the road and - we had to kick it as hard as you could, one had to run for it, while he ran you run - all ran and hid - hide - hid - hide - you went}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9402170\charrsid2370612 
 hidden - hide yourself away in}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612  ; somebody would say - the fellow who had t
o come - he had to run, come back backwards you see, put the tin back in the spot it was, then look round and see what people were and - he'd say, all right so and so you know. And then of course you'd have to show yourself. Then, he'd go off a little fur
t
her up the road - in another doorway you see. In the meantime somebody come out of a doorway and kick the tin again. What we call that kick tin. And then - tip - cat as well, you know a stick - pointed both ends, hit it - hit it one end so it comes up in 
the air and - slosh - slosh it with a stick and then run. For round - for rounders you know. That sort of thing. Tip-cat.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you make your own sticks for that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes. Yes, oh yes. Then come along policeman, he'd give you a clip round the ear c
ome on, time you was in bed or - off. They - they - there was none of this you know, they'd sooner give you a clout with a - with their glove you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Do you remember the police being in evidence then very much when you were a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh not - w
e knew when they were on the beat. 'Course they were on the beat then there was no - there was no such thing as traffic cops. No, they were always foot - foot sloggers as we would term them these days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you feel quite frightened of them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I su
ppose we had certain amount of fear. Not always. Oh I said they were always on foot, now that brings back my mind when I was a choirboy at Milton church. When we used to come out of choir - on - on practice - choir practice nights, we had a habit of k}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9402170\charrsid2370612 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 ckin
g the public house door on one side, of course there's two pubs, one either side, we went round one of the lanes. The Black Dog we used to - we used to kick the door there and then run. Well - the - I suppose they got a bit annoyed with us for that, there
 
was a mounted police used to - mounted, yes, yes, a mounted policeman used to come around that particular - he used to come round that - those particular evenings when we were coming out of choir practice, perhaps he might be a bit behind and he'd see us,
 
we'd say, cor, there he is, look. And the field next door to our - our church - lovely - there mangelwurzle there was you know, anyway, a field and we'd be over that gate and across that field like - like shots you know. I know once he put his horse at th
e
 gate and came over but - I think - I think he realized you know he'd be doing more damage by chasing across the field to the crop. He - he pulled up. But - I think - I think that - that's about the only time we were really afraid of them, when he put his
 horse at the gate. We did - we did scuttle that evening.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did your mother ever say, if you're naughty I'll call a policeman?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I expect she did. I expect, we - we often - we - I've often said that to other people - kids even now I've said it. If yo
u don't behave yourself, I've said, I'll call a policeman, you know, when you've seen them kicking at a - at a kiosk or - or -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9402170\charrsid2370612 t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
's got to be something really bad?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I was thinking of more in the home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, I know what you mean. They may have done, I expect so, I wouldn't - I wouldn't contradict the fact that she might not have done.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Were you free to play with anyone you pleased?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes. Yes, I think we were, yes, as boys - as boys I say we were.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 But as you got older?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
As we got older we - we - well we could pick and choose more easily. Those we liked and those we disliked isn't it, I mean it shows your own.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 It was up to you though?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes, it wasn't up to parents. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 They didn't discourage you from playing with any children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
No. No. No. No. No, I expect we would find out quick enough who was -, likely to lead us into trouble or - or we were likely to lead them into trouble, whichever way you like to look at it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Were you allowed to get dirty when you played as children, did your mother feel strongly about that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Dirty? Oh I suppose we were normal, yes, I suppose we were normal.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you belong to any other youth organisations besides the Primrose League and the church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. No. No, no, the - Baden P}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9402170\charrsid2370612 o}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
well hadn't - the scout movement hadn't really started, although I would very much liked to have joined now I - I look with regret on the fact that I didn't when they did start about 1908 to ten I think it was. I was very much,
 as I told you, very much a man for - or teenager, and still am, who delighted in the countryside in nature as a whole and - we used to go out - three of us used to go out in the wintertime, take a billycan with us, went out through thy woods miles and mi
l
es we'd walk. And we were teenagers - eighteen nineteen. In the wintertime. That's after I got - no, I suppose we weren't playing football that time, I was probably in - in between times. You - you get a surge of interest in one particular thing and this 
a
ppealed to me more and in the winter I would love to have a long country walk or a long long walk round the cliffs and round through the lanes back. Just the three of us, young, only young perhaps about four o'clock just coming in dusk sit down amongst th
e trees and make a fire and boil up and make a pot of tea or - not a pot of tea, a billycan of tea. Have a little bit of something to eat.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You would have liked scouting wouldn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I would have, yes, I would very much have done. Of course we -
 we have - out of our children we've got two - two Queens - Queen's scouts amongst our grandchildren. As a matter of fact one's getting - this wedding tomorrow. Yes, see she's - he's getting married fortnight to - no, next Saturday week. Anyway we've just
 been dow}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9402170\charrsid2370612 n there and - he's a Queen's sc}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 out.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you have any other hobbies, did you collect anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh as I told you, boating. Yes, boating.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you have a stamp collection or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, I'm afraid not, no, I - I wouldn't - no, I wouldn't - I wouldn't - I wasn't at all keen on stamp collecting. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you have any pets apart from the goat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 That wasn't our pet particularly, it was my father's. Anyway, no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you help with the gardening, with the allotment?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Oh yes. Yes, went up there. 'Cos it was a - quite - quite a walk from home really this was. Used to go up there because it was somewhere to go, you know, get away from - just around.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you go fishing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes. Now I did go fishing.
 Yes, I - I - my first recollections of fish when I was stopping on the Isle of Wight with my grandfather and I told you my grandfather I didn't tell you my grandfather had a nice sailing boat and he used to take us out for sailing. But we used to go down
 
to this little jetty in the River Medina where he had this moored and - we had fish hooks on a piece of, you know, fishing line and - went down and we were fishing. I caught an eel. About that big. Nice fat one. And the thing wouldn't - you can't kill an 
eel, you know that. No you can't. Anyway we - it still riggled - we got it home to grandma's and grandmother - she - she - she d}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9402170\charrsid2370612 r}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
opped it and cut it up and put it in the old frying pan and do you - you real - you wouldn't realize it but those - that was still movements in those portions of body. As she cooked it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did it taste good?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Oh yes. Eel is nice, a fleshy eel, yes. Of course they're not like the congers you know, a conger eel is tremendous fish, about that thick around, like cod steaks you 
know. Huge and - of course they could - very nearly bit your leg off. You get a - you get one here about eight - ten feet long.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Where did you come across them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh in the - oh off - more off the big rocks you know, more off what they call Penley 
Point, out - out around the channel going towards - but then that's coming - that's coming from one stage as a - small boy and coming - I'm coming now into a stage where we used to go out in the Sound after we had our boating club going, used go out in th
e
 Sound and - I used to go fishing for mackerel. You catch mackerel on an empty hook you know, you haven't - needn't put any bait on it, they'd follow the flash of the hook, as it flashed through the - just below the surface of the water, when they feed - 
actually feeding or - or writing you can see - see mackerel jumping in the sea. They'll bit anything. And yo}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4524907\charrsid2370612 u can catch them galore. And ye}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 t another occasion you'd go out fishing and catch whiting and - whiting's another thing which once it starts to bite w
ill feed well and you catch plenty that way but - sometimes you - you're sitting a boat that keeps going and you get a touch of mal de mer.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you have a bicycle?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 My father never let us have one.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Why was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 He reckoned they were dangerous. Dangerous. He did really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Like motor bikes now?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Yes, about - akin - akin to motorbikes now, a bicycle to him - he reckoned they were dangerous. I suppose because they were silent and - they were silent - silent, they were ridden in a s
ilent way weren't they you know, cushion tyres, but - I can remember the penny farthing you know being ridden. Oh yes. Yes, my - my uncle, he rose a penny farthing. Right up here, well, sitting on the top wheel with a little trail behind.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you think that was wonderful?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Yes, I did think so. I never had a go at it myself. Well that was one of the first things I - bought myself when I - told you about my Uncle Harry, he - he gave us a pound each - a golden sovereign each, my brother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 He gave you a sovereign?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
He gave a sovereign yes. And I bought this cycle for twenty-five shillings and - second hand of course. Well I didn't know much about bicycles although I had ridden one although - forbidden my father until at that time I was just a
pproaching my twenty-first year. So I was growing up fast. And - he said, now you'll break your neck. And I nearly darned well did that same night. I went down a very steep hill and I though I'll try this out, you know, being enthusiastic to see what it w
a
s like and I hadn't tested the brakes on a hill you see, and we've got some steep ones in Kent and I went down Boxley Hill and it went down you know, wide like that, When I came to the bottom it - it was approaching a - a road, not a major road but a lane
 really - approaching it like that, you know, at an a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4524907\charrsid2370612 n}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 gle, an angle, not - not - not bang into it, just like at an a}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4524907\charrsid2370612 n}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
gle. I thought to myself, well - I - I - my brakes wouldn't hold you see, I was gathering speed all the time. I came to a stop where I thoug
ht, you know, was easing up, instead of that it was only a - a flat part of the hill and then of course I'm down further into more of a - more a - a - an acute angle. Anway I see this staring me in the face, I thought I must go into that turning, I took t
h
e hedge like that, I went in the hedge with it. I - how I missed couple of tree trunks I don't know, I - I missed the hedge - I hit the hedge and the brambles you know. I called myself some names. And I - you know I'd done that before I know her my dear. 
And - what damage I'd done to the cycle. So I - I pushed it on and started pushing it, you know, and it started to grind and all I'd done - I hadn't punctured it, hadn't punctured it, but what I'd done, the chain wh}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid4524907\charrsid2370612 eel had slightly twisted - buck}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 led and was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4524907\charrsid2370612 grinding}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612  in the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4524907\charrsid2370612 f}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 rame of the bicycle, every turn you took so the - it was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid4524907\charrsid2370612 grinding}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
 a groove in the frame of the bike. So - I was annoyed - but from, this was a flat road that ran into it you see, a flat lane actually, I was about what - seven or eight miles out of - out from the t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid4524907\charrsid2370612 o}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 wn, out in the country. I was going towards Maidstone from the Medway t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4524907\charrsid2370612 o}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 wns towards Maidstone. So - that - I did what I could, I put my weight on the wheel and got it so that - it more or less took some of it off, I didn't take i
t all off so I could peddle without too much irritation to myself, hearing that grinding as I went round. And I cycle - after walking about half a mile I cycled on into Maidstone. I went into a public house and bought myself a glass of port.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was that the first drink you'd ever had?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Oh no. Not the first one, but that's what I did. I got my strength back then but I'd got a hellih hill to face to go back on the main road. Well of course I had to push the bike all the way up there, it's getting towa
rd dark then, it's in June, getting towards dark. When I got to the top of that hill I thought to myself, well, I thought I'll free wheel down it. Which I did. And watching very very carefully you know, I knew - I knew the hill would fade into a - a flat 
r
un. I - I could lose speed there. I was very fortunate, I did. And then I came on another section which ran down towards the - the town itself into the shopping centre so I took another road, went - bypassed that. I had to go up an incline like that. I le
t
 it go down there and then let it brake itself going up kind of thing. I got home. I didn't go home actually. I went into - next door but one into a neighbour's and the person there - young - well he was school - school - teacher, several years older than
 
me, so my - my young sister was - Gwendoline - was - she was stopping with her because her parents was away on holiday and I thought well I'll go in there and I'll have a wash, because I was full of prickles and - and little, you know, little starts of bl
ood where you'd - where you'd - the prick}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4524907\charrsid2370612 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
es had been. And not only that - dusty and musty. And got this - got washed up. I didn't say anything, I just told this Olive, I said, I told her hat had happened. She said, you want to kill yourself don't you? I sa
id, don't you say anything to my father, I said because that's just what he said, now you'll break your neck. Nothing was ever said, not at that time but as said - several years afterwards. After I was married that was because it didn't matter. But - ther
e you are. It just came back you see. That's the cycling.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you become a keen cyclist after that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
I got a new bicycle about - oh, some while after that when I could afford one. Matter of fact - I more or less committed myself to the and I used to cycle quite a; lot then. Right round - right round Margate, places like that. Many miles.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you go to any theatres when you were young?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4524907\charrsid2370612 Theatres? Now you've come }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
on a point. 1912 I went to - Kent, in October, you've got that down there. 191
2, October 1912, that's right. Now about three weeks after I got there, be early November I joined a dramatic society, yes, and - I was introduced. It was football again you see. A fellow said to me when I went to work, I told you I was going to a - to a 
p
articular job with my father you know, coming up, well when I went to this place I got talking to one of the fellows working there and he said, do you play football? I said, yes. He said - like to play for us? The Gillingham Baptists. I said, yes. He said
,
 of course, he said, you'll - you're supposed to become a member of the Bible Class. I said, well that's all right, sort of thing. He said, we've got a nice gymnasium, and they had. I joined - joined this gymnasium and Bible Class and - only went once in 
six weeks you see, that was to qualify all the time - it's like re-registering you see and - and I was rather a hypocrite you know because - after I'd joined this, few - a month or two afterwards Im - I went in the choir at St Mary}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4524907\charrsid2370612 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 s church Chatham. So I was doing that Sunday mornings and the choir at the Baptist Tabernacle in the evenings.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did the Baptists know about that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What did they say?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Nothing. What could they say, they were pleased to have me. Anyway, no, I mean - 
anyway I was about to say - one of these fellows at the Baptist institute was very much interested - his - his employer was a solicitors clerk, chief clerk of a solicitor, his employer and his employer was very much interested in this amateur - amateur dr
a
matics you see. And - he said, would you - would you care to join our amateur - he was in it himself although I - I've never heard him warble a bit but anyway I said, yes, what did it entail? Well he said, we have practice certain nights you know. So I sa
id, right-o. I'll join. And he took me down to the - to one of the halls where they used to hold their rehearsals and introduced me. My batto prof}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4524907\charrsid2370612 o}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 und you know. Pirates of Penzance and - I became a pirate - a pirate - we were all pirates in the first act and then second act of course I became a policeman. That's my }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid4524907\charrsid2370612 introduction}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612  to that sort of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you carry on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I didn't, no. No, I - I - I wasn't in a position to carry on because it began to entail - my - my income wasn't of such a nature th
at I could afford it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What was the cost then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well, it - it meant I had to buy all the script and - libretto and music you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You paid for that yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. Part and parcel of the society. Anything went wrong with the - with the a
ttraction of the show you'd have to - you'd have to meet the cost between you. And I wasn't in a position to do that so I - I packed it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you go to the theatre yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes. We - we used to - I used to go to - up in the gods and see - many of the - very ol}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid4524907\charrsid2370612 d - now who is it? Musical play}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 s they were - musical plays. Not mus}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4524907\charrsid2370612 
ic hall, musical - musical play}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 s. I'm just trying to think of one or two of them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Like Gilbert and Sullivan ones you mean?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh I also went and saw - some of - Gilber}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4524907\charrsid2370612 t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612  - Doyle Carte - but that - then of course I got married just shortly after that. I - it faded out. Everything went by the board because actually the war started you see. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How old were you when you first went to the theatre, can you remember going as a boy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Going to theatre? Oh my - now that's come back to my father again you see. He had two complimentary tickets given him and he took me to see Oliver Twist on the stage. - That was my first introduction. I was amazed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was that in Plymouth or Portsmouth?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 In Plymouth. I was amazed really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You were surprised that he took you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. Yes. And - and then Siberia was another one. You saw this - across the stage you know - the old prisoners and - and }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4524907\charrsid2370612 Cossacks}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 . Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Why did he get the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4524907\charrsid2370612 complimentary}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612  tickets?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
I suppose one of - one of the associates let him have it you know. I - I when I was out with the Overseer in Barrow I often got - well several times I was invited to go to places by - by the people, foremen - for
emen or anything on - on the firm. The - Vickers Armstrong. You might - pass a ticket over, go and see - might go to theatre. Like to come and see us, we're playing Oldham on Saturday, you know }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid4524907\charrsid2370612 rigger}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 . I'd go and see them. If I wasn't refereeing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you go to the cinema at all when you were at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Cinema. Cinema. Cinema had not long started. Andrews - what's the name they used to call it, not - it wasn't cinema, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Magic lantern?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, it was an advance on magic lantern. My wife mi
ght know what they called them those days. Anyway it was a living picture. It wasn't - wasn't the cinema.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you go to see them though?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes, well went and saw them once or twice but - mainly - it was mainly magic interns in our young days bu
t the - cinemas started up about 1905 - for or six and I can recollect. I can remember them building the first one in Plymouth, now I knew it was sixpence - sixpence for adults, three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4524907\charrsid2370612  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 pence for us. You don't know Plymouth so I can't explain it, Drakes Circ
us. This is where they put a bypass round one part of the town you know and shut a piece off and built some new buildings, Carnegies Library and - and this - Drakes Circus, this cinema - cinema deluxe I think they called it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you think that was an advance on the theatre?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Oh it was. Yes, well it was something unusual you see. Something new. It wasn't often I went though. No. Well I suppose - well I don't suppose - r}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4524907\charrsid2370612 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 re - I suppose it was a rare occasion in a way. Finance again you know. I hadn't - I hadn't - I mean to say if I - if I went down to the town on Saturday evening to meet the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid4524907\charrsid2370612 la}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 d after football we'd be playing in the afternoon, meet them again in the evening, we'd go in the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid4524907\charrsid2370612 f}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 ried fish shop and have a ha'porth of chips and - a ha'penn
y look at the Evening Herald and your pocket money was gone. Out of that bob. Yes. No, but anyway that - that - that's only just my - that was the fact though you know but we got a kick out of it. No, I can't think of anything else in that respect.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Wh
en you were fairly young still do you remember if people outside the home, like relations and neighbours, helped your mother out in the home at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes, you've - you did say - ask me that and I said I don't remember any of my relations visiting us i
n that respect. They may have done, as I say, we - were only top for ourselves and we wouldn't have known any different. I suppose one of my aunts may have taken me out on occasions but of course - that'd be on my - my maternal side. They may have - if th
ey happened to be over from the island, see I had two aunts on my mother's side you see and - they may have come over I don't - " don't - don't really remember because -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 When your mother was ill or she was in confinement who helped then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 That I c
an't remember. No. Of course that's - that is one of the piece of the thing that you're trying to get at. I - I wouldn't remember one little thing about it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Do you think you were put out of the way when that was going on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I even remember - might
 have been neighbours come in. That - that's more than likely. Yes, I - could be a neighbour. Because we had a fairly good neighbour, I recollect the name, who - who had three - three boys there and of course we were family of boys and girls growing up an
d
 they were growing up, much about our age and - the husband of this particular person, he was on the railway. I remember him taking my brother and I and his own two sons blackberrying at Bosham. You know Bosham? Out in the railway cuttings that was. I rem
e
mber sitting there picking blackberries as fast as you - you sit on the grass and pick them - as big - as bit as walnuts I was going to say. That's the - that's the - the impression they gave me at the time you know. Heaped up basket, I know we came home 
with a heaped up basket. Now that - that - that was the neighbour and that may have been, that person, the wife could have been up to my mother you see. Because we often used to be in and out of one another}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid4524907\charrsid2370612 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 s - the boys you see - and we used to be in and out of this person's house. So I expect that's where - more than likely.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Your mother's family lived on the Isle of Wight didn't they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You went to see them for holidays and you mentioned that your father's mother you remember going to see her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Yes, well she didn't live - live all that away from where I was born, yes, down another road and lived near to the railway. I remember quite - we used to call it Jacobs ladder, a wooden bridge that went across over the railway and down on the 
ourskirts went out to Milton.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you have any other relatives living nearby at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
No. Not then because - one - 1901 - 1890 - 1890 - 1899, yes, Fred, that was my father's eldest brother, he - he went out to the Cape with - as a - amongst the v
olunteers, Hampshire Volunteers, the Boer War and he stopped out there and joined Baden Powell's police and settled in - British East Africa, Kenya that is now. And - Uncle Ern, he worked in the dockyard, he hadn't married then either. They were both sing
l
e men. Uncle George, one of my father's - the next one younger than my own father he - I don't ever recollect - I think there was a split in the family there, I think my father had a quarrel with him and they never - they never - I don't ever remember him
 
really, only by name, although I know his son. He lives our way anyway, at Sittingbourne. My father's youngest brother - was in the Post Office and he wasn't married then. Or if he was he was - he was up London way. He may have been married, he probably i
n London - in the London area.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Would he ever come down to Portsmouth to visit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Oh I think - yes, I think he visited us once or twice with his - with his boy and - we took - his son was about - few months older than me. My cousin Alf - Alfred and 
my father's oldest, Horatio, my father's elder brother, he was - as a - teach - teaching in the London area. As a teacher. He was married, he had married a teacher and they ran a - eventually ran their own school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you see them at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes. We used to see them - but not very often.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did they come to see you or did you go up to them?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, we never went up to them. They came to see us. Of course, see, as I said, very rare - very rare.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Were your parents the kind of people to have lots of friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Well lots of acquaintances I wouldn't say lots of friends because I don't - don't - couldn't appreciate the - what can I say - the difference between a friend and a - and a - an acquaintance then as you can do now you see so to me 
- so they were acquaintances, I would say they were acquaintances through the - my father's various activities. More or less.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Do you think that they had separate friends or would they be the same friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 They would be the same friends I should think.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Your mother wouldn't have her own lot of friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
No, she may have - I don't recollect any - females coming to our house - to my mother that she might have met before she was married you know, I can't remember any of that because apparent
ly - in the dressmaking business they - I suppose they were like the are in various - other businesses, there were perhaps half a dozen girls and - they come - but they've all separated, got married, so I wouldn't know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did your father's acquaintances from his activities ever come to the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes, yes, they would do - consult him on various things.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Would they come for a meal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I don't think so. No, I don't think so.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Do you remember friends ever being invited in like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, I don't, no I don't. No I don't. Of course we may have gone to bed mightn't we, see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did neighbours or acquaintances ever drop in without an invitation?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, I know what you mean - I know - I know the type of thing. Now - this - this partic
ular person I spoke about, next door but one - Mars Bailey was her name - she may have come in and out sometimes, I would say she could do. I should think she could do but - of course that unfort - that is an unfortunate tray - well I say unfortunate trai
t
 of the West Country character you know. This is - we - we're talking about Portsmouth now but I'm - I'm talking about further West. Plymouth and - oh they're terrible down that way you know for intruding in one another's without - without by your leave s
ort of thing.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 So when you went to Plymouth did you find that happened more?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 We found that - found that very very pronounced.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did they think you were slightly cool?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 May have done, may have done. Of course you know, east is east and wes
t and west, the twain shall ne'er meet. Well that's a real - as you know I was called a cockney when I went down to Plymouth when I came up from Plymouth to Kent I was called a Westoe so I - you can't win either way. So I've always called my - when I was 
in with a mixed crowd - where do you come from son? What are you, you know, or say - I always said, well - simple Southerner, that was my reply, or cosmopolitan. That - that - they could take it as they liked.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did your parents ever go out to visit their friends and neighbours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
No, as I say my father probably went out - well he was often out, obviously - he was out more often than in in that respect but not to visit. No, not in the same category as visiting, rather more or less - functioning, at particular spheres of activity.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 If your parents got together with their friends did they make music or have any activity like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 My father might have - might have - and my mother of course - might have made music when any of these functions wer
e on mind you, because I told you I think my father would rather recite than sing anyway.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Would he have done that, would he have recited to people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes. Yes. Oh yes, he held the - he had a gold medal of it you know. Elocution.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You said you were interested in elocution as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Well I still have interested in it - I - I - at school we had to learn certain poems, you know, Tenhyson's Revenge and all that sort of thing, on and on, the heart of the foe and that but - of course my father
 having often you know, recited it aloud at home I had got the more or less certain amount of urge to capitulate or to capitalize on it and gain a certain amount of confidence and telling about singing you see, my father used to - he would sometimes sing 
a
 bit of a comic song and - I remember I'd run a ten mile road race, this is coming back to 1913 now, I ran - I had run a ten mile road race, my father was one of the time keepers and judges at this particular spot and I was last man in, 'cos I wasn't - I 
f
inished the course When my father knew I was going to run it he said, you - you - you'll - I told you he stuttered didn't I, when he was a bit cross - you - you - you'll make a food of me. I entered this race without saying a word to him you know and now 
he was go- to bed}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4524907\charrsid2370612  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
on I wouldn't say a word. I went and put my name down with the secretary of the - the organisation and - I ran this race. Road race it was, ten mile road}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4524907\charrsid2370612  b}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 ac}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4524907\charrsid2370612 k}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612  Well it involved up hill and down dale and right round the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid4524907\charrsid2370612 country}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612  side and back
 to the esplanade, Royal Esplanade and to the baths there and they got a sing song - a little bit of tea and things on after that. At the Bull Hotel Rochester which was where the Queen - where Queen Elizabeth - oh no, Queen Mary, that's right. Not - not t
h
e present Queen Mary, in the past. Historically I should have said that. Where she - well anyway - and we had this - I - I was prompted to sing my father's one of my father's songs, she put me up to it - oh - I know - made me wear a wig. But he was so del
i
ghted that I'd finished the course. He was delighted really. Although he said, you - you'll make a damned fool of me. Well of course we - and I wasn't disgraced and I did that ten miles in about sixty-five minutes and that wasn't too bad, I thought it was
 pretty good.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Many people divide society into different social classes or groups, in that time before 1918 did you think of some people belonging to one class or group and some people belonging to another?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Now I'll pick my words carefully here b
ecause - I would say certainly groups yes. You had - you had a society which would - tolerate you. You had a society which would embrace you - I'm putting my own words in a mature way. You had a society which would reject - reject you. There are three gro
u
ps there. Now how can I put them in another way? They could be - associated with religious organisations on the rejection side. I say this all advisedly mind you. I'm only talking from little experience rather than from any quoting knowledge. Those who wo
u
ld accept you, well I would say they would be people that were tolerant to one another, sufficiently tolerant but you weren't quite - middle class enough. Could you - can you make sense of that? In other words your - you're - you're finances wouldn't allo
w you perhaps to - go so far as they could go, at the same time you're respectable enough to be accepted by them in other - other - in other ways, you see what I mean.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What sort of people would those people be do you think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Let me try again.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Would you distinguish them by the kinds of job they had?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Yes, it could be prompted by that, yes, could be, could be prompted by that. Of course - having a father who had mixed so much in different organisations I - I probably become more exempt of -
 I would become more exempt from some of these categories than others, you see. I - I'm accepted in any company. I mean to say, I - I can speak to the navy on the road and be quite happy with him and he - he could chat with me. I - I - that's my nature. I
 accept him and h}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4524907\charrsid2370612 e'll accept me. I - with the co}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
loured people abroad I've come with, I've had the same sort of thing. I'm with, you know, working with coloured people and they've seen you and you can't see a dark man in the dark where there's no lamps you k
now and you see perhaps a green pair of eyes. Back of their heads you know going along the lane. Now I'm talking from - from - from Bermuda when I worked for a firm - was with quite a number - thirty-three percent - of the population there are colours on 
t
he island - on the islands because it's a series of islands. And - there - there you see you've got this - you've got this feeling, they're no less than - to you than your own kindred really. If they - if - if they can be respectful enough to you you shou
l
d be respectful enough to them. I - I have that - always have that feeling towards my fellow man, because - having mixed roughly in a different sphere to my brothers and sisters. Because - I - I'm talking one that's apart. I'm not trying to belittle them,
 I'm only trying - trying to feel how I've - there might be a touch of snobbishness in me, might be, I wouldn't say there isn't. But my - my wife would say this - there is in our family but - I - I say, no, not quite because -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You mixed more widely than your brothers and sisters did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I did. I did. My acquaintances were in all fields of activity. I worked with the lowest - the scum of - I'}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid4524907\charrsid2370612 ve worked with prison - jail bir}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 ds, I'll put it that way and going to see and that. I've sailed the seas. 
I've conversed with coloured people in - in - in their own - Port Arthur and Texas here I've sat on a hatch with a fellow and yarned - and the coloured crowd down below are cleaning out and he spoke to me and he said, well do you know, he said, I only wan
t
 to get; my degree he said, I', training for a barrister. Now - what more could you make for that. He was - he was streets ahead of me in his education. Yes he was down doing this job of cleaning out these tanks - oil tanks. I say, you've got to accept th
em my dear, you must accept them. And this - this - I've - I used to }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4524907\charrsid2370612 referee}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
 matches with these coloured people and I've got utmost respect from them they - they would - they were always, as I've told, going along these dark lanes at night and if you're com
ing perhaps at ten - ten o'clock at night have a voice shout at you, goodnight Mr Waldegrave, you know, it's - it might startle you for a moment but - you - next morning they'd say, oh I saw you last night, you know. And you say, yes, that's all right boy
.
 Everything all right? Yes. Quite happy. I accept them as they come. And you can't do - can't do better than that with your fellow man. Mind you you can - you can be very very cross with your fellow man if he's not - not playing the game with you, you can
 
also - pull him to pieces and revile him, if it's necessary. At the same time if you - if he shows respect you must show him respect. And that is my approach to life. I'm just come down to try and classify these groups. Trying to get to the type of person
 
that - represents group - the middle class group which I more or less quoted just now. Those that tolerate - and - and accept. I think I'm trying to discriminate or make myself clear on that point, have I? But - now is there any question you was to ask ab
out?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You're talking about a middle class group, what other class would there be, would there be a working man's group as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 There - there would - could be working man, could be white - they could be in a supervisory grade in some capacity lik
e that or they could be - shall we say - solicitors offices or - or that type of - or - what - what we - we used to describe as an ink slinger. Yes, you see because - because they - they had a - a sort of self-importance about them that you couldn't alway
s catch on to.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Would they set themselves up above the ordinary working people do you think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Some would try. Some would try but when - when - when you can hold - hold your own with them and you always feel equal to them then they climb down you se
e. You see, you've got to do that, you've got to do that. I mean to say, no matter if you in rage you've got to do it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 There would be two main groups then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Two. Then - now I come to the more humble type. They are the ones you can always get on w
ith. He was the old cockney from London or whatever, you always got on with them you know. You got the right approach you get on - I always find them happy enough. And they're the people I like.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You felt your own family was in between because of your father's activities?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
I think some of my family would be - on the snobbish side. I do. I feel my older brother would be. I don't say so much about younger brothers. Because - one has been in the Navy and he's roughed it in the Navy. The other}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid798420\charrsid2370612  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 one, G.P
.O., he was senior draughtsman with the G.P.O. in London when he retired. Only ten years ago. That's Reg. Alec, the youngest one, the youngest boy - I don't - haven't had sufficient dealings with these over the years you see to know because - well I - I s
u
ppose we could say, well we've held ourselves aloof - we haven't held ourselves aloof, we've had our family to bring up. My - my - my - my - I've been a - more of a misfortune rather a fortune inasmuch as I've had to go and seek work, where they'd had it 
always on the plag}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid798420\charrsid2370612 u}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
e, it's there, it's always been there for them. They haven't had to go and look for it. We - which gives me a wider scope and a wider ability to speak on it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You said that you touched your cap to people when you were a boy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh 
yes. Yes, yes, yes, yes. I think - it's a - it's what should be done - in respect to your elders or to - or to the lady. It's never done these days or very rarely although if you meet an elderly man who's been brought up in an atmosphere, I'm with my wife
, first thing he does is to lift his - if he's wearing a hat he'll lift his hat. I've had that happen to us very recently on several occasions you know. And it's a pleasant feeling you know, to feel there's still some of those people about. It's so rare.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 When you were a boy it was mostly to your elder and ladies, there weren't particular kinds of people that you had to lift your cap to?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh - well, school yes, schoolmasters, they all expected you to do that didn't they oh you won't know, but they did. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Anyone else outside?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well I suppose you would to - the parson. I think you would. Another open question
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was there anyone you called sir when you were a child, or master, did you use those kinds of words to people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I don't quite follow you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You said you touched your cap to people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you call people sir, did you used the expression?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Sir - yes, because even - even - mostly to - much as I didn't want to do it, right up to the last I had to sir so
me people. Because it was - I was an under employee. I - I'll put it this way, they were in a higher category. There was the Admiral you see of the yard I - to talk - when he gave me my I.S.M. - thank you sir, you know. I accepted my Imperial Service Meda
l
 and thanked him and - no - but it went very much against the grain in some respects, I thought I was humbling myself, and I did - I did quite a few times, I - I - I often thought - I went on various - conferences with my bosses down the various dockyards
, like Devonport and up to - up to - Ports - down - down to Portsmouth from Chatham and also to the Admiralty and I had to - I had - people were head of me who were sir - being }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid798420\charrsid2370612 stirred}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612  by people above me so I more or less had to, you know, be a bit diplomatic and say sir. But it went against the grain.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was there anyone outside the work situation who you'd say sir to? Were there any local dignitaries?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, I think I would treat them - all depending which way - in which manner I said; sir. I say it's
 something you can be very very - what can I say - emphatic in saying sir, mean to empl}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid798420\charrsid2370612 o}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 y a little degree of wrath doesn't it.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Where you lived in Portsmouth, who were considered the most important people in the area?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well - important people - o
f course important people as far as - who was - now you going back to when I was young. I suppose - the important people in my life were mother and father. That's perfectly obvious. See. But within the community a large I suppose in my - my grandparents o
n the Isle of Wight were important to me because they gave me satisfaction and - personal satisfaction in holidays and - I suppose - other than that, nobody more important than myself. I was quite - I was quite - quite important in myself.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I'm thinking more in a social sphere.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
No. No. I don't - there weren't that local - there were no local heroes in - inasmuch that - a certain crowd who played for Portsmouth at the time in the football team, Billy Smith and Stevie Smith, they were rather short of
 it, I can remember one - one had moustache, Stevie he was short and bandy, of course they - their football shorts came down below their knee in those days you know and - and Stevie, always together they were, and Stevie was about couple of feet taller, a
ppeared to be to me you know and he was plain clean shaven. Now they were always together like Mutt and Jeff, you know. But - I suppose we looked upon them as important people.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Who would your father have respected, who would he have thought was grand?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Well I don't know. I expect he saw himself - I'm as good as they are, same sort - same thought as I would have these days. Yes, I would say following his dogmatic manner you see. If he was right or if he thought he was right even he'd fight it to the
 last ditch. He would really, whether - whether - whether it's the reigning monarch.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Do you remember anyone being described as a real gentleman or a real lady then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes, now, I have to wander around a bit in my mind in that respect. We meet - we
 meet them don't we, these - these - we meet them often. They may - they may not be the type of people one would associate with but at the same time they can be as you say, the real lady and real gentleman.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Can you remember any individuals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, 
no, I see what you're getting at. Yes, I think of one now who worked I believe or was - a civil servant and he was my Bible class teacher. Saoge Ope his name, I have a book, one of Dickens books, Barnaby Rudge, that he gave me from his Bible class and he 
w
as our Bible class teacher, elderly man, very elderly man. Been a - been in the Indian civil service and he gave us - gave me this on Christ as a present - Christmas present. I've got his signature and all and I've still it and - he was what I called a pe
rfect gentleman. He was so gentle. He was strict with his gentleness mind you but he was a perfect gentleman in his }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid798420\charrsid2370612 manners}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
 his approach to us boys, well, young men, we were teenagers. This is at Emmanuel church where I told you I eventually went in the cho
ir you know. Yes. That - that's why - why - that's only one example but - there were so many of them about you see that I forget. But that - that is one particular person who would - yes, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was there any difference between the kind of people that went to church and the kind of people who went to a chapel?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Oh I - I - you know, I've always had very perverse feelings about this inasmuch as in - I always thought a Wesleyan - since I have two pictures you see, I always thought the Wesleyan was a B
ible thumping crowd. No, that's - that's to be perfectly candid. Always thought they were Bible thumping crowd, always - it's always stand outside the chapel after chapel and talking, you know, all this - you've seen it. Yes. And I always felt it you know
. But it didn't seem it the Church of England. Very rarely see it outside Church of England. Might - they might have foregathered in the - in the porch}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid798420\charrsid2370612 -way and had a little conf}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 ab with the vicar as they came out but - but you wouldn't see them standing outside like they do - you know that's my - that's my -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Would you say that the kind of people who went to church were more middle class than the kind of people who went to chapel or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well in a varying degree I would say more middle class. Yes. O
f course you have this - this factor entering into - being a - being a state church as it is, the Church of England I'm referring to of course, the established church, you would have a small number of regular church goers who were looked upon as essential
 
to the upkeep of the church. In other words they - they - fill the platter very well in other - in more ways than one, you know, they were called upon in more ways than one to do jobs so far as the church was concerned, I mean from financial assistance an
d also their ability to contact other people who could do things as well. I say yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 More so than chapel?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes I think so. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Where you lived - you remember Plymouth more clearly?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes, I do, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did all the people in your position in life have the same standard of living round where you lived?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 On the whole, yes. On the whole, yes, I would say so.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 There weren't any groups who were very badly off?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 An now wait a minute. Now - you're coming back to something which h
as come into my mind - we're speaking about it I believe to Michael and Joan yesterday, where people used to take the family and the father's dinner down to the gate. Did I tell was it you? Were you hear when I - did I tell you that or - oh, yes, yes, wel
l
 that was a fact. I thought - oh well - there was certainly people pretty - pretty badly off, there's no doubt about that. Then of course, their circumstances could be caused by two factors. Too large a family or too fond of drink. That's what I would - I
 put it down - or inability to - to understand economics.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 So there were these poorer groups then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh - yes, I would say there were poorer groups, yes. Yes, looking back on things I say there were. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Can you describe a family that you knew that were badly off who lived near you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
What, in those days? Of course you see, I'm in an unfortunate position in answering this questions that I'm - I was the child of a father who was progressive, in other words, he was going up and up. Therefore 
- as I was growing older and could appreciate this particular way of life if would appear than I'm growing away from perhaps that scale of - of human being that - were really - because you know, appearances are not always what they are. I - I'll put it li
k
e this, we know very well that - there are certain types of individuals who's got plenty of means of keeping themselves decent, they've got it, they haven't - they haven't got rid of it they haven't drunk it away, they haven't thrown it away, they've stil
l
 go it but they prefer to live the life they live rather than - rather than anything else. It's a life of choice with some of them so therefore you - if you can - if you can manage a family into that category they live by choice - I'm thinking of people l
i
ving in caravans in those days who lived by choice in a caravan, roaming the countryside for instance, what we call diddycoys. Now you - they're not the true Romany kind of people, they are of a gipsy type who road - roam areas, they travel from farm to f
arm or pick fruit and that sort of thing and - they set up little communities in areas, in these I suppose the - half these - these merchants you see around, they call them }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid798420\charrsid2370612 gypsies}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 , they're not more gipsies than you or I because - they come through from tha
t scale of life which was a Romany life of gipsy life to come on the dregs of - from a town. Normal ordinary life, and they choose that type of life because it's the easiest way out, they haven't got to be clean, they haven't got to - they haven't got to 
- buy anything, they can steal it if they want to. And I - I'm talking from a knowledge of these people that we had a camp quite near to us.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you know of these people before the first war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I - I - no, well I would say that these same type of 
people persisted. I'm thinking now of Milton, round Milton Shores which was something like the tidal river down here at Wivenhoe but mud - plenty of mud flats. They lived in old shacks right on the river bank.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You remember them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I do remember th
em 'cos we used to go round - my father used to take us round - round these shores for a walk on a Sunday afternoon, they used to have some awful dogs you know, like - well they're like prairie dogs you know - scavenging for food and - that's the type of 
individual I really mean. I do - I do feel that they are the - the type of people that are not poor. They're not poor you see. They're only poor to us. But - you know, I - I really they're much - much more - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid798420\charrsid2370612 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 nriched enriched in this respect, that - they can live on nothing. Without working for it I've seen them go from door to door and pick it up you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did they ask for help from people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh well, they didn't ask for help, now that's a wrong way of putting it. They came - womenfolk - came with 
their clothes pegs. That was the favourite thing of the time, clothespegs. The men simply stopped and played shove ha'penny or - or pitch and toss I should think, pitch and toss, a very favourite game for those people, sit round in a ring and - and somebo
dy keeping crow see if there's any policemen about.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was it against the law?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes. Pitch and toss is. Gambling. In - in a public place.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 So it was the women who came round?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 They come round with their clothes}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid798420\charrsid2370612 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 pegs all the lot of them. All dyed osiers tops you know, dyed osiers. The plume}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid798420\charrsid2370612  - the p}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
lume was osier. Dyed - it was magenta and that sort of thing you know, yellow or magenta and come round with bunches of that for sale you know. Try it on. You've seen them often.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 But thinking of ordinary society, excluding those?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Yes, well, excluding those I - I suppose there are - there were good many of the - well, we would call the labouring class who had a job to exist on their - eighteen to nine - eighteen to a guinea a week wage. O
bserving the fact that probably rent in those days was about half a crown, three and six a week. You see, which which, which I suppose - also coming back to - statistics, not necessarily statistics but - economics of building trade I should say the types 
o
f houses I've seen and - and we lived in one, I say were built for round about a hundred and twenty pound you know. And of course there were no rent restriction acts or anything like that to to stop people from being put on the streets. They had to be - i
f they had to be evicted they were evicted and that was that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Do you remember seeing this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
No. I have not. Oh I tell a lie, but not in this period. No, I was going to say I saw on the - in Guernsey. It looked to be one when we were going by - and all the furniture was out in the road.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 That was after the war was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Were some families thought of as rough and some as respectable, do you remember a distinction like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well - there wasn't much to choose - you - if y
ou can imagine, oh no need to imagine you know there are - streets and streets of houses of terrace type houses you walk down and you can pick out the - the humble and the less - less humble. Or the rich or the less rich. Living in the same vicinity by lo
oking at their windows and their doors. You can tell - or if they've got a small front garden, manner in which they keep their -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 So it was up - was that true then too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 It - it's personal to them, and the manner in which they live isn't it. Theref
ore you can't say that - that's person's richer than the other one. They're probably all of them - they could be all on the same income group but - but - this is where the snobbishness comes in, if - in the extension or expansion of the borough into more 
s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid798420\charrsid2370612 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
lubrious areas what happens. Those that have got the where with all move out. Becomes suburbia doesn't it. Therefore the - they come what they call toffee nosed I use these expressions, you'll have to excuse them won't you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Are you speaking about the earlier time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
I - I also - I'm also - in - embodying that - I'm including that in it because my father you see moved out from - a four terrace house and - in Portsmouth to a place that had been freshly built in a rural area. He's still within - with
in - you know, stones throw of his work you might say or within reasonable distance of his work, of course there weren't any electric tramcars in those days, they were horse-drawn.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 He went to work by tram did he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well if he had to. He had to. He'd probably walk. And take nearest cut through you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 He made that move again in Plymouth didn't he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Yes, that is so. Yes, that is so. Yes. So you see - when you became - become more affluent you - so you take the stride up don't you, in other words you - you'll be getting rid of that old rain}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid798420\charrsid2370612 
-}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 hood in a minute - you'll be getting rid of that old rain}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid798420\charrsid2370612 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
hood in a minute and getting a - a leather shoe. You see. I mean -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Do you think both your mother and father had the same attitude to people in different social classes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
I think they accepted people that they - in - came across together. You know, if one - if one particular type of people were there with father it was hers. They had - well, of course that comes back to a further - a prev
ious question about associates. You come back on the same thing really don't you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 But you think they were the same degree of accepting?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, no, you - you're trying to - this grouping business coming back within the scope of their - their acquain
tances and that's - that's - again you see you can't - in our particular instance you can't very well differentiate between one type of person who came to our house or whom my father associated with with another because most of these - orders - that - ben
e
volent societies and that sort of thing to which my father belonged, they - would obviously hold their meetings - in public houses which they do, nearly everywhere you go you'll find - R.A.O.B. you know or Rohal Ancient Order of Buffaloes. Lodge so and so
 you see. Because they - they are the working man's }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid798420\charrsid2370612 Masonic}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612  - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid798420\charrsid2370612 
freemasonry}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
 you see. I was never one anyway. And neither - I - I prefer to remain as I am, I don't want any kudos from anybody. I'd rather take my own way out, although I have been - often been a
ccused of being a freemason. Yes. I was speaking to my newsagent just before I came away, his brother's on the same board of - of Governors as I am, the school, and he was telling they were going to - to Spain and when they came back, the two brothers wer
e
 going together, his - and my newsagent was one you see. I said, well, how did you enjoy it? I heard he'd had a bit of a rough time, they went by sea. He said, I'm never going - never going by sea again, he said, I'm going to fly again. Because they had b
e
en quite a bit. Well, I said, oh you didn't have a very good journey then? He said, how did you know, he said, oh I said, I met your brother last night, this was on Tuesday, we had a - our headmaster was retiring and we had a do. I said, I met him last ni
ght. Oh he said, down the Lodge? Now - mistaken idea. I've often been - and yet I - I've - I've no - no desire - no desire whatever. In fact I'll give it to you one way, I'm quite happy to live as I am. I don't want that little bit of freemason
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Were you given lessons by one of your parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. No, not at all. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How old were you when you first went to school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I should say - just under five I should think.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 When you first started what time in the morning did you go?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Nine o'clock.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 When did you come back in the afternoon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Well we came - we came home to dinner. We were right handy to the school you see. And we came home to midday meal, and then - back again half past one I think it was. And then at four o'clock.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 When you first went to school did you go in the morning as well as the afternoon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 There was no half day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, no. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was it a church school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. No, the public - what they call Public Board School.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was it just boys?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 A boys - yes, boys.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you walk to school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes, quite handy, I could climb over our garden wall and drop in - playground was the - the rear of our garden.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you go by yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes. As far as I remember. Yes. Well there's no need - for -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What did you think of school, your first school?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Well - I suppose we accepted it as a part of our - normal life at that time. Inasmuch as the - went to school, we did our drill, we had a little drum and first band i
n the playground - the youngsters just played their flutes and drum and - you know, those things they would grow weary sort of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Do you remember liking it or disliking it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well I think I liked it fairly well, fairly well. I didn't say I didn't play truant mind you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you ever get caught for playing truant?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How did you feel about the teachers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 The teachers? Ah - I think our headmaster was a bit of a - a devil really, 'cos he - 'cos he used corporal punishment t
hen, which they don't use now, inasmuch as they'd give you a cut round the legs with a - with a - perhaps with a cane or make a - you see a bit, but that's about a the sum of total of it, I suppose - people that wanted or youngsters that wanted more - pun
ishment got it, but I - I never did, not then. Not then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What kind of thing would people get caned for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
I suppose - the normal practice of - of not - behaving themselves, inasmuch as - I suppose they could have been saucy to the - the teacher, and he would use corporal punishment.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You can't remember a particular instance?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. No, I can't. No. Not - not now, not at this stage. When we get on to another school perhaps.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did the teachers at that first school emphasise certain things as being important in life, like manners or tidiness?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh I doubt it. I doubt it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Punctuality?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Punctuality, yes. Yes, because you see - they gave prizes in those days - to school}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid798420\charrsid2370612  - for children - for attendances. And if you got attendanc}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 es, w
ell - and punctuality I - I got - as a matter of fact I daresay I could show you a - one of my old prizes which has got that - in the front \{ILLEGIBLE\} attendance and so forth. So - so -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How about ways of speaking, did they emphasise this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh I - I don't think they were so - perfect in that respect. Mind you - they taught us the - the three R's, rea}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid798420\charrsid2370612 ding, writing and arithmetic - a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 rithmetic without the a.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did your parents show interest in your schoolwork when you were little?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well I - 
I should imagine so. I should imagine - mind you I'm going from five now to - to around - eight - first three years of my schooling, you're touching on that era now. And - it - it is - it is possible that - they may have shown - in some manner or other at
 home - we had - didn't have homework.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did they ask you what you did at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I can't remember that at all, no, I don't suppose we were really - we were really interested, but they might have said it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did they visit the school, and meet the teachers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Well - no, I don't - I don't think parents - unless it was a question of - taking the child's - part for some punishment someone had I don't know they ever visited school - any parent.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Would they meet the teachers outside school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, I don't think so, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did the other children in Portsmouth I suppose?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes, yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Milton?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, this is not Milton. It was Soton. Soton.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did the other children come from similar types of home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes, they came from the area around.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Do you remember the teachers singling out some children for different treatment from the others?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Not at that school. Not at that school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Do you remember any gangs or groups of children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well I suppose we did gang up
 a bit you know, because - you could say - well gang up to this extent, that children with - lived in - within one street, would - perhaps congregate. After school time, so they're - so that normally I suppose we would have congregated in the playground a
t playtime. That - that's - that's my obvious - rply to that, because I - I can't really - imagine us doing anything different.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 So you can't remember any particular children who were left out of things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, I can't. No. No, I can't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 The school you went on to after that school, did you go on to the Higher Grade School from there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
No. No. No, this - this - the - I've got another school to come through now first, but - coming back to this - this particular era - this week was the anniversa
ry of Queen Victoria, or this last week. I marched from this school - about a mile and a half, two miles - up to - Stansall recreation ground as it was then, its not Alexandra Park in Portsmouth, where we had races and all that sort of thing on they 1897 
- Queen - Queen Victoria's Jubillee, and I received a beaker, china beaker for it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Have you still got it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Did I give that to Geoff only a few weeks ago wasn't it? And - walk - that's walking - you don't know Portsmouth at all do you? No. Well fro
m - Flattenbury anyway walking right through - right up Commercial Road right out to - right out more - more or less out in the country, about - two miles I should think roughly. To - this Stansall recreation ground as it was, and it was more or less a m}
{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid798420\charrsid2370612 ea}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 dow, as is now a park you see, with all the - amenities and so forth.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did all the children in the schools in Portsmouth go too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh we - we had - I do remember this 'cos I - we were in a race - three boys and the girls were drivers, with ribbons 
you know attached to you, you know. And that was the Ju - Diamond Jubilee celebrations for the schools. I remember - I was five years old then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How old were you when you changed schools then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I should say I was about eight and a half, to - to ni
ne. We moved out to Milton. So - I changed schools, I went to Francis Avenue school, which was a newer school built not aw - all that farther from the station, you could say - that Harold Road school where I went to first was that side of the station, Fra
ncis Avenue school was over there that side and about - ten minutes walk between the two really.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 So that when you moved you had quite a long walk?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I still had a long walk to come - come back - from the new area that had been - built out of Milton, to come -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you still walk every day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 On your own?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes. Yes. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was that a boys school as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well, yes, you see, there - there weren't the co-educational as they are now. They had the boys por
tion - the girls portion, they were adjacent but a - but apart.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 The new school was a board school as well was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Would you go home to dinner then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. I went home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 It was quite a long walk?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. But - no - no school meals in those days you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you like that school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh I liked it well enough, yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How did you feel about the teachers at that school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well I was - I can remember - Mr Bath, that was his name, I can picture him now. At 
this school we had the workhouse boys came to this school, it was adjacent to Milton you see, and that was the nearest school to them. We had them there. And they were a rough handful, I remember one - one boy particularly picking up inkwell and throwing 
it at the - at this - the teacher, and - and Mr Bath chasing him around the desks, you know, those little low desks, and - cutting him across the behind with a stick. And that's - that's one instance I was going say about punishment just now.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Were you astounded at that behaviour?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
In a way I suppose we accepted it. I suppose we thought that they were - I suppose we were getting a little bit - toffee nosed perhaps and - and we - accepted them as - part and parcel of the ruff'uns of the school. But 
still, nevertheless - they all had to have their education.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you tend not to mix with them in playtime?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I can't remember much about the playing there because - as I say - we didn't have much time for playing about and - and - I suppose normal
ly we had our little bit of drill out in the playground and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid798420\charrsid2370612 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612  a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid798420\charrsid2370612  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 kick about with the ball of course. Ball was always in the - in the playground.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Were there gangs and groups in that school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, I should imagine - if there were - if there were gang
s, they would - we would gang up - the - workhouse boys would go - their way and we would go ours, you know that sort of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did your parents show more interest in your school then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well my father was - as I told you before, he was a very bus
y man, he wasn't - available - for that, but my mother was a - busy woman bringing up a family and she also hadn't got all that time - to know how each individual member of the family was doing. When you look back on it I can really visualize that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Do you remember the teachers singling out children for special treatment at that school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
No, I don't think so. As I say - the - one or two of these workhouse boys I remember distinctly this particular incident I was just - recalled. That also - could b
ring back to mind that some of these boys were more or less - put aside, and held - tried to discipline them a bit, which was obvious, that had to be done
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 The next move in schools was when you went to Plymouth?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Next I went to Plymouth, yes. Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What sort of schools did you go there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I went to Salisbury Road school for - the - first - beginning of the winter term or - no, autumn term they term it these days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 That was another board school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 That was another board school for t
hree months. During that time I passed my examination - the eleven plus I would term it now, I passed for the higher grade school. And I went to the higher grade school, Regent Street. High - higher grade school 'til I - went to my apprentice.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did that school seem very different from the ones you'd been to before?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh absolutely. Oh not the board school, you mean -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I meant the higher grade school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Higher grade school, yes, definitely. You were in a grade, you were in a - well it - it's 
selective, I'll put it that way shall I. 'Cos you had - you had similar - characteristics to the present day schooling of - well I suppose a technical school. Inasmuch as we did woodwork - we did iron - you know - metal work. We also did - all the - we ha
d a commercial class for -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You did science too didn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
We did science, yes, yes, yes, we had a good lab, we had a fine science master too. That I remember very well, and - as I - I believe I said in preambles before that - we did wonderfully 
well and that school - is now Sutton High School there Some of the - my classmates - and I and - can remember - reach - reached the high degree. One was knighted and - and several more - reached the top.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Were you living near that school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Not too
 far away at that first time, but then we moved from - where we were - were handy at the board school I first went to while we were there. We had move from there - out to - in the estate was being built - on the outskirts of Plymouth, adjacent to the Temp
le side. Of course I had a fair walk then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How long would it take you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Half an hour. Previously it only took me about - ten minutes or quarter of an hour the other way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You went home for dinners did you?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. Yes. Yes. Oh not always. 
No, not always, when we moved out to Peveral I remember - often used to have - a few pence to go and get myself a - Cornish pasty or something like that you know, and - have a roam round or - go do perhaps a bit of shopping for mother. So when we - I went
 back like home at teatime, take home a bit of shopping for her.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How did you feel about the teachers at that school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh they were - they were a - they were a class on their own really. They were they were - people - distinctly - a class - for the
 - for the particular training that they were - they were for. And - they were strict. I know my - headmaster Mr Lethbridge, he was a - I picture him now, he just looked like Shakespeare did beard and all, but he was a - he was a thorough gentleman and we
 
had our - thing we don't have in the board schools mind you, we had - the - morning - parade you know in the hall and - prayers and - so forth. We had an art master, we had a science master, we had - we had the lot really, as - as - still prevails now in 
the schools. In the - in the - in the secondary modern schools particularly.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did they emphasise things there such as manners or tidiness as being important?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes. Yes, definitely. Yes. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 And punctuality?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Punctuality, yes. I thi
nk - I think you could say all the ethics of good living try to install it, and also - now what would I say, spirit of esprit de }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5785297\charrsid2370612 c}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid798420\charrsid2370612 
oeur}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 .
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How about ways of speaking, did you have to speak correctly?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh you had, yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I remember you telling me you went in for elocution?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well - I know my father did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Didn't you say you did as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Well I had a little but not much. But I - I could - I could recite once upon a time but - you know, The Revenge - that sort of thing, but still -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How about punishment at that school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well that - that - you can have that too.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was that corporal punishment?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes, corporal punishment.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What sort of things would you have to do to get caned?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well I suppose tell lies or anything like that you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 The same sort of thing as before?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Were your parents more interested in your school work at that school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well of course then - I'm talking myself individually now, I suppose - my parents were - really my fa
ther particularly I suppose was getting interested in me, inasmuch as that - I was growing up and I would have to come out into the world, and therefore he would - be - interested to that extent, to know how I was getting on. 'Cos I used to have to do hom
ework then. And I used to go back to school and do - do - night school as well, in the later stages when I was in higher forms. Or classes as they were then, they weren't forms but classes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I remember you saying that staying on at school you felt slightly different.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Oh yes, you - you developed - you developed - well I developed particularly I suppose a - a sense of - responsibility to myself and my - my parents. Inasmuch as - although I didn't get what I wanted to do - I felt that I was going to b
e independent if I could, and that's the feeling we had. I suppose that's - some what can I say, a - a spirit that - one doesn't always - see in - children these days. Whereas as long as they can - get what they can out of their parents they're satisfied 
and that's that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You were more concerned about the future?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I - I was, yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Would your parents have visited that school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 They may have done, they may have done. Of course we had to bring home our reports and that sort of thing, so 
it was obvious that - that was all - all laid out for them to - scan and - criticise.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What sort of homes would the other children at that school have come from, it must have been quite a mixed collection?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh they're all mixed types of home. Oh yes. I would say the - I don't say I was any brain}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5785297\charrsid2370612 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
er than - than the others in the board school. There are ones of those board school ones who are able to - a - attain - the - to go this - the eleven plus, I've come back to the eleven plus now, but you se
e - this is - this goes back nine hundred and four you see. My brother, he went - from Portsmouth higher grade prac - straight into the higher grade you see, there, nineteen hundred and four. Nineteen hundred and three I should say. And he - he - he passe
d the knock out exam - in - the - before I got into school really, passed in the November, I went into the dockyard in the -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Do you remember the teachers singling out certain children at that school for special treatment?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, I don't think they w
ould - I don't think they would select any particular - individual - inasmuch that - the - what can I say - the individuals themselves selected themselves for prominence if you put it that way, you knew when you were in the first half a dozen in - in the 
- of course, always had exams - in - interior exams.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 And you were graded in the forms?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 In - in your class - classes, you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Do you remember any gangs or groups in that school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, I don't think we ganged much because we were too much - involved with our - schooling, to that extent.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You all worked hard?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Well we all - we all did our bit to - to get what we wanted, and we knew - this was our - coming out parade you know, we had to - do something.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Were there any children who were left out of things, and of the boys?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
No, I don't - no, I don't think so. I'd say - if there was anything to be - got out of us youngsters, they were the masters there who could - could bring it forward.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You wanted to stay on didn't you and take chemistry?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
No, my - my father suggested I should stay on, to take chemistry. Well - inorganic chemistry, or science, because I did extremely well in the - in the overall national examination of Civil - for the Civil Service, you see. And - an
d as I told you before, I - I was beginning to thin in those days, don't forget I was sixteen then you see, and - I - thought to myself, no. Visualizing as I do at those times, my - younger brothers and sisters behind me, and my father being as - as he wa
s
, he was - I suppose he - he was - he - he was jolly good enough to want me to make something of my life. I said, no, I'd rather have a trade. And that's how it came about. I left that school in July and - started work in October. And I was then in my sev
enteenth year. For - for a shilling week.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you have any jobs while you were at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No part time job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. No. No. No, I never had time for it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You did four years of your apprenticeship, and then you moved to Chatham?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Here.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 That was because you and your father came?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was - promoted - promoted here with the firm, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Can you tell me how you got your own job when you came to Chatham?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 About this job? For - for improvership you mean? Well - I can t
ell you. Whilst I was in the - in my former first - four years - I - had to - well I want didn't have to but they asked me to go in their office and do some their account for them when they were behind with their bills. Tubing timber and all that sort of 
t
hing and - reckoning out the balance. And of course I had - I had higher grade exami - education you see, and I was fortunate enough to be able to - do this class of work, where - the other apprentices sort of there were - were a more poorly educated - we
l
l they hadn't had the standard of education I'd had. I was fortunate. And I appreciated it. And they appreciated the fact that - I had had this education, they took advantage of it by asking me to come in the office - for a month or two, to get up their a
c
counts, and to assist their - their head clerk and cashier - fellow who - who - only two people there anyway, and - it was during that time - when my father said, they're giving, not ruining your apprenticeship. You - you see the manager and tell him you 
-
 you've got to get back to your tools, he said, and learn your trade. Well when I was a third year apprentice - I could build a boat. Two of us built a boat. There was only three weeks difference in our apprenticeship, he was three - there week older than
 
me, we built a boat - at a cost of two shillings a week each. So - a man's job for - well for - less than - well anyway - but then you see - we had an Admiralty overseer who used to come and examine those boats from the - Admiralty, and we were supposed t
o
 be under the guidance of the journeyman of those days, and when this Admiralty overseer was about - our - artful firm - management used to - shift some of us around so we weren't too much engaged on Admiralty work - to look that they were going to employ
 child labour, if you can make that - any sense out of that, so as - there wasn't too much - too much apprentice work and not enough journeyman work going into the job, and - he was also - a friend of my father's, this Admiralty overs}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5785297\charrsid2370612 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 er, my father was a - 
was a foreman then and - and - eventually, were coming back to what your - the question you asked me. How did I get this job? Whilst I was at the - in the office, the manager, Mr Steadman said, oh I'll under - I'll undertake to teach you draughtsman ship 
i
f you'll give a hand with the accounts. Well this is what went on, you see, I gave him a hand with the accounts and he - just give me a little draught - and when he - when I - was on the point of - well I wasn't on the point when I had to approach him for
 - leaving the firm due to my father's removal from the area, he - he come in one morning, he said, here you are Waldegrave, he said there's a job here for you. A draughts}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5785297\charrsid2370612 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 man}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5785297\charrsid2370612 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
s job at - this company, up the Medwa - So - I - I - I - I've still got the - the
 - recommendation from - he - he - he gave me. Typed out and everything, he signed it. Ever - for - what it was wrong Well - I applied for it, and I - when I came up - here, I interviewed the firm, and I was only a - only a youngster, they wanted somebody
 with about forty years experience, to - to be able to - to - to design - fifty foot - fifty - fifty foot steam finishers and that sort of thing, and put it all in this \{BLANK}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5785297\charrsid2370612 \}
 Well there wasn't - it - it's}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612  too - too much to expect, I could do - I could do 
minor work but not that. And of course he said, well - this is - this is still another Admiralty overseer, here, this - this end. That - that - my father had contacted. He said, well, he said - I'll put a word in for you, he said. And for what it's worth,
 the firm that - will offer you an improvers, which they did, offered to take me on as an improver for ten shillings a week.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 It was an increase?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 It was. And I - I was in my twentieth year. So I got ten bob a week. So that how it came around. The
n - then - that's when I just - the end of that period in two years, well, within a - within a few weeks war broke out, and they were scrounging the dockyard was scrounging around all the local people for - for men to go in and build up the staff inside t
he dockyard and I was one of them. At the end of that - that is -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 When you finished your two years improving?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What did you do then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well I - I - I went - I went straight into the dockyard, as an improve - not as an improver, as a 
journeyman. As a shipwright, a ship, yacht and boat}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5785297\charrsid2370612 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
builder. As a shipwright you see. On the war ships and that sort of thing. And then we I got in there - I volunteered to go - they were - circulating the staff, the dockyard staff for - jobs around - away
 at different places, and I volunteered go away wherever they liked to send me. They sent me to Scotland.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 And you got married just before you went?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. Got married after I - had three months away, I came back and got married.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 So you went to Scotland for about a year?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I was in - I was up there - I was up there - yes, just over a year. No, May - that's right. Fourteen months. 1915, 1916, that's right.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Then you came back to Chatham?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I came back to Chatham.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 In 1916?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 1916. In - just - the day before the battle of Jutland wasn't it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Then you stayed in Chatham?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
For a while. And then I - and then I went to - I went to Sheerness, on - on the - Iron Duke, did a job on - yes, yes, on - on - anti-bombing arrangemen
ts and one thing in - well lots of - lots of all sorts, but - of course we had a - we were working - when I was at the dockyard then, it was thirty-three shillings a week. Which was a lot of difference between - ten shill - or twelve shillings that I was 
getting - after my - my second year I had about two bob rise. As an improver I mean.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 When you were an improver what sort of hours did you work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Fifty-two wasn't it, fifty-two or fifty and a half, I'm not quite sure. I used I used - no, you start 
- six o'clock in the morning. In the morning I went to St Mary's church in the choir, the Church of England, which is one of the - big churches on the - overlooking the river, in the evening I was down at the Baptist. I - I -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 So you carried on all through life?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I - I carried on like that you see because, my first contact with people here, was an absolute stranger when I came here.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was this 1912?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 19 - 12, after 1912. I came in October '12. I knew nobody. I started work as an improver -
 I took my - indentures - I had, because of my father's moving from - from - Deveonport to here - I had these given to me - for - for four year I had two more years to do to complete a fully cycle of - of apprenticeship. I went up the Medway River to comp
l
ete them. And then my first day at this particular place I went - we started work at six in the morning, and half an hour morning's break for breakfast at eight o'clock to half past, and I was invited to have a cup of tea with one - one of the youngsters,
 
and we got talking and said, do you play football? I said, yes. He said, we've got a nice team at the Baptist. He said, I don't whether you - you're interested? I said, well, I said, yes, I am, I don't mind. Like - I - I was under - sort of a - an inducem
ent to go there - to the football, but I had to be - go at least - once in six weeks to a meeting. But I - I made - I - I did I went to Bible Class there. Occasionally, and also I joined the choir straight away. So -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What do you sing in the choir?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I'm a bass. Well anyway, that - that's only by the by. No, but you know, these sort of things - do creep in and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 So how long was it after leaving school before you went to Gillingham, you said seventeen didn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, oh no, no, I - I wasn't
 all that long. See, I wasn't seventeen actually, was in my seventeenth year. I left school after summer. Before the summer holidays. So I had my summer holidays plus. From - end of July, or beginning of - near the end of July, and all - the - I think it 
w
as about fourth of October - I had those weeks, all those weeks - a free agent. I used to go out the moors and wander around and - that was my nature you see. Although - I - have other things in mind I was also a - very much involved politically - a year 
or so after this - and being a boat}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5785297\charrsid2370612 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 building, or learning to be a boat}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5785297\charrsid2370612 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 builder, I put it that way - the - concern I belonged to which was the Junior \{BLANK\} Constitutional Le}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5785297\charrsid2370612 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 gue - wanted - well it was first founded at the dock in Plymouth. My father was Ch
airman of it, we boys, who founded it, or young - young men who founded it - really - had this - idea of getting - a social side going. And the said, well what about a boating club - because boating clubs were very prevalent down the West Country, I don't
 
know whether you ever knew that. But they are, very prevalent and - we - we - they said, well, you know, about boats, what about can we get one. Well Lord Aster at that time was our President. The late or the ex-Lord - Nan - Nancy Aster, Lady Aster, the M
P
 that was, her husband. 'Cos they - they weren't - they were plain - at that time they were plain - we knew him as Mr. The Honourable Mr. - Honourable, see they inherited, they got that the title when his father died you see, he came into the title, but -
 
anyway, that's beside the point. He gave - gave us a five pound note you see and he said, he you are, fix yourselves up. Well I - I had - I had the - the right of the purchasing of a boat, which I did for thirty bob. Twenty-seven foot whales ex-Navy - boa
t
, waterlogged, right the way up Devonport Harbour, went out and had a look at it and I said, well it looks all right to me, except it was full of water mind you, we baled it out, and - I - pulled it right round the harbour right up the River Plym and beac
hed her there, up near Milton. And that was the starting of our boating club. And from there we - we rose to a - other I - I more or less was the - head cook and bottle}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5785297\charrsid2370612 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 washer, the - the - I was running the whole show.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 When did that start, about 1910?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, no, I - 1912. 19 - no, what am I talking about - 1910 when I - when Aster when }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5785297\charrsid2370612 A}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 ster got in with Shirley Benn, that's how I remember that, there was a right you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What was this organisation called?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Imperial -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Imperial Constitutional?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Yes. Jun - Jun - Junior Imperial Constitutional League. Well it was a unionist - concern, attached to the - of course the Tories - were - a mixture of Unionist and Conservatives. If you - if you can - hark back to them, I don't know - they we
re, I don't know from where it would be - would be - actually the head of of that particular - institution. Castlerae, of course he was Irishman. And - although we never met him. But of course my father would be - oh a public man. Although he was a dockya
rd officer he was a public man you know, and - that's how we got - became involved. We ran the football team, we ran the boating club in the summer and the football team in - winter and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 So you had plenty of social life really?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes, yes, I did. 
I did. I also liked my - my - peritanacions you know out in the countryside. With - with two or three of the lads that were similarly - of similar nature to myself.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 There's Dartmor just around the corner as well.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh I know, I walked from Plymout
h to Burrator and back - in an afternoon and early evening. Although I - I - I ran part of the way anyway, 'cos I was pretty fleet on my feet. Yes. I used to love Dartmoor, just over towards Brent, South Brent. I know that - I know - I know - I know Buckf
a
stleigh, I've been in the abbey several times. Yes, and I've partaken of the - the mead. Yes. I always think it's incongruous, that massive mill in front of the abbey. Yes. Of course they're still building there you know. I mean, where - about three or fo
ur - five years ago, we were last down there - down that way. They're building a motor way there at the moment, the A38 extension. Yes. Yes, but they're doing a lot of - bypassing I know.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You know these people you went into the social side of the Impe
rial Constitution did you know these through your father or did you meet these at work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Oh, we - we were - we were - well we were split up into what we called wardens, ward captains. In other words we did a lot of - leaflet distributing, going round 
the various - homes at electioneering time and that sort of thing. As I say we took the horses out of the - out the carriage when Aster himself when he went in to Parliament. We took him out of the - took his carriage - carriage horses out and we put on d
rag ropes and pulled him round the town. You know, that sort of thing. Of course you don't get that these days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 There's not so much specta}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5785297\charrsid2370612 c}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 le is there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, no, no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 If it is it's one of bad feeling.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well we enjoyed ourselves social 
life, I - I did have the pleasure of having a few - few waltz steps with - what we - what was eventually Lady Aster, when I was - about - I was eighteen, nineteen, just going on nineteen then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Were there any other things that you were involved in apar
t from the walking and the social club, I suppose that would take your time all up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well, it took up most of my time really. I -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What about before you started that, because that was 1910, between 1908 and 1910?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well - actually - I suppose I could say that - I'm more or less involved with St. Gabriel}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5785297\charrsid2370612 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
s football club, that's a church - church football club you see, playing with them and then - the summertime playing cricket. But - that was on the outskirts of course.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 So you would go out in the evenings quite a lot then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Yes. Oh yes, just wander around you know, of course - Plymouth was a - an ancient old place, town, town around the Barbican places like that well - there always something to see. I remember going up on the Hoe and s
eeing the Shanmrock race the - America, the American Cup you know, on - on - on a - on a magic lantern screen you know. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Who would be your special friends at this time, would they be people you'd know at school or would they be new people that you
'd met subsequently?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Mostly - people I met subsequently, rather than school - either school - I mean like schoolboys that - or school - fellow - fellow schoolboys - went in the services and - oh dear, anyhow, life was passed in between ages. But I ha
ve many many of them, well I met quite a few of them since - I met one up in Invergordo when I was based up there during the first world war. I was surprised to see the person come up with two rings on his arm, walking up behind a - Admiral - oh dear oh d
e
ar, had the - Iron Duke at the time, not Beatty. No, no. No. Anyway, that's how I - I - I just can't think of the name, not Beatty, but anyway, I was just - seeing him walking on this floating dockside with - we'd - docked the ship in dock, she'd had a - 
c
ollision with one of our own craft, and - I looked at him, I said, Vic - Vic Shepherd, you know, he was a Naval constructor, he rose to be - knighted. Yes, he was a - head - Naval - Naval con - he was the Director of Naval construction, eventually when he
 retired - about the same time as I retired. And we used to - I - but - people like that you know. But - other than that - in the main - I - I was treading fresh water.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you have any special friends at this time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, I - I didn't - embrace any
body particularly. Well - you know, a young Cornish fellow that used to live a few doors from me, we often used to go out together, but that was about all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Where would you go?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Out in the country. Because he was a - he was - more or less - of similar nature to myself in that respect.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did your parents meet your friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Oh they would come and see them, yes, they - would come in. They were welcome we always used to meet more or less - you know - at different functions that's why.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you have to be in by any certain time when you'd left school and started work or were there no restrictions?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well - I think really - we - were supposed to be in by - by not later than ten o'clock, we used - but we used to be in a bit earlier. I kno
w I - I very rare later than about - between nine and ten. But - of course, my father as I say being a public man like he was - he was a - he was always engaged elsewhere, with different - societies, all sorts of things like that. Politics and - other thi
ngs besides.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you go out with him before you joined the Imperial Constitution?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Well - well - oh you've got in the earlier stages where we used to go out with children, he used to take us round Portsmouth, round the - shore at Portsmouth, 'cos 
that's where I was born you see. But other than that - no, I - I don't think so. Because if there was anything - like any - gala or anything like that on, then - we'd all go together, mother and father and - so many other - members of the family, but othe
r than that - he was - as I say, too busy a man.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you interest yourself in politics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
No, I - I - I - I - re - remained and still am a free agent. To be - he - he was a - take us for - or arrange for us to go, of course he was a - a man of - at
hletics as well you see, and he was Kent County three A's holdership for the Kent County when - when he - right up 'til the day he died, and he was seventy-six age of seventy-six. And - he organized - sports in the county from - what was - this was a very
 
professional run county, and he changed it over - right practically all - right over to amateurism, because he was a strong amateur man. And of course we joined in with it, in our way. I was a - I - I used to run cross country. I have tried the mile and h
alf mile but - ten miles - my mark rather than - than short runs, yes. I prefer long races, I used to do cross country a bit.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you. Well it's a little bit enjoyable in the winter isn't it, you know, when you can get out there, especially running aga
inst - against the snow and hail you know. Oh it is, yes, yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I like walking now, I don't do any running much.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh well we - the wife and I, we walked miles, and mind you we still walk miles about. I haven't got a car so I always walk where
ver I'm going.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Neither have we. We - I - I wouldn't give a thank you for that. But - of course the - you - you'll }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5785297\charrsid2370612 h}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 ave gathered by now that - I - I've got a - a roving nature in that respect. But I - I see - what's good in nature. I like - I love ab
out the countryside, I love it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 So what age were you when you got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Let's see. 1915, I was twenty-three the day before I was married, I was twenty three - the day before I was married, 1915.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You have two celebrations straight after each other each year?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. Wedding one day and - birthday the next, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How long had you known your wife then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 We got engaged - on her twenty-first birthday in - December '14. The beginning of December '14.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 That was when you were engaged?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How long had you known her before that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh not very much. Not many months before that. I suppose about - five or six months perhaps.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 So it was about a year before you got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How did you meet?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Well we - in those days of course there weren't - the cinema and that sort of thing that people want to go to - none of that, Sunday nights was a training night Had a general - general - for young people parade you know, and you would - well if you s
aw - saw a nice young lady, you know, give her the glad eye and that so of thing, but - then that was - that's - that's the general - you know, good evening, how are you you know. But if they - simply - shrug their shoulders, you know, they don't want it 
you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You met her on one of these parading evenings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Yes, along - it - it was - after church on Sunday evening. I remember quite well. I took her home of course. For company of course, saw her across the lines to Gillingham and that was that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 This would be up in Gillingham wouldn't it, I was thinking of Plymouth.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. No, no, it was Gillingham there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 So you'd only been in Gillingham about two years?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I arrived October '12 to December '14, that's two years about. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you save up money for getting married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Oh - I did. I - I - I volunteered, 'cos war - war broke out August the fourth fourth - 1914. The wife and I - we were courting then. We were at Gravesend on that occasion when we heard the news. And - so - 
I - was - immediately transferred - I didn't finish my apprenticeship actually, I - I had five weeks go. No, six weeks to go - when they gave - I had instructions for us older boys - who - you know, to go into the dockyard, they were wanted, for the - for
 
repairing the - war dam - 2ar damaged ships coming in you see. As it was - well it had been - you know, seen a little action in the channel - off Dover and that, they were bringing them in the dockyard for repair and they want all - all the people they co
u
ld get. So I was more or less - pushed into that. Well after a few months in the - in the - following May, that was Aug - August '14, in the May - following - I vol - volunteered for service wherever they liked to send me and they sent me up to - Na - Nav
al base at Invergordon. And I stopped there. And that's where -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 But you actually got married in Gillingham?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 So - I actually got married in Gillingham but I was - I was - up there three months and came down on the Friday or Saturday - took - well 
from Midday Friday got down here Saturday midday, and got married on the Sunday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you have to go straight back up again?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. No, we had - we had - I had seven days leave. And - went on a - sort of honeymoon down to - Ryegate. And then - I - I
 - we went back to Scotland - took her back because I went back to Scotland and went back.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Had you got anywhere to go to arranged beforehand?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes, yes, yes. Crofters cottage.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was it Inverness way?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh north of Inverness. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 So after your marriage you went back to Scotland? Did your parents help - you in setting up a home or was it all off your own bat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh no, we didn't have a - when we went up Scotland we didn't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 But did your parents help you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh lord no
. No. No, I went off on my own bat. Didn't we love. We did. Oh no, I - I - I went - when I - I was the first one to break away from home you see, and - we went up there and - we made our little bit of home - well, we didn't make a home, we had furnished a
ccommodation. Rough as it was, we had furnished accommodation. Well then - about - a bit later stage the wife had to come down - we were - expecting with our family coming along and - and I stopped only there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How long was that then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well - well 
it was about - I came down in the June didn't I. Well - the battle of Jutland wasn't it. Because I'd only just come home, was going up Railway Street Chatham when - I said, good God. And we saw that on the headlines - various ship had been sunk and that y
o
u know in the battle of Jutland. I couldn't - couldn't imagine it because I'd just been working on one or two of them. Great things you know, couldn't imagine them being sunk. Well we did see - the wife and I both saw one of the ships sunk up there, we we
re about -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was this the one with all the children aboard having a party or something?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes, yes, oh you've got that there. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Could you describe the wedding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Our wedding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes, your wedding. How many guests and that kind of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh, good Lord.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was it a big wedding or a small wedding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
No, on a Sunday you see, midday - a little after midday service. We were married by - a blind vicar, Cannon Robyns, a blind vicar, he married us. And I think we were the last marriag
e he conducted - before he retired. I - my - my wife's father at that time had been in the choir there for about sixty years, no fifty sixty wasn't it, as a boy and man wasn't it, and - this was - the whole choir remained behind after service and gave us 
- you know, the full - full choral service. So we had - you know, quite a happy - send off from the church itself.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you have a reception?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 We had a small reception indoors, because - at that time - there weren't things around like there were -
 like there are these days you know. Expect to have a hotel reception, the wife sort of thing couldn't have that, not then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you go back to your wife's home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes, went back to the wife's house - wife's house and had our re - reception. And
 - when - at the - well - we - about four o'clock in the afternoon we - went to - went off to our little honeymoon didn't we dear. Down to Ryegate, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 When you went back to Scotland how long did you live in the crofter's cottage, did you come back to Gillingham after the first world war?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Oh, yes, I would say I - I - I packed up - returned to Chatham. You see. Well when the baby was born, our eldest boy was born, I returned to Chatham. And the of course the - started looking round to set up a ho
me you see. Which we eventually did after a - after several - about two month wasn't it. Two to three month. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did your wife have a job when you married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. No. No. Old fashioned idea - that - oh you had a job when - when I - when - when we 
were - you gave up your job just before we married, all right. And from then on - she was housewife. Up 'til now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Before you got married what was your job?
\par <subject2>Mrs W. My job? Well - I don't know what you'd call it. I worked in an office It was a builders and an undertakers, and I was in there for five years before we were married.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 And you didn't continue working after marriage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh no, no, no. No. No. No, I mean - it - it wasn't thought of in those days really you see. Not - 
not for people to work after they married. Well I say the breadwinner was the man and he had to - it was his responsibility. And always maintained that, I still maintain it, because I - I think - in case of where there - where there are two people in the 
h
ouse, the man and the wife, in they've got a family at all, then they - all - all right for women's lib I know but - my - my point of view is that - the home should be the first consideration. I know - I know - what people think but I think myself that - 
i
t's - the cause of a lot of discontent in the present day - day and age, is the fact that the two people are out earning, and they have to get what they can get - to keep home, they don't want to keep home, they want to keep up with the Jones's. We were f
ar far happier in those days than they are now. Weren't we?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you like your job at the undertakers before?
\par <subject2>Mrs. We. Oh yes. Oh yes.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Mr. W. Long hours you know. I know I used to sometimes - eight o'clock in the evening. Yes
, eight o'clock in the evening I've - I've come down here haven't I. Hung around.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 When was the first child born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes, May 1916.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Were any other children born before 1918?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, one - one born in 1918, yes. Our oldest girl.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 So that would be two, did you have any more after 1918?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. Yes. One was born while I was out in India, 1920.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How many children in all have you got?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 We've got - we've got - four - six children. Four boys and two girls.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Were your children born at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes, all born at home, yes, yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you have any medical help during this time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh well, you - the - the - midwife wasn't it, midwife made - and doctor wasn't in.
\par <subject2>Mrs. We. I had the doctor for - two of them I think. That's all, then I had the midwife - or a nurse.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Mr. W. Yes, they called them nurse in those days, they're called midwives today.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you help in any way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Me, I was away from three of the births. I was away at the time our fi
rst one was born, I was still up in Scotland you see. When the third one was born I was in India in Bombay. When the last one was born I was out in Bermuda.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You say you had a midwife, did you have a nurse as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. Well, no, a midwife was a nurse. They - they - they - she - she did they two.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How long was the midwife around for, was she there just for the day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Mr.W. You know more about it than I do I think.
\par <subject2>Mrs. W. Yes, of course I do. Well, no, she came in morning and night, and I have someone in during the day to do the work. That was for a fortnight.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 That was a different woman, not the same woman?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, no, same - a - well, the - the same woman came morning and night and the other one came during the day.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Two different women?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 That's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You were in bed for a fortnight?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, not for the whole fort - about seven days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you have any relatives or neighbours to help?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. No. Well I had a sister - who used to come up oc
casionally but - I mean they all had their own homes. And - and I had no neighbours that I could call on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You know all the questions the first time around about your own childhood?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 These are to do with your own children.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 My own, yes. Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How much of your earnings would you give to your wife at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Cor lumme. I think I - yes, I was going to say - I - about - how much?
\par <subject2>Mrs.W. Very nearly all I suppose.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Mr.W. Yes, I expect so. I say - at that time I suppose I was earning about thirty-three boab a week wasn't it when we first married.
\par 
\par <subject2>Mrs.W. I don't really quite remember.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Mr.W. Yes, thirty - thirty-three. Then of course there was overtime and that sort 
of thing which - there - there wasn't a - yes, that's right, thirty-three and six. So - there wasn't a great deal by the time you paid your rent and that some of thing. But - of course - as the war progressed, and we - were going back now Going back now t
o
 1914/18. As the war progressed - overtime, all night work and all that sort of thing, you know, rush jobs, you - you got extra money. Well the sort of thing would naturally - give you - an income, and they also bought - bought forward what they called a 
w
ar bonus. And this war bonus - continued after the war for a - for a period, I - forget how long, it wasn't for - all the long. And then they - cut it off like that. So you - these days if they did that they'd all - all walk out wouldn't they? But - we - 
h
ad to take that because that was - that was a - a recognised deal, the war bonus, so therefore - therefore it was no longer required when you went back into peacetime. It wasn't absorbed into a - into the wages - as things were. Although incomes were goin
g
 up slightly. See you didn't drop right back to the thirty-three and six at the - outbreak of war, then onto - four or five pounds or whatever it might have been - with - including overtime perhaps and - that sort of thing, but of course - you were in a c
h
anging world. And incidentally you're getting into the world of unemployment. You see. And this - this - you have to get the axe - did apply, and I was one of those that - which altered in a way, because in 1919 I got my notice - to - to leave you know, I
 
got a discharge notice, and of course they could just give a fortnight's notice, two weeks, for you to - you know, have a look round. Well, I immediately - I got mine - I got a - I went straight over to Shorts at Rochester and got a start there - the foll
owing morning. So while that not - notice was in vogue - I was working. But - five days after they is}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12544460\charrsid2370612 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
ued that notice they cancelled them all. So those who were out of work through that notice went back in the dockyard. I didn't. I hung on my fortnight the 
Then - the - they decided they wouldn't issue - the notices would not be - were were all void, and therefore - I could - come back. So I put in for a week's special leave - from the dockyard. I was working for Shorts. So I stopped a Shorts for three weeks
.
 And in that time - I - felt like that you know. Am I doing right or wrong, will they eventually issue - reissue these - and I'm in employment. So what I did was - I came back into dockyard after the end of the three weeks, and whilst I was back in I was 
l
ooking around for - for more substantial employment, you know, outside the sphere of the dockyard. I tried for - Metropolitan police, I tried for several other things, I tried for - a - a - a ship's carpenter's job, which I eventually got. But I - I took 
a
 ship the was already in the dockyard, a merchant ship, a - a - ex-German, bought some Russian refugees to Chatham - or to - to London, and she come round to Chatham for refitting. And I - when she - when she sailed I signed on her and went - went out eas
t trooping. That's how - that's how that came about. That's the reason why - our third child was born - while I was out in India.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Let's go back to when you just got married and you lived in this crofter's hut in Scotland.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was that a very big house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Good God. Don't say. My wife has never - never forgiven me for taking her up there like that. You know, the crofters cottage was about - walls about two foot thick, you know, and it was only like a bungalow, a stone - stone bungalow in 
- affair. It was a - a room and a bit, and mother earth was the floor, no floors there. Mother earth with a - a canvas covering, like - like lino - wasn't lino those days, it was - simply a canvas covering wasn't it dear. We had the best room in the house
,
 in the - in the croft, this croft, we had. The old people - lived in the other - we had one half and the old people had the other. We had - we had a - this living room, and a bedroom. The bedroom you just about get round like that wasn't it. No - no pipe
d water, we had to go outside - and use the - a village pump, and pump up water.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 This would be only a sort of a temporary arrangement?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I think we ought to bring it to the house you go in in the Kent area, because that was probably mo
re relative to the questions about family life inside the home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
I think it would be better to take the Kent home which is when you had the first child rather than the one in Scotland which is just makeshift anyway. Was this in Gillingham or in Chatham, this first home you had down here?
\par <subject2>Mrs.W. Well we lived in Gillingham first.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Mr.W. Yes. That's right. That's right. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How long were you in the Gillingham home for?
\par <subject2>Mrs W. About seventeen and a half years. But we were in a - other - in Grain - in Grove - what do you call it - what's - what' was the name of that?</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Mr.W. Granville Road. Granville Road. We were there eighteen months, but then we had to get out because - it was a reserv
ed house, it belonged to - a man - who was the official turn}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12544460\charrsid2370612 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 c}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12544460\charrsid2370612 oo
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 k in the dockyard, and he was just on the point of retiring. And as he would want his home when he retired, we had to get out. Matter of fact I had to go to court over it, because I - I - we c
ouldn't find a place and that was that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 When was this, was this very early on or was this later, Granville Road?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 That was the - the - our first real home wasn't. That's our first real home.
\par <subject2>Mrs.W. How old was Colin when we went there? About three months?</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Mr.W. No. Yes. Yes, he was wasn't, yes, I was - I was forgetting.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was Colin the eldest?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. He would be about three months old when we went there. Yes, I suppose would.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 So you were in Granville Road for eighteen months?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you have any relatives or lodgers living there with you or was it just the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, no, just our family. No, we had - yes, yes all right, yes. We had - we had we had three soldiers billeted on. Yes. And my - 
my wife and a young baby and with three soldiers billeted on us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 That was a compulsory thing was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Compulsory, oh yes, yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you have much room to cater for three soldiers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, we hadn't.
\par <subject2>Mrs.W. No, we only had to sleep them - didn't we, only had to sleep them.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You didn't have to give them food or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, no, no. No, went to bed and we - we - wouldn't see 'em go out in the morning without a cup of tea and something to eat, could we. I say
, I went to work, but they - they were - billeted on - on the - troops - troops place round - not billeted, that was their training ground and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you have any paid help in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Or anyone to do the washing for you?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh no, no. No, we wanted paying ourselves.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did either of you make or mend the family clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 mother - mother - you see what mother does now, she's been doing this all - all her married life.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How about shoes and things like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well I
 used to do - I used to do that. I used to repair the shoes. Right up right up - when they were - pretty well grown didn't I. Do all the shoe repair Other than stitching, I couldn't do stitching but - I used to put soles on them and heel - heel and sole t
hem.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How about helping around the house, did you do anything like cooking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well I suppose I - I did - a little occasionally same as I - as was necessary, I'll put it that way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How about cleaning or decorating, things like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes, I - I did - I've done this house right out, you know, all - all the - same as now and I used to do it then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Making the fires?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 There's one of my efforts today. That - that was always my - more or less, wasn't it, except - except during the - I s
uppose - when I was away from home of course my wife had to do it herself.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How about helping with the children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 We took our children out with us whenever we went. Didn't we dear? And they've all - all appreciated it, even our daughter's only a -
 was it - what - a few months ago, said to mum she said, do you remember, mum, when we used to go over to - to }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12544460\charrsid2370612 Up}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13982660\charrsid2370612 nor}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 , across the water, take a - take a pie over there you know, straight out of the oven. A - a rabbit pie and a blackberry tart, all warm and 
go down and catch the boat across the river and go over in the woods over there and - we - well now she - she's - she's a woman with her own grandchildren. She said, how we used to enjoy it. We used to go round the countryside, and - as I told you earlier
 on we walked miles and miles, hundreds of miles and the children have walked miles and miles with us, haven't they dear, in their turn. As they've come along. Yes, we've - we've always taken them out with us. And I -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you ever do anything like reading stories to them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Mother did it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. I - I - I don't think I really did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you ever look after the children when your wife was away or out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh well - we - naturally I would. Naturally. Yes. But that - that was - hardly ever arose - did it dear. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did the children have any household tasks that they were allotted?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh - yes. The girls were weren't they dear, they used - give a - well, they wasn't allo}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid12544460\charrsid2370612 w}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 ed, they used to - naturally fall in line to - do a l
ittle bit. When the youngsters were young. Yes, when the - elder ones were able to help with the younger ones. Molly was nice - a nice little housema}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12544460\charrsid2370612 id one time was}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 ' she dear.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What time did the children go to bed in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh - round about - half past six. The younger ones.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 When they were young, up to about ten?
\par <subject2>Mrs.W. Well, about half past seven I should think. In fact I know that the youngest boy, when he was quite a little boy, used to sit in his high chair to have his tea,
 he'd sit there and as soon as the six o'clock pips went on the wireless - he'd - so he used to go at six, and he was - about two to two and a half.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did they put themselves to bed?
\par <subject2>Mrs.W. Oh no. I always went up with them until they were - oh they -</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did the children share a bed or did they have their own bedroom?
\par <subject2>Mrs.W. Oh yes, they had to.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How many rooms were there in the house in Granville Road?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 In Granville Road - three bedrooms wasn't it. Three bedrooms. Yes, there, - there was only child, that's so.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you have a bathroom in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. No. No, not at Granville. Up on the top one.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 That was after eighteen months you went to there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 We - that was 1918 - we moved up to - the top road.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 And you had a bathroom up there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes, we had a bathroom up there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 When would the children have clean clothes?
\par <subject2>Mrs.W. What questions, every week. Or - or - as often as they wanted them when they were tiny of course, always clean.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Where would the meals be eaten?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Well in the living room. It was our living room wasn't it? Like the one in there you see, this'll be the kitchen, middle room - scullery out there, you see scullery, kitchen, living room and the - what they term these days the lounge.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Where did your wife cook?
\par <subject2>Mrs.W. In the kitchen.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What kind of cooking equipment was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 A range. There was a gas cooker there wasn't it? Oh we - didn't we have - no we had a range there. Had a range. Yes, a cooking range. Coal.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 When was breakfast eaten, what time of day?
\par <subject2>Mrs.W. When we got there. Well - I don't know, half past eight. It - well it was according to - a - according to the age of the
 children, I mean when they had to go to school breakfast'd be about eight o'clock. To get them off about half past eight.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Would everybody be there then?
\par <subject2>Mrs.W. Yes. But not father. Father'd be at work.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You'd be at work would you?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I would, yes. Yes. Used to start work at seven those days. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How did you manage for your first meal?
\par <subject2>Mrs.W. How did father manage for his first meal? I don't know, I was in bed. Mr.W. Me - I - I expect I managed al
l right, must have done because I - I'm still here. No, I mean to say - no, I could - I always - I'm always able to look after myself in that respect aren't I? Always have been. I say - I - I - even now I come down and - cook my - porridge - after having 
a
 cup of tea in bed, I come down and then mother comes down and cooks the breakfast. So - and that's in those days the same thing used to happen, I used to cook myself something, if there was something to - if I wanted something cooked. Otherwise - I'd mak
e myself a - sandwich of cooked bacon and - you know - take with me. If - if there was any bacon, if I - we could afford it at that that time.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How about midday, would you stay at work midday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. No, I used to come home didn't I. I used to come home in those days, I used to cycle. Cycle home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What kind of things would you eat midday? And would the children be home?
\par <subject2>Mrs. W. Yes. Yes, all together. Meat and veg. Meat and veg. That's all I can tell you.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you ever make bread or jam or pickles?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, very rarely. You made jam, yes, jam, yes, make - pounds and pounds of blackberry jam. Yes, and plum. Yes. Well -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you do vegetables and fruits?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I grew - I used to grow vegetables at an allotment.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was there any tinned or dried vegetables or fruit around then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Well, tinned wasn't - tinned vegetables weren't known in those days. They weren't known. Dried vegetables - very very few dried vegetables, haricot beans, peas and that's all - tha
t's about - in the main wasn't it, the rest would be - normal - normal grown stuff you know, no tinned stuff like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How many days a week would you say you ate meat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How many days? Well I - I suppose so. I would say - of course you've got to take into consideration that - you could get - meat and meat.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 When you were an improver you went to work at six o'clock in the morning?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes, six o'clock in the morning, and I used to come from Cleave Road up here at the top, walk right down Sou
thern Hill, through Chatham High Street, Rochester High Street to that place. At eight o'clock we went to breakfast, half an hour's breakfast, eight 'til half past, then we -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Where would you have that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Come - come outside and sit on the wall of 
the pub there. Anyway, yes, anyway - or - or sit on our workbenches you know, and have a cup of tea and a - and a - whatever you had to eat, and then carry on then 'til twelve o'clock. Twelve 'til one for dinner, then one 'til five or half past five, I'm 
n
ot quite - I don't quite remember whether it was five or half past, but anyway - and then we did 'til one o'clock on Saturdays. Yes, six 'til one with a half hour breakfast. And anyway, it was well over - about fifty - fifty and a half or fifty two, I'm n
ot quite sure.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Would you have had holidays with pay?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Only - only the - on the public holi - the Bank - just the Bank Holidays, that's all. And that - that was three a year.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 When you were getting that ten shillings did you think it was a fair wage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Didn't consider it at all. It was a job to go to and do it, that - that - that to be perfectly candid - was low enough - God knows, but still.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you give any of that to your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No - may have given her something now and again 
you know. But I don't know - well I must have given her something, I must have given her about five bob, half of it perhaps. 'Cos I - I never forget this. I was then - well on in my twenties. And therefore - I wanted things. And I was then beginning to br
anch out with me - as I told you before - came here, I knew nobody, I was in football and - dramatics society and - and of course that all absorbed what little - little pence - few pence I had.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you get on with the other people there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes. Yes. Got on very well with them. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Were there other people learning the trade as you were?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes. Yes. I daresay that you - there was outside again you see, and then they were building steam pinnac}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid1198299\charrsid2370612 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 es and - Admiralty boats as well as private stuff you see, so we were all engaged on similar work, where I'd just come from, in - in Plymou}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1198299\charrsid2370612 th, and - they were appr}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
entices as I say - of - well as a - - a calibre that I would meet. And some of them were doing seven years, you see, because they were -
 they were just about coming out of their time, they went in at a time when - when it was seven years apprenticeships because that's what it was just a few - prior to my going in. I had to do six. Six. Six.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How did your employer treat you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh very well, yes, very well.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How did you feel about him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Well I - I - I'll put it this way, my employers were such that - we didn't meet our actual boss, but only the foreman we met. The actual boss lived somewhere you in the - environments of Lond
on, outskirts - of the lights and they were also businessmen in the shape of - they had tugs on the river and that sort of thing you see, they were shipping people rather, but - apart from that - I got on very well with them. And we had a timekeeper - who
 
was round about my age there at the time and used to do - look - look at the time sheets and so forth - he was a - a young fellow about my age, and he done me - tried to do me - me a lot of good when I was out of work, and - in his later years. He became 
Secretary or the - of the Queen Line of steamers that operated here, the pleasure steamers out of this port, and also the General Stream Navigation Company.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 So he was in a position to help you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. He - well he was able to start - put me onto wo
rk. And - I've been to hide and - and got - excused from him to go back in the dockyards - if I wanted to. Well he appreciated my - my little bit of effort and the same as I appreciated theirs.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you like that work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh I didn't dislike it at a
ll, no, it was something that was pleasurable inasmuch as you're producing something that was - that was use to other people. I mean to say - these days I don't call it boat}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1198299\charrsid2370612 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 building you know. There - this - this present system of building.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How is it different?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Oh - there's no comparison. There isn't the least bit of comparison. If you build a boat of wood, plank by plank and up and up - a nice sheer graceful lines here they don't do a decent day's - well it's }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid1198299\charrsid2370612 fibre}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 glass for a start, that - that 
one - one method. But even if they're built of wood - they - they're mass produced, they - they don't build 'em clinker fashion as we'd term it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 That was moulding it round a shape?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 That was the shape, we - we - you - of course you wouldn't unde
rstand it but - you - you know a level keel in the - stem and stern come out like that, well - what they call the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1198299\charrsid2370612 garbler}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1198299\charrsid2370612 straightener}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
, the first - first plank from the keep outwards. Well - that - is curved like that. I mean here's the keel. But when you look at them they're like that. That's when they get the - what they call the turn of the bilge you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 And so it's very important that curve?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes. Well - if - if you work that mathematically you could see the reason why Because - because - that's what they call the mid}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1198299\charrsid2370612 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
ship, body - body board like that especially finding - you got - say - twelve planks a side or thirteen or fourteen planks aside, according to the - the width of the - the - or depth that you've got to get the boat or the ship
 - that is divided into - thirteen or fourteen parts, the same as it up and down, the stem is up and down and the stern you see so -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 It really was a skill?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 And you've got - you - you - it - it - it - you'd got to know, you'd got to know and be able to work to it you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I see why you feel it's not the same.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
It's not the same. No, not at all. There's no - there's no - well even in these - rowing skiffs on the river, I mean to say - they want what, the nine inches of depth, that's what 
they are aren't they, like a nine inch plank stood on edge, and they're out there like that aren't they. There's nothing in it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 When war broke out you said you went into the shipyard?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 In - when I was what?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 When you finished your time as an improver?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes, yes, I went - I went in the dockyard.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What were you doing there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well - different class of work altogether. From wood I was going into steel and iron. Angle bars and girders and what have you and - and -

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Were the skills that you'd learnt of any use to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Oh I've learnt a lot. A lot of different - lot of difference between - working with wood and working with steel. I would say - for one thing, if you cut a bit of steel you can't put it together again, only - onl
y - under more modern condition now, you can weld a piece on I know and all that sort of thing. But with wood, you - you didn't have to do that, you could do it, gradually work it in. You see. As - with steel you've got to mould everything. You've got to 
h
ave - templates - to mark the piece of steel plating on, where it's got to form the shape of a ship. You - you build a wooden - with thin board you know and and put that out, or else - or else lay it out on a floor, on a - on an old log floor, and you wor
k out these templates, you make a templates what's on that floor, those lines, and you know, it - it's - it's amazing, you see a - a ship's side is like, taken from the centre of the ship down there and up like that. Well that's all - m}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1198299\charrsid2370612 o}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 ulded. Right out lik
e that, you know, you've got that laid and in - in actual - size - on - on a - a scree - a little screed board, and that all scrape - scratched in with a - with a - what you call screeding knife, and you mould your wood work to that - the moulds. Well tha
t's given to a blacksmith to go and make the angels for the ribs of the ship.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 That was your father's job wasn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Were you working the same hours in that job? Did you have to be there at six?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. No, well then we - we come down to forty-eight, that's right, forty-eight hours.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What time did you go in the morning?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Seven. And they had an hour and a half for dinner. But when we came wartime they took the half hour off, and - and that - it's stood ever since as an hour You see, hour and a half for dinner in dockyards.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What time did you finish in the evening?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Five o'clock.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you have Saturday half day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You were still living at home then so would you have given money to your mother from those wages?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh I must have - I must have done, yes, I must have done. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How did you get on with the people at the new job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh well I was accepted. I was young - young fellow, I could nip around you know and do some of the jobs that they cou
ldn't do quickly, I mean - not from a - aptitude point of view but for the fact that I was - well - young and - young and - mobile.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You said they were trying to get labour to come into the dockyard when war broke out, was there any competition among p
eople to get those jobs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Well, not - well not really, but you see, if - if you hadn't come that way they' direct us there, you see, by virtue of - better hour - well, no, not better \{BLANK\} because that had - that didn't come in 'til 1916, defence \{BLANK\}
 that was a couple of years after the war - or - anyway, within that period after the war broke out, but they had - they were able to direct people say if they had their call up - of the troops at the same time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Again you were in contact with a foreman rather than an employer were you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 We had - like there was diff - different grades of - supervision, you see. You had a - you had a charge}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid1198299\charrsid2370612 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 man, and from a charge}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1198299\charrsid2370612 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
man you had an inspector. The charge}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1198299\charrsid2370612 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 man was like a - a senior - working hand with
 a - with a charge pay, a su - supervising pay - weekly, then you had a qualified man, an inspector, who was a salaried paid man, monthly paid man you see, non-industrial. The }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1198299\charrsid2370612 \endash }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612  charge}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1198299\charrsid2370612 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
man was industrial. Yes. Then he had a foreman above that. The senior foreman above that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 They were salaried men as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 All salaried, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How did you feel about that work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh I - I - I liked the - I liked the challenge really. Mind you - it was - rougher. Very very much rougher. Than working in - in a
 boat shed, in a building boats. Conditions were tot - totally different. Oh yes, you'd get out on a - on a - either a steel deck or the boards with - snow and ice and that sort of thing and you go to pick up a - a coal chisel or a - or a - a steel spanne
r, it's just like catching hold of a red hot bar you know, it was so cold Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 When you first became an apprentice back in Plymouth did it alter your attitude to your schooling at all?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 It did to a certain extent, inasmuch that - I - saw the powe
rful weight of education, at that time. Yes, I was. But when I came up here as an improver - I went to night}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1198299\charrsid2370612 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
school and - in the tech down in Gillingham, to learn Naval architecture, and - I did - quite a bit - I did a term or too. But I - but I but by then - I had - faded out you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You didn't feel so strongly about school anymore?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was that part of your job or off your own bat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 That's my - off my - that was only my own - sort of my own education.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you go to any other evening classes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 That's why I went to evening classes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you go to any other ones besides that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
No, no. No, only the Naval architecture. Because you see I - I was green as far as - Naval work was concerned you see. Warship building and that sort of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I'd like to know briefly about the jobs you've done since the first world war, you moved around a lot didn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. I - I - yes, I was - I was - after I finished - the war finished - I was discharged from the dockyard, I went
 over to Shorts. I went boat}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1198299\charrsid2370612 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
building there For a few weeks. And I went back in the dockyard again. I carried on in the for - for a while, few months, then I - wanted to go to - I wanted to get away, I wanted to go abroad for - to - emigrate really, althou
gh what we had in mind was me to get a knowledge - to get to Australia and get a knowledge of - that or New Zealand, didn't matter which, so I took a job as ships carpenter, on a ship that was lying in - in the dockyard at the time. She was a - under repa
i
r, she been a - a refugee ship brought over from Russian people, and - I took a job as ships carpenter, and when she - sailed on her crew I signed on, as ships carpenter. And I went to sea, and I went trooping out East, out to - down to France taking - wh
at's called colour troops from there to India, then around to Burma, repatriating Turkish prisoners from there to Constant - or Istanbul as it is now, and - and back again, backwards and forwards through the canal.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you enjoy that life?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No I didn't. Not one little bit. Yes, that - that was one of the jobs.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 And you were a carpenter all the time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How long for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I came off at India. I paid off the ship in India and came home. I - on a distress ship British seamen, the Ro
yal - because we had a mutiny aboard and that was it and - and - we all - all went ashore in Suez. And the funny thing about it was that - I - I met a young fellow from - Cleve - from -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 So what did you do when you got back in 1920?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I was just ho
me - I got home in Nov - the end of October. And November the fifth I went up to Snodland up this river here, and I got myself a job, had to pass the doctor and got myself a job, that's - only about five days after I got home, it was snowing. And - got a 
j
ob - with a - another fellow that - an ex-Navy fellow who'd just come out of the Navy, to develop a pair of lock gates for a creek - they were going to widen the creek and wanted a pair of lock gates to take the width. And - got at this job and - started 
t
here, I went backwards and forwards from here - to - to Snodland, or to - Halling really. And - for ten months. We built the lock gates, it was - well, the fellow I had with me on the ship - paid off with me, he - he came along afterwards, he came from Mi
l
l area, he came along afterwards - and joined us, the three of us, we built these gates. And - got them in position and - that was the end of that job. I - that was - August 1921. I was out of work then from August '21 to - March '22. Roughly seven month.
 And I had - three children. And we didn't get family allowance, and we didn't get the - the unemployment money.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What did you get as a job finally?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well - and during that time I - I -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1198299\charrsid2370612  I - of course I had - a - a pre}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 siding - a - been a poll clerk in the election and then I was made a presiding officer, as different elections come along, like local elections, I was given preside - presiding officer's job.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You got paid for that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes. Day - a day's pay. Well - well - the fee for the job.
 Which was quite - quite good, and - I tried several other jobs in the meantime, I tried for - a job as a policeman, Metropolitan Police, I got one - one free meal out of that - in St Brides Street. And - but I wasn't taken on, 'cos there was a lot of ex 
- RMA's were - service people coming out, big he blokes you know. And - anyway I didn't get that, but I applied for a job at - applied for a job at Darenth didn't I, and they made a mistake they thought I - I said - I - I read the - the - the print }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1198299\charrsid2370612 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612  boot}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1198299\charrsid2370612 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 maker. Instead of boot}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1198299\charrsid2370612 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 maker it was boat}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid1198299\charrsid2370612 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
maker and - that's - that's why I - because that was - dead out was boot and not boat. And that was that. I tried for several jobs around that way. I tried - at that same firm I tried for a - a job up on this top roa
d, this A2 as it was, it was only a narrow lane but is now a road. I tried for a pick and shovel job. I lived on - other side of the A2 - top road, as you come to top of Stanford Hill, have you come up top of Stanford Hill? No, well anyway, top of Stanfor
d
 Hill - is going along on the A2, that's the big shopping centre along the top there, all the way out to Rainham - I tried for pick and shovel job and when they were widening that road. 'Cos I knew a Borough - 'cos I knew a - the Borough Engineer. The Bor
o
ugh - Surveyor I should say and - he said, I'm sorry Mr. Waldegrave, he said, I daren't give it to you. He said, you're on the wrong side of the road. You come under Chatham. Well that's - our gutter was - Gillingham, being - the land outside of our door 
w
as - being lighted by Billingham, but we were in the Borough of Chatham. So I didn't get that. And just before the end - of my - unemployment period, I applied for a job to - as - what do you call it - the playing fields - fellow. Oh - oh - lost for a wor
d
. Well now anyway, I tried - tried to get this job. And I didn't get it, at the back of us where we were living, the Girls Grammar school. As the - caretaker of the field you know, anyway - we didn't get that, so - so what I did - I went down and tried to
 
get a job at the dockyard - unloading a ship. Stood outside the gates and waited for a job. I couldn't even get that. In the meantime my father had seen the - one of the senior men of the works department - and they'd got some - lighters - lying that they
'
d employed during the war, and they had to be - re - re - rein - reinstated into carrier capacity for - handing back to the firm - firms they'd taken them from, suitable firms. And - he was willing to employ me on that for six weeks. I went in on that. I 
stopped there in that works department, going from ship}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1198299\charrsid2370612 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
wrighting, repairing these lighters - to - skilled labouring, one shilling a week above the ordinary labourer's pay I got for that. Then back again ship}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1198299\charrsid2370612 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 wrighting when they wanted another job done on t
he dredgers or something like that. Then back again. I was up on the roof repairing - repairing the factory roof and that sort of thing, all these sort of things, rig - rigging up scaffolding, that sort of work I had on the - on the works department. That
 
went on for two and a - about two and a half years. Then work began to - increase on the - constructional side in the dockyard itself, which was separate - I come under a separate boat - Admiralty boats sep - separate to the other you see, and therefore w
e
 - were trying - they were going to try and get me over - transferred - over to - NCD - which they eventually did. And then I went back on that and went onto submarines and then - from then on - for a while, and - 1927, I came out again. But that's how it
 was you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 So you were out of work completely in '27?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
That - in '27 I came out again, well - well I didn't actually come out, there was two oil tankers in the yard being repaired. I went and saw the Chief Officer of the - the one of them, tol
d him that I was under a fortnight's notice, I said, do you want a shops carpenter? He said, -yes. I signed on and I took that one out to - Texica - Texas. Went to New York and then down to Texas. I went - carpenter again. And that's how it came about - I
 went there. But I went back to Shorts - oh, then I came up to - when I came back from there I got a job putting up a building at these banks, for one of those big furnishing firms.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was that a carpenters job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 It was - steel and woodwork. And I b
uilt - built in steel there. This - this is - based - based on the second world war, it's still there, no brickwork attached to it. Just -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 On the job you were working as a carpenter were you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh I - I - I - I did the job myself, I made that ground level and everything you know. Well, I had one - one - one ship}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1198299\charrsid2370612 wri}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
ght - ex-shipwright to help me, and an apprentice from the company. But whilst I was on that job and coming back to this man - this - steamship company man, timekeeper from - he - he - hi
s firm that were employing me, his - Captain Shepherd, the Queen Line of Steamers, he took me down and - employed me. And - when I completed it I got the push. And then - I went back in the dockyard for a short - for - oh - on hired work, not hired on, te
mporary employment.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Which year was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
1928 - '29. '29. I went back for a short while, then came out again, then I went over to Shorts again - on another job, building - supposed to be building a barge for Firestone, instead of that we were con
verting one. That's a swindle - that Shorts were carrying out. And - we went down to - this firm - the Queen Line Steam they call barge yard to - copper the bottom of this particular - job, barge that we - we - that we were converting, supposed to be - su
p
posed to have built mind you - for Firestone Company, American, and - whilst we whether there I finished the job off there and I - I saw O'Keefe, that's the man's name I'm talking about, I saw O'Keefe, I said, any chance of a job? He said - I - just a min
u
te, he said, yes, I think so. Come along. I got a job then - on some - minesweepers they were converting - into pleasure boats. And - yes, yes, as a shipwright. Then we - then I went back in the dockyard again. And I came out the next time - no, I didn't 
-
 yes, that's right, when I came out the next time, I got my notice of discharge - I was - referring a football match down here at Gillingham - practice match at the beginning of the season at August, when one of the Directors said to me - I'd met him when
 
I was putting up this building at back of this - shop, and he said to me he said, hello. What - how are you getting on, what are you doing now? 'Cos he recognised me from - this job - I was doing at the back of his shop. I told him I - I was just - was ou
t
 of work from that day I've got a job for you, he said. He said, I've got - a contract to redeck Rochester pier. He says, all right? I said, yes, when do you want me to start? He said, well whenever you like, Monday, he said, report to my general foreman,
 
he said, and so - so on, which I did, and I went - they weren't ready for me, they hadn't got any materials or anything, but before that, when I got home from this football match there was a postcard from this O'Keefe telling me that Messrs - oh - ex-Mayo
r
 of Rochester and all - anyway, it doesn't matter, he - he had got this - job - telling me that he had got this job - if this news was any good to me he'd be pleased to hand it on. So they thought of me. You see. So I got that job, and I went then for thr
e
e weeks I went up - helping to build the Memorial Hall opposite Rochester cemetery, on a building you know. And then I - I was - I took over the - pier repair, I redecked that pier with - I employed what labour I wanted, and when we were really hard up fo
r a bit more labour -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 So you were foreman really then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes, I - I ran the job.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Would that be in 1930 by now?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. 1930 it was. And then he - he also - became - councillor that day, this particular boss - and then he went on to be Mayo
r. But anyway - Joe - Joe Leech, that's right, Leech. Anyway he - he gave me a - when that jobs was finished, I went back in the dockyard, and - we were - then - more or less hired. And things were beginning to open up. Well they were beginning to sense t
hat - this war was coming on, but - anyway - I - the uncertainly of - of it all was - I didn't know. So I volunteered to go to Bermuda. And I went out there for two years.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was that on a ship?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, I - on the - repair base. On the floating dock out there, repairing the West Indian - station fleet and that, carrying out all -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 So which of your skills were you using then, was that a shipwrights job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I was ship}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1198299\charrsid2370612 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
wrighting, yes, yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was that up to 1932?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 '32. Yes, '32 to '34. That's the two years I was out there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 And then you came back in 1934?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
I came back here in 1934 in the dockyard as - I was - back what - three years, yes just barely three years and - I was asked to go overseeing at Barrow. I went up to overseeing for the Admiral}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1198299\charrsid2370612 
t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 y on the aircraft - building of the aircraft carriers - Illustrious and Indomitable.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How long were you there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I was there ten months when - war was on the verge of breaking out, from '38 - 'til April '39. I came back in - April 
'39, I packed up a good job - to come home because - we had this - our young family, and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 They hadn't seen much of you had they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. And - and that's how - what - that's how it happened, I came back and throughout the war - I - first of all whe
n I came back - I carried out ship}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1198299\charrsid2370612 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
wrighting jobs, then I went into - into an office in the yard as a foreman writer - and the day I went in the costing office, became a - estimate}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1198299\charrsid2370612 d}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612  and costing man, and I did - quite a lot of work, believe me, and - and qu
ite interesting work. Very - it was a challenge. I was - I was - estimating - and also - meeting the shop stewards and that and - arguing with - over them over prices of jobs and - we had to - get them down to - brass tacks, we had - as as - as a man that
 knew - knew the job I could tell them, I could do the job.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 So in 1945 did you carry on with that work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
1945 - oh no, I - I - oh this - this went on from - 1943 I went in the - foreman's went from foreman's office in - to - in '43 into the costing office, and from there - I - as I say I went costings right up to the time I retired, right up to - '57.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Have you done any work since '57? Any part time jobs or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Part time jobs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Since retirement - it's just - going out 
on the electoral role, getting, you know, going through and getting that paper out which you - everyone should get, you have it - I know you do - tenth of - Aug - October, last day of register. Yes. Well I have the job - I had the job of going out - right
 
out - right out in the country you know, there's of these out - far out stations out were, walking about five miles to get - and this is on a capitation basis you know, about a penny for ten or something like that, is the payment you get for it, and - go 
from farmhouse to - to a - cot - cottage somewhere in an orchard to find out whether they're on the register or not. Really - that takes - about - round about the end of September and go on then 'til - 'til - the -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Have you done that each year since retirement?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Oh - I - I did it three years - four years running. I had the gipsy encampment up top here as well and - it was a - really a rele - revelation - some of them, to see it. But - I - that's the only - other - other than - just the - being a p
residing officer at the various elections throughout the period, through out the years - of -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 All the time you were in England you were presiding at elections?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I - up 'til last - yes, up 'til last year, from - I did my first - polling clerk job 
in 1918, when they advertised in the local pres for - for staff. I did that on one occasion, and from then onwards, every time - all the time I've been in England on a - on a - an election date of any description, whether it's local county council or what
 - I've - been presiding officer. Up until - 1st - general election. That's fifty years. Over fifty years.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What do you get paid for that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well it - the - about - seven - seven guineas for a day. For a fourteen hour - fourteen hour day.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Looking back over your life as a shipwright and carpenter and all the things you've been doing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What have you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Is there anything you would have preferred to have done?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, I wouldn't. Not at all now. I - I - I - well you see - taking my - leisu
re time out of it, which is - been quite immense and - especially football, you see, I - I've been a foot - I'was a footballing referee for twenty years, and - I'm still very much associated with - with local football, I'm President of the Rushden Distric
t
 Football League, we put a thousand odd players out every week on the field of play, and we're proud we do it. We have a splendid competition, we've got one - of the highest leagues in the county, and I've said, I'm not saying this boastfully because - I 
am only a - a nominal head now. I've been through the - the council and the shares and - and that, I'm just what they call - retired to the peerage. And - but I'm still as proud as ever, forty-five years of it and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You mean you got your pleasures in your spare time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I got my pleasure from - yes. Walking, the wife and I have wal}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1198299\charrsid2370612 k}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 ed thousands of miles, now that's not saying anything -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you do that before 1918, did you used to go for walks a lot in the period that we were talking about?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Yes. Yes. Yes, I - now my - we had a very pleasant - episode regard of this - from the younger daughter of our two daughters. She said - she was talking to a young wives association at their church down in Hove down in Sussex, she said now I'll - always
 look back on my childhood with pleasure, when my parents used to take us all out for walks. And now moth - mother - mother was only talking about that last week. He was it, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 When you started work full time did it change your relationship with them at all? When you grew up and left school and worked?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well - I'm afraid sometimes we - we had a little blow up with another.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You stood up to him did you as you got older?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. I was very - he had his - he was of course Secretary of t
he - Kent County Association for years, he was - dockyard representative on - the - the Admiralty for schools, dockyard colleges, and - many many other things. There - they - they're innumerable. He was council - town councillor here for - some years, but
 - I wouldn't follow politics.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Had you belonged to a trade union?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes. It was essential to be on - be - because when I went as a ships carpenter I had to either belong to the Seamen}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1198299\charrsid2370612 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 s Union or - an associated body, affiliated with them or - th
rough an affiliation, before the - at the time - what is now called the Shipbuilding - or Ship - Ship - Ship - Builders Federation - that was the Shipwrights Association.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was it a closed shop?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I couldn't have got a job as a - as a ships carpente
r - perhaps on a - on a tramp steamer or something like that, but at that time, particular job I'd asked for - I wouldn't have got it unless I was - a union man.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you take part in any of their activities?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well I - I was a union man to this extent, that - when I was in the - estimating office, we were still - industrial at the start.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 When was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 1943. '44. Yes. Yes. Well we were - we were industrial. We weren't industrial - until - 1953. But - in that time, we were also had an Est
imators Association, you see, from all the dockyards - in the Kingdom, and although we were only a small body of about two hundred odd, I was - I was on that - council and - we were fighting tooth and nail to get non-industrial - status you see. And there
fore - we were - being }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1198299\charrsid2370612 revivified}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
 by our own unions, my shipwrights association, and by the - AEF as is now, the - Engineering - Amalgamated Engineering Association - wouldn't play ball, inasmuch that they were - wanting - to have - represent us on a non-in
dustrial - they were industrial, we were - we were - we were wanting to be non-industrial, which we were. We - we don't touch tools. All we went round, look at a job and price it up and say well, that's our estimate of that job, and then we would argue wi
th the men who'd got to do it and say, well, if you can put a - put a case forward - where you could claim more, we'll - we'll - we'll review it, you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You felt you were very much struggling with them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, I - I - I went away, I went away - o
n various jobs, you know, daytime, I've been down to Witchford and down to the Isle of Wight or down to Southsea, and down to Plymouth on various schemes of work. But you see - this sort of thing - we had to build up - to put before the appropriate unions
 and their leaders. There's some information there that - rather staggered - stagger a good many people. There - there's my indentures. One shilling per week, sixpence a year after, and M was eighteen years old then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How old were you when you signed this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Me, I was in my - seventeenth year.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You left school when you were sixteen then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I left school when I was sixteen. Yes. I could have carried on but my - I wouldn't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 And this was the apprenticeship in the dockyard?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. No, I w
asn't in the dockyard, it was a small yard at - shipyard and boat building yard - down in well I used to have to go from Devon into Cornwall every day. Across the harbour.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you continue to live at home at the same time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You didn't get lodgings in Cornwall?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, no, I - I used to walk say about - nearly three miles - in the morning and three miles back at night. Walk.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What time would you get back at night then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Somewhere around about - around - somewhere round
 about quarter past six. There - there was a - a - as an active sort of fellow I suppose I was able to walk at least - four miles an hour.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 So it would take you an hour to get there and an hour to get back?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Round about, I had quarter of an hour's boat journey you see across the harbour. I used to allow myself three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1198299\charrsid2370612  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 quarters of an hour really, but - of course you don't know that part of the world do you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I do but not very well, I know Devon because I was living in Buckfastleigh last winter.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
No. No. No, well I - I - I lived at - I lived at actually on the outskirts of Plymouth, I had to walk right into what was then - Plymouth was three - three towns once upon a time, not the City of Plymouth. Plymouth, Devonport and Stonehouse, and I used
 to have to walk from Plymouth to Stonehouse every morning.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you find that taking a job for the first time changed your ....
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well - you see, I - I've had what you call - respectable education, a little higher education than the average chap I
 was working with. We were practically a mob of - young apprentices see, younger than me. In - in age, but they were - been - been at the jobs - years - quite a little while longer than me. But - we mixed very well.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What about your parents, did they treat you as more grown up once you'd left school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Well - I suppose they did, I mean to say, after all's said and done one has to - more or less live in - live in that atmosphere of - growing up. And - therefore you know that's all. I - as I say I - \{ILLEGIBLE\}
 - had a - I chose this, rather than carry on at school, my father said, you can stop on, because at that time I was fairly good at - at - chem. - chemistry and science, but I wouldn't because we had five or six younger than me, six - six younger than me.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You were one of the oldest ones were you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I'm next to the eldest, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did they treat you any differently once you'd left school and gone out to work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh no, no, I can't say - I can't see that because I - I lived my own lif
e in that particular way well I mean to say after all's said and done - one has to - accommodate oneself - to the - change of life in - in that respect only. Of course I - I mingled more - with different elements. You know, I - some of the rougher class o
f
 people in a way - if you like to put it that way - some of - some well - lesser educated than I was, I'll put it - I - I'm not - I'm not trying to be - you know, a high brow or anything like that, but - I - was - I - I was a higher - higher grade schoolb
oy as we were termed in those days, higher grade schools. And they were only - they were only ordinary board school boys. Of course you wouldn't - you wouldn't know about this sort of schooling, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I know a fair bit about it from my mother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. Yes, yes, quite.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Often when you do leave school you have this kind of - you change your life a bit.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No - I - I - I - I - what I did really find that I - I - I got a little bit vulgar, put it that way if you like, in }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1198299\charrsid2370612 my - expressions of - I - learn}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
t - learnt how to use a swear word occasionally you know. So that I'd call, you know say, you know, you're - a damn fool or something like that, I - I'd probably use a little stronger one as they - anywhere these days - one could say it's a word t
hat's - a household word, in most places anyway, but not in this one.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I think you were in the choir and things like that weren't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you continue in the choir when you left school and went to work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes, yes, yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you go to Sunday school still or did that drop off?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh we went to Bible Class. That was connected with the church of course.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 So that carried on after you left school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes, yes, I mean after all's - all's said and done you know 
- this may sound rather funny to you but you know - we still consider a Sunday as a Sunday. Both my wife and I, when we're away on holiday we always go to the church. If it - if it's possible to get there you know. Because that - that's been our life, I'm
 
not a religious man, not by any means - I think - as far as I'm concerned the church is - church is the whole - open - open atmosphere in which one lives one's life. I don't know how you feel about that but I - that's how I feel. Oh no, no, no, I - I - I 
maintained that interest right throughout the whole of my life. I've -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I don't know whether this is a country town.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well - it - it's - it's the biggest town in Kent. Oh yes. It's the - most populated, eighty-eight thousand in Gillingham, as oppo
sed to - Rochester next door - - sixty thousand and so forth, things like that. We have a population in the area - the Medway towns of around about a hundred and - a hundred and - eighty - hundred and seventy or hundred and eighty thousand. So - well we'l
l eventually be a quarter of a million in the course of another - decade - at least.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Quite a lot of children are sent to Sunday school when they're young and then when they get older and go to work -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes, well that - then -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Make their own decision on it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Of course that - that - that depends on your -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You say there was corned beef?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes, corned beef, oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 But not much else in the way of tins?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, no, not tinned, there was brawn wasn't there. You - you could 
buy - buy cooked meat couldn't you. But that corned beef was - pretty - what - what we would term in these days as very very cheap, it was around about eight}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1198299\charrsid2370612  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 pence a pound wasn't it in those days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Were the children allowed to talk during meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Could they choose what they wanted to eat from what was on the table or just have what was there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well they - they knew their table manners didn't they really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What would you attitude be if some food was left uneaten on their plate?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Oh well - I think they were pretty good at - we - we knew their - appetites more or less didn't we, you know, so give them what - what was considered reasonable enough for them to eat without having to leave anything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 So it was gauged out anyway?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Could they wait until things on the table, like the salt were offered or could they ask?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh they'd probably ask because it was usually on the table and if it wasn't near them, can I have the salt please, you know, well, a
s I say their table manners - were always - we always - taught them to - you know. To be just - behave themselves at table, they weren't expected to grab things and take like that because that's - that's - damned bad manners. So that's how they were - the
y were brought up, to respect table manners.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How about asking for second helpings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh I daresay they did occasionally, if it was something they liked, they had it if it was there to have, that's the point.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Were they told to hold their knife and fork in a certain and sit up in a certain way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes. Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What about bringing toys or a book to the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Very rarely. No, very rarely.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 When did members of the family leave the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well I suppose - they would g
et up - if - if - if we were all - all at table together - and it was approaching the time perhaps one might have somewhere to go, we'd say, yes, you can go, you know. All right - or - do you mind, you know, they they were brought up that way you see.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 When the children were very young did you feel - there was a certain way of bringing up children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Well - the only way they were brought up was the way we would expect to bring them up, and that is properly. In - with regard to other people particula
rly, because if you have people in - in the house and you've got an ill mannered child there's nothing worse than feeling - if that child's not behaving itself you've felt the same perhaps if you've been in a person's house where there has been a child, y
ou know, you feel, well my child's not going to be - not going to be like that. And that is - as I say they were - taught to behave themselves. Not rigorously mind you, but just - quietly put in their place.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Do you think your wife and yourself had the same ideas on bringing up children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes, yes, I wouldn't - yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was there anyone you might talk to if you were worried about the children in any way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well I - I don't quite - I didn't quite catch that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was there anybody you'd turn to for advice if there was - something, maybe something medically wrong?
\par <subject2>Mrs.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1198299\charrsid2370612  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 W. Yes. Yes, my mother. I'd go to ask my mother.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was your mother alive when the children were very small?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes, my mother was alive but then 
you see - my mother was a different atmosphere to my wife's mother. Wasn't she, my - as I told you before my - my father was a public man, and - their lives were different - differently - placed to ours. I say, and although he didn't live so very far away
 from us, only - a mater of - several - minutes walk away - they - they were - more or less - in their own atmosphere. My father as I say was a - was one of the town council}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1198299\charrsid2370612 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 ors at - on one occasion for quite a period of time and he had his - still had his 
- other - objects in view, you see, so many things he was engaged in. He dabbled in - most things. Therefore - we were - we were really not more - not so concerned with my people as we were with my wife's people. 'Cos my - my - father-in-law was a - a pro
per - quiet old fellow, wasn't he dear. Yes. You know, a gentle type of fellow.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 So really you kept more in contact with your wife's parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. Yes. Of course my - my father was a very dogmatic man. So that - that's putting it - point blank, he
 was a dogmatic man. And as far as I was concerned I could go my way and he go his you see. But - we - we were best of friends and - oh yes, the best of friends but - that - that was the atmosphere between us more or less, you know, we're bringing up our 
family and that's that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you want your children to share their worries with you if they had any?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Share their what? Worries? Oh we'd like - we would wish them to. We would wish them to, oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What kind of things did you think you ought to do for your children, what kind of things did you think you ought to give them say?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 In what way, material?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Like affection or safety, that kind of thing? Material possibly, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well - we - we could only give them what we could affo
rd to give them, that - that was - not all that much I may tell you, I mean to say - they - they - as I told you before, we - we we took them out with us and if we could give them a good outing - well they were happy that was all that was required of us a
n
d they - all they expected of us. Well as they grew older of course they - they found their own feet, they found their own friends. They go their - their way, as long as they were - behaving themselves that was as far as we were concerned, if they didn't 
behave themselves of course they get a damn good talking to.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 When you were young did you both ever manage to leave them so that you could go out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well, yes, the older girls didn't they. When - when - we never went out - while the other - when our
 - old - older children were young, we never went to - never went out or - we never had holidays or anything like that. As I say - mother had the - had the difficult task of looking after those children while I was away from home, as I was on those occasi
o
ns - at sea and that. But - other than that - when they - when they grew up, they were able to - just - take over the children - mostly Monday nights wasn't it when we used to go down to the theatre, you and I and Mr and Mrs Milner, we would - one of the 
girls would stop in and look after the younger ones, you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 This would be quite considerably later wouldn't it, 1920's or '30's that would be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes. Yes. Yes. Because -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Going back to the first few years of your children being young.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How did you want the children to behave towards you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Well we wanted them to trust us. Oh yes, yes. Oh yes, we liked to feel that they - they felt they could come to - for help. Oh yes, we liked them to trust us. Well they did an
yway. I don't think we - any of them would turn round and say we didn't do our - duty by them, can they, hit one of them, not - because - they're all affectionate to us still. And old as they are they'll come and kiss me, boys and the girls.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Were they allowed to speak when grown ups were talking?
\par <subject2>Mrs.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1198299\charrsid2370612  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 W. Not when they were small, definitely not.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What kind of things do you think you brought them up to consider important in life?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well I suppose - honesty of purpose. Do th
e best they can. They can't do any better. Play the game if they've - if they're that was disposed. Of course - the boys are - are more - what can I say - not quite so - I can't quite get the right word }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid1198299\charrsid2370612 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612  a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1198299\charrsid2370612  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
meal - amenable to - to discipline as the girls w
ere. Not to that extent. Well you can understand that anyway. Because - there - there was a - a difference in age between the oldest boy - and - the next oldest - the next boy down, a difference in age, let's see, Dennis is 1924, - Colin is 1916 you see. 
S
o that - that margin of difference, you have two girls in between, you have that margin of difference between the two boys. Now that boy we used to take around with us when - when he was - when he was born - was - was a nice age, we used to take him aroun
d
 - 'cos I was a referee - a football referee at that time, and when I went round to various places refereeing - and mother was available, and we had referee's meetings, you know, and - that sort of thing. He always went with us. Outings, always took him w
ith us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Would you say the children received their ideas on how to live from both parents or from you mainly or from your wife mainly?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh I think - I think - of course the wife has - had the major influence. There was no doubt about that. Wife had the major influence.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Some people think that children should be with the mother all the time and other think that it's not necessary, it does them good to be with other people quite a lot, what did you think at that time? Did you think the children sh
ould be with the mother most of the time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Well - no, I - I say - they - they were left to their own devices, when they became of - of an age - when they became of an age to be able to differentiate between right and wrong, then they were left to thei
r own devices. They were corrected when it was necessary to correct them. If I wasn't at home, as I say, when I was away and I wasn't at home, the - responsibility of that fell on the wife, naturally. And - and they always turned to mother, they still tur
n to mother for anything, don't they.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What about when the children had a birthday, would it be different from any other day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes, they had their little - little friends in and - they had a little party you know, just to - cheer them up.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What about cards and presents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, no, used to play - play - normal games didn't they. Indoor games.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What kinds of things would you do as a family on Christmas Day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Ah - now which Christmas Day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 In the early years of marriage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 O
h yes. Christmas Day was our home day, when we had - of course wife played the piano. We still have it, she still plays it. But - we - we used to have - our song, 'cos we didn't have wireless then mind you, there was no - no - radio, and we used to have o
u
r little sing-songs, the children used to sing their little pieces, say their little bits of poetry and that sort of thing, they enjoyed their - they enjoyed their Chri - their little Christmas together - with us. Then - then - the following day, we were 
-
 oh we used to have the wife's - some of the wife's family up didn't we. And - on Boxing Day used to have my - my people - come up sometimes. But that was the - only - difference and the children themselves as I say - were - well right up - right up to a 
little while ago came in the grandchildren then wasn't there dear when the ceiling fell down in the other room with - knees up Mother Brown or something like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you have any books or newspapers or magazines in the House?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I always had - I a
lways had a daily paper, and a Sunday paper. Because I think it was - well it was the only way of keeping in touch with the - with what was going on in the world around because - you - as I say, there was - wasn't wireless you see. There was no radio. Whi
ch is one of the things that - has brought - brought one end of the world - right on top of the other.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Which daily paper would you have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Me? I suppose the - I - I - he's asking - asking for political points of view isn't he? What papers? Yes, wel
l I had the - I have Daily Express, I used to have the Daily Mirror. I - sometimes -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 This is in 1918 time?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 We had News of the World on Sundays, then we gave that a go by, had the News of the World because - every - every weekend they used to ha
ve - print a - print a song there. Oh yes, they used to print a song all - all in the music didn't they and the words, many a song in there. A song, those that were most popular too. Well we used to cut them out didn't we, for that - more or less for that
 purpose. Of course that was a blood and thunder paper. Well - it got too much of it. And I have the Sunday Express, I've had it for ever such a long while, but - the Sunday Express is a paper I've had I suppose - since - 1923 I suppose.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What did you have in the very early years of your marriage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Well - we used to get the Scotsman up in - Invergordon. The Scottish paper. Other than that I can't really tell you, except - except that - we got whatever paper was going, because going to work you didn'
t - you bought - you - you bought a paper at the gate, dockyard gate you see, whatever was going you simply bought a paper.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you get any books from the library or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes, we belonged - we belonged to the library, we - we s
till belong to - Gillingham library but - we belonged to Chatham library then didn't we.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did the children go out with just you sometimes on your own or was it usually as a family group?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh I did, yes, yes. I - I - I - I've got that snap of those
 horses up on the main wasn't it, the children, yes. Yes, the - I used to take them out. I - I've got a walking stick out where they've knock - knocked all the handle to pieces, playing hockey with it, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you go anywhere on bank holidays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Oh yes. We used - if - if it was - we couldn't go far. But as I say, on those sort of days - we'd pack up a little picnic - lunch and - tea you know, and perhaps go over across - what they call Hucknall the other side of the river, or somewhere like t
hat wasn't it dear. In the main it was Upnor wasn't it, it was a fashion}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1198299\charrsid2370612 able place to go to, there you }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
are, bank holiday. But - we used to go up the Staff there occasionally didn't we.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Where's that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 That's along the top on the A2. On the top roa
d. They used to have a fair there. There's an old charter fair - it was - it used to be held in the parish - by the parish church right down in Gillingham. As a little chartered fair it gradually - it went from there - when that was - by virtue of the fac
t
 that sometimes happened there you know - some - there was an alteration, and - they changed and they - it grew too big for the place, I'll put it that way. And they - they had it up on the - up on the A2. where - in there - where the - A2 is now but real
ly it was right through.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you ever go away for holidays as well as bank holidays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
No. No. We never had no money to go away did we. No. No, we never had money to go away for a holiday. Might - might have taken the youngsters to the - the young
est ones - up to - either to Maidstone or - places like that on the bus and then gone up the river. But other than that, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How would you spend Saturdays and Sundays, after you got married and had the first two children, did you do anything with the 
children then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Well you must realize that - there was still two years of war when we had the first child. And - and the other one came along, well there wasn't much that you could do - at that time. You were still in the - in the process of getting o
ver the war weren't you right up - in the early twenties, and that was when things were bad. I couldn't get a pick and shovel job when they were - doing a - doing a - alterations - widening the main road up top which came eventually as the A2. I couldn't 
e
ven get a pick and shovel job there, because - we were living - that much - in the - boundary of Chatham. Upon the A2, one side's Gillingham, one side's Chatham, as that A2 runs through, it still is. One side's Gillingham and one side's Chatham. We were l
iving on Chatham side and I couldn't get a job on the - Gillingham side. No relief - relief work. No. I was out of work eight - eight - seven months then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What was your attitude towards Sunday, and the children playing on Sundays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 The children all went to Sunday school. They all went to Sunday school didn't they.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What did you feel about them playing on Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well I don't think they ever - I don't think they really had - yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you think it was wrong to work or to enjoy yourself on a Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Oh no, as I told you - you know, I - we - we - did think and still think that Sunday's a different day to the rest of the week, and therefore - we try - or - we did try and we still try - to make that little difference - in our approach to the day.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You went to the Wesleyan Church in Gillingham?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Baptist, yes. Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you both go?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, no, my wife - I didn't know my wife then. When I went there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 This is all after you married now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh no, we - oh n
o, we were in a different parish altogether you see, that's right down there. And - the - where - where we were married, in Gillingham parish church. That's right - right down, still there, it's a twelfth - twelfth - thirteenth century church, you know, a
 twelfth century church.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Which church or chapel did you go to when you came back from Scotland and lived in Granville Road?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 We still go down there didn't we.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You said you were in the choir earlier when you were young?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 That's before we were married.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you continue that after?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
No, I didn't. No, no. No. My - my choir came - when I was abroad. I had two years in the church choir out abroad. But - other than that - I should - there - there was a - what else was there. Well, no, 
I didn't - I didn't do any other - choiring - choir work since then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you belong to any clubs round by the church, like a temperance club or anything
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, I didn't. No I didn't. Other than what I told you about - you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 These questions are all to do with the early years of marriage.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
No. No. No, we hadn't got time really, we hadn't got time, as I say, we were bringing up a family, and as I say I was - wandering around getting - getting a job where I could.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did your children go to any of the adult services or just to the Sunday school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 They all went to Sunday school didn't they.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Was grace said at meals?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. No. I'm sorry to say no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you have family prayers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. No, we - we didn't get down to that 
because I think that brings a child up in a narrow - in - into a narrow - outlook on life, you - you're ramming religion down their throats you know and if you ram religion down a person's throat when they grow older they don't want it. See, they - they -
 
if they've got - sense enough to - to - rebel against the whole idea of religion. It - it does - in my - my estimation anyway, what I've seen of life, that sort of thing does happen. Yes, you've got to - I think you've got to have an open mind. I think it
 essential to have an open mind on - on all - all topics. Whether its political, spiritual or otherwise.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 It's easier to have a closed mind,
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh - I - I - yes, well that - that - there's one - there's one factor that you've got to look at, you've g
ot to have faith in what you think. If you've got faith in what you think - the whole world can go bust. As far as you're concerned. In - in other directions I mean, you've still got to - you've still to to have - a - a - a - a fellowship with your fellow
 
man. Haven't you, I mean to say, you're still - still - you're still all inter-dependent - on one another, and if you're still interdependent on one another therefore you must feel compassion or - or hatred whichever way you like to - exercise your though
ts, you've to have - another - another combating force and that's faith in your own religion. Or what you were taught. Or what you think. That - that's one of the factors that people - try to forget.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you have any interest in politics after your marriage? Did you vote for instance in a general election?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
No, no, no, not in politics, I - I have been a presiding officer at many polling booths that I can remember round this area, I suppose I've been in practically in every - in charge of every poll
ing station - I was going to say - in Chatham and Gillingham, In the past fifty years - when I've been at home, for both - county council, municipal and - Parliamentary elections.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You haven't actually been organizing the counts and that sort of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh no, no, my politics is - I - I - I keep an open mind on those things.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 So you weren't a member of a political party?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. No. No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you ever feel under any pressure to vote for any particular party because of your employment?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Well, yes, up to a point, yes, I mean to say you've got to have - if - if you've got to cast your vote you've got to have a - a - a motive for - casting your vote. You've got to think - you've got to think the issues out for yourself. You've either got 
to vote for the part - for a party or for an individual you see. And if you - if you - think - these matters over - you - if - if you don't vote at all, I'll put it this way, if you don't vote at all, then you've got no right to to find fault. With whatev
er happens, because you've no right to have a say in the matter. Because those people that - go - eventually go and - and represent the community at large are the ones that - put there by the people who registered their vote.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 When you and your wife were at a home how did you spend your leisure time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Well - whatever leisure time we had, I - perhaps I - do it yourself jobs and so forth. Of course as I told you I was refereeing for twenty years, and - that's - weekends you see. Saturdays I mean, not 
weekends, because Sunday football hadn't so long been in vogue but - other than that - well we enjoy our - our company with ourselves. You've asked a question there which was asked by one of our neighbours, not so very long ago. We - we sit here and we ca
n
 talk. Wife and I can talk. We can - just read one word in the press, like this, do you remember that? So and so. Something - only a place. No, well what was that? Say, well we passed that when we were going up on the Al or when - when we were going throu
g
h so and so, and do you remember when we got so - and we go from one place to another - within time we're over at Guernsey or somewhere there and back to ourselves, and we can talk for hours on this. We talk for hours. There - is this year's diary, in the
r
e is only a few press notes - from beginning of this year up 'til now. I've got dozens of them. And we go back. If - if we can't remember, say, oh that wasn't - I say, right - back to 1918. Do you remember when we went so and so? And we can talk and talk 
a
nd talk. Do on another. So we're happy. The wife'll be doing her knitting or her crocheting - or we'll - have the wireless on, now - music - another thing you see, the wife plays - well she doesn't do very much these days because of the - well it's too co
ld in there in the winter and in the summer we like to go for our walks. You see. So this is this is the whole set up - as far as we're concerned.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you belong to any clubs or institutes or anything like that in the early days of your marriage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. No. Well, not those early days. When you say early days you - you mean the first -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Say 1918 - 1920
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well - 1916 to 1918 was wartime, you - you were at back and call of - of - I was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you have any pets or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. No, no, not when they were small, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Until you became a referee did you actually play football?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes, yes, I - I played football, I - as I told you I played football and cross country -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you ever do anything like bicycling?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Cy
cling? Oh I used to cycle, well I used to cycle regularly to - backwards and forwards to work, but - but not for - not for - not - not when I was married, to go out cycling. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How about fishing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Only fishing I've ever done and I - I can tell you this, is off Plymouth Sound.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 It's a good place is it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Yes, I've been there fishing for pike just off of Drake's Island. You want empty - once they start to bite you get - an empty hook'll catch 'em.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did anyone outside the home help you or your wife too look after the home or family in any way? Like relatives or friends or neighbours?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No. No, when -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Say your wife was confined to bed how would you manage then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well, on those occasions - there was usually - I would be availa
ble in the evenings, and - well - thank God they were few and far between. That's the only thing I can say.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 So you were able to cope?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you have any friends that you saw regularly?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 No, we knew nobody out that way did we, not Granville Road.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How about when you moved to the top house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Well we - we - yes, one or two neighbours there, was quite friendly with, one particular one, Mrs Milner. That was about - she was about the nearest wasn't she although Mrs Randall Lewis - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you ever have friends come into the home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Oh yes. We used to - we used to go into her and come into ours, they were only next door but one like you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 How about something to eat and drink?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. Yes. Yes, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Would there be any special occasions?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I don't think so.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did friend call in casually or did they have an invitation to call round?
\par <subject2>Mrs.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1198299\charrsid2370612  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 W. Well, you see, I had some sisters and - they'd come in or - Ethel - my sister-in-law, she'd po
p in any time.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Did you ever have a musical evening or any kind of evening with friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
We did - now we did. We - we can say that can't we? We - Granville Road we had musical evenings. There was - wife's sister, her friend, Edie, ther
e was - the wife's sister's eventually her husband, he - he wasn't then, he was - he was - they were courting. Three other Naval fellows was it? Two anyway. Yes. They were - we used to have - violin, piano, two - they used to sing, they - Geoff used to si
n
g didn't he, and - used to have a musical evening in our front room down at Granville Road, when - when Colin was a boy, a baby - baby. That's our eldest boy, when he was a baby, we used to - they used to come in - fairly often, they were in the barracks,
 Naval barracks you see and they used to come up, have - have coffee and - a bit of supper you know. And then we used to have - enjoy those musical evenings didn't we. You know, Grace is going West and all those sort of things.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 In the district where you lived who were considered the most important people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Who did I -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Who were the most important people in the town or the are you lived in?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Who did I think was most important? It's difficult to say isn't it. Well - not yes, I suppose so, I
 mean to say after all's said and done - he - he is the selection of the - of the people that you put in to govern you - locally isn't he.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Anybody else?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. Most important bolke is the rate - was the rate collector.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 The rate or the rent?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
No - no, I can't - I can't - really diff - differentiate between - the - much as I know - know of many many of the Mayors of the town, they were to me they were no more important than the man in the moon, in - in - only in relation to the office. 'Cos
 some of 'em I wouldn't give that much for. As individuals.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 What sort of people would you say went to the church and what sort of people went to chapel?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Well - it's difficult to say isn't it. I suppose really - there's the usual trend of - of th
eir own particular denomination, I mean to say after all's said and done you know, if you're Wesleyan - or non-conformist, I'll put it that way, if you're non-conformist, you'll find that there - there are more - together - than the established church. An
d
 therefore you get the type of people - going to a chapel who are - what can I say - more community. Whereas with the established church, I'm talking now of the - Anglican - Church of England - they're cliquish to the extent - of they're off, you know, to
 - and - and - really - cold, they're not welcoming. Unless you happen to be right at the inner circle. That's the type of people - I consider goes to church.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 And the more friendly groupy ones go to chapel?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Where you lived did all the people in the working class have the same standard of living or would you say there were different groups?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 You can't - you can't say they all had the same standard of living because each individual family must be - must - be - governed by the par
ticular incomes, and they're - their - upbringings, because after all's said and don}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13370131\charrsid2370612 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
, we - we happen to be of a family - we - we were moderate people - working class, yes, but brought up in an atmosphere - wholly our own. Therefore you can't - you can't -
 say well that particular class - that segregates us from that class because they - choose to go - beer drinking and public house and that sort of thing and - and - and have got - haven't got a penny to bless themselves with the next day and they probably
 
would have been better off than you, so you can - you can hardly describe what - where the difference is in working classes, I mean to say, working classes are working classes whether they're - artisans or - or - egg slingers as we used to call 'em, you k
now, clerks.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Do you think that one group felt superior to the rest then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Would I think what?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 For instance you just said the artisans.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Or the ink slingers, do you think that any one group out of them even though as you s
ay you can't generalize it, that they themselves thought they were superior to the other groups?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Oh yes, yes. The white collar - the white collar person was superior to the - to the man in the overalls. That - that - that was the considered idea, alt
hough the man in the overalls was getting more money, in - in my young days - the average clerk - in a - Prudential office or somewhere like that was getting about a guinea a week whereas a - a mechanic, full blown - fully indentured - man, artisan - woul
d
 go and get about - thirty - thirty - bob to thirty three shillings a week. But - but - but - these people always were superior to you because they used to go to work clean and come home clean. Now that - that was difference, yes, I agree with you there, 
there was - there was that - trend, in - in - in the - the two -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Do you think it was a reasonable thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 I - well - well I think it was a pompous idea myself.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Do you think there was much distinction between craftsmen and labourers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Bet
ween craftsmen and labourers, now - that depends upon on your approach to - to the individual, after all's said and done - I as a craftsman - have a responsibility of work - a labourer - a labourer. He himself - has only to do as he's told. See, therefore
 
- there is - there - there's a - a distinction there, and therefore - a craftsman does claim - the right - to have what we would regard as responsibility payment, for our knowledge. Over and above the labourer. So - there - there - in that - never - never
 
look down on a labourer. A craft - no person, no person at all - should look down on a man in the gutter - than the - crowned head of England, because in my opinion we're all interdependent. Now this is only - because - I know I express myself that way, a
n
d I have done - often, I say, how are you John, or - or how are you, to a man in the street or along the country lanes you know what it is in the country walking along a country lane, meet a farm - farmhand coming along, goodnight sir. Goodnight, you know
. But - you know, old John, he puts his nose up like that, you know, how they do you know. And then there - that's the type of thing you'll meet isn't it. You have met it - yourself, most probably.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392620 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 Do you think in those days that there were some families considered respectable and some families considered rough?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1141354 FW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7484140\charrsid2370612 
Oh yes, there - there are, yes. They do, you do meet it because - you - you feel - when you see this sort of thing, you feel that - they should be in a better position than they are, beca
use it's not necessary for them to be in that position, and ninety-nine times out of a hundred it's brought about by their own - by their own self will. If that's what you mean. Because - they're respectable well does that - where does respectability lie,
 that's the point. I mean they - may be the biggest rogues in - on earth.
\par }}