{\rtf1\adeflang1025\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\adeff0\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang2057\deflangfe2057{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f38\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f39\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}
{\f41\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f42\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f43\fbidi \froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f44\fbidi \froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}
{\f45\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f46\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;
\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}
{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden 
Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs20 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}}
{\*\latentstyles\lsdstimax156\lsdlockeddef0}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid3302345\rsid6427082\rsid6824016\rsid6891892\rsid7811105}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 11.0.0000;}{\info{\title <pagez1>}{\author SEENU}{\operator lhorto}{\creatim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min9}
{\revtim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min9}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords14033}{\nofchars79991}{\nofcharsws93837}{\vern24613}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 http://schemas.microsoft.com/office/word/2003/wordml}{\xmlns2 urn:schemas-micro
soft-com:office:smarttags}}\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1800\margr1800\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0\ltrsect 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\donotembedsysfont1\donotembedlingdata0\grfdocevents0\validatexml1\showplaceholdtext0\ignoremixedcontent0\saveinvalidxml0\showxmlerrors1\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace180
\dgvspace180\dghorigin1800\dgvorigin1440\dghshow1\dgvshow1\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale90\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\splytwnine\ftnlytwnine\htmautsp\nolnhtadjtbl\useltbaln\alntblind\lytcalctblwd\lyttblrtgr\lnbrkrule\nojkernpunct\rsidroot6427082 \fet0
{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}\ilfomacatclnup0\ltrpar \sectd \ltrsect\linex0\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ltrpar
\qj \li0\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid3302345\charrsid6824016 
\par <anchor>Could you tell me your full name?</anchor>
\par <subject>Angus Robertson.</subject>
\par <anchor>And your present address is {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceType}}Bridge{\*\xmlclose} of {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceName}}Cally{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}, Perthshire?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. You don't want the house.</subject>
\par <anchor>It's called Romadie, is that right?</anchor>
\par <subject>Romadie. Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>When you were married?</anchor>
\par <subject>'29.</subject>
\par <anchor>You were born 1892 and you were born in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Dunfermline{\*\xmlclose}?</anchor>
\par <subject>In Dunfermline.</subject>
\par <anchor>What was the address?</anchor>
\par <subject>Douglas Street.</subject>
\par <anchor>Can you remember how many years you lived in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Douglas Street{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}?</anchor>
\par <subject>It was a short time, I think - it would only be two I think.</subject>
\par <anchor>Then where did you move?</anchor>
\par <subject>{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Canmore Street{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}, which was the one just - beyond here.</subject>
\par <anchor>Can you remember why your parents moved house?</anchor>
\par <subject>Why? Well for a bigger house. Oh they - they - oh they - they had to scrape everything together to get married. It was hard going - at that time I remember father saying.</subject>
\par <anchor>Can you remember how long you stayed in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Canmore Street{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}?</anchor>
\par <subject>It would be - three years I think, three or four years. Then went down to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceName}}Comely{\*\xmlclose} {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceType}}Park{\*\xmlclose}
{\*\xmlclose}. And in 19 - I think 1909 - we moved up to Benachie which is a big house on top - at the top of the park. Now the musical institute.</subject>
\par 
\par <anchor>That was the name of the house was it, Benachie?</anchor>
\par <subject>Benachie.</subject>
\par <anchor>What was the name of the street that it was in?</anchor>
\par <subject>It's not in a street at all. Right at - yes, at the top of the park - the park.</subject>
\par <anchor>That was round about 1909?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, I think that's about it. Mm.</subject>
\par <anchor>How long did you stay there?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh father died in - '23. And - stayed on until mother died in 1932, then we had to sell up.</subject>
\par <anchor>You were married by that time of course, 1932?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. Yes. But I was staying - I stayed for the first - oh - nine months, we stayed with my mother in Benachie, until my own house got ready.</subject>
\par <anchor>You told me about your brothers and sisters, there were six of you altogether?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Mary, Edith, William, yourself Angus, Ross and Betty, and there was a year and a half between each of you?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, that's so.</subject>
\par <anchor>Your father would be about thirty-three when you were born, where did he come from originally?</anchor>
\par <subject>Father? Dunfermline. And his father came I think Kinross.</subject>
\par <anchor>Your father was managing director of the linen mill at one time, had he ever had another job before that?</anchor>
\par <subject>No, he went right into the mill.</subject>
\par <anchor>Was it a family concern at that time?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. Yes, his father. In the handloom weaving days.</subject>
\par 
\par <anchor>Your father would never be out of work?</anchor>
\par <subject>No, fortunately no.</subject>
\par <anchor>Your mother would be about thirty-two when you were born, where did she come from?</anchor>
\par <subject>She came from the back of Benachie. That's why the house was called Ben - up in - in Aberdeenshire at Insch.</subject>
\par <anchor>I've been there.</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh have you? Well that's where she was born. And she was a schoolteacher. 
I think in - Townhill. I rather think Harry Lauder's wife was a pupil, either at school or at the Sunday school, 'cos she was a Sunday school teacher as well. And so was my father. I - I wouldn't - am I right in that. They certainly were both in the choir
, I think that's where they fell for each other, in the church choir, two of them, both keen adherents of the church.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did your mother give up work when she married your father?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did she ever work again afterwards?</anchor>
\par <subject>No.</subject>
\par <anchor>I want to ask you about life at home when you were a child.</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. Yes. I can't - remember much of this.</subject>
\par <anchor>You moved from {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Douglas Street{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} when you were very small, you probably don't remember much about that?</anchor>
\par <subject>No, I don't remember.</subject>
\par <anchor>Do you remember Can more Street at all?</anchor>
\par <subject>I honestly don't. No.</subject>
\par <anchor>{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceName}}Comely{\*\xmlclose} {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceType}}Park{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, I remember Comely Park.</subject>
\par <anchor>Can you tell me what sort of house it was you lived in in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceName}}Comely{\*\xmlclose} {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceType}}Park{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}?</anchor>

\par 
\par <subject>Yes - oh - eight or nine roomed house. We had maid then, I should think - three. At that time there was six of us of course. I'm not sure, I rat
her think my aunt - came and drop mother - mother lived with her - she lived with us for the rest of her life. My - my wife - my mother's sister. It's - a large house as houses go in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Dunfermline{\*\xmlclose}
, a large garden, with a full time gardener.</subject>
\par <anchor>You said that you had maids in the house at that time?</anchor>
\par <subject>There was certainly -</subject>
\par <anchor>There was about three, plus a gardener?</anchor>
\par <subject>Certainly a cook. And a housemaid. And I think a table maid and the nurse.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did the nurse look after the children?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. Six of them, I don't know how she did it.</subject>
\par <anchor>Was she actually called a nurse she wasn't called a nanny?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh yes, she was - but she was no - she was known as nurse.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did these servants all stay in the house as well?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did they have their own servants hall?</anchor>
\par <subject>Not in that house. The next house, in benachie they did.</subject>
\par <anchor>In Comely Park then whereabout would they eat?</anchor>
\par <subject>In the kitchen.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did they have a room where they could sit at all? Or did they sit in the kitchen if they had a spare moment?</anchor>
\par <subject>Do you know I can't remember that. I don't think they'd have room, no they hadn't what - called the - servants hall, no, I don't think so.</subject>
\par <anchor>Can you remember how did the servants and the members of the family address each other, what would you call the servants, did you call them by name?</anchor>
\par <subject>By Christian name.</subject>
\par <anchor>What would they call the family?</anchor>
\par 
\par <subject>Mr so and so and {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname State}}Miss.{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}</subject>
\par <anchor>What about the children?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh - it was always master - Angus. Not the nurse of course.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did she call you by your own name?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, christian name. And other names too I'm sure.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you call her nurse or did you give her a name as well?</anchor>
\par <subject>Her name was Katie, Katie Keir. I don't remember at what stage we called her Katie, we called her Katie later on. Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Can you remember if the washing in the family was sent out or did one of the servants do it?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh dear me, in - Comely Park. The household laundry went out. The personal laundry, the kids laundry was all done in the house.</subject>
\par <anchor>What about mending the family clothes, did your mother ever do it, or was it the servants jobs?</anchor>
\par <subject>Mother did very little, it was my aunt who did that. But I wish I remember when this started at, I don't - I remember Benachie up at the top of the park very much better, I could give you all the answers there.</subject>
\par <anchor>You were older by that time weren't you?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. I could refer to the sisters in that one if you're interested to know about that mending.</subject>
\par <anchor>What about repairs and improvements in the house, did you have somebody coming in to do it, or did the gardener for instance ever help in the house at all?</anchor>
\par <subject>No. No. No, it was all - tradesmen. There was no do it yourself in these days, father was no good at - hand - he - he wasn't a handyman. He had a very full life, yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Your nurse, what were her duties, what did she do for you and the other children?</anchor>
\par <subject>The whole thing - now and again we were - up to the drawing room, where - and saw mother and father. Father used to have magnificent - pillow battles with us I remember along the end of the corrid
or. But - generally speaking, nurse had us the whole time.</subject>
\par 
\par <anchor>Did she ever have time off?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh she must have done, but I don't remember what happened when she was off. We're bound to have been with our - my mother or - but I don't remember that.</subject>
\par <anchor>You said you were taken up to the drawing room to see your parents, was this at any regular time, once a day?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, it was - it was at - pretty well, at regular times, I can't }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid7811105\charrsid6824016 tell}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid3302345\charrsid6824016  you one, it was probably in the - late afternoon. But I'm not at all sure, I don't remember.</subject>
\par <anchor>Do you ever remember your mother coming perhaps to bath you or was that just the nurse's duty?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh mother did originally, yes. But - that was - a com - a communal business of course, there was always at least two of us, and probably more.</subject>
\par <anchor>When you were young did you have any jobs in the house that you had to do?</anchor>
\par <subject>No.</subject>
\par <anchor>What about bedtime, who put you to bed?</anchor>
\par <subject>Nurse.</subject>
\par <anchor>Can you remember round about what age you started putting yourself to bed?</anchor>
\par <subject>No idea. Jolly early. But - I'm sorry, I've no idea.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you have to share a bedroom with any of your brothers?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. Yes. The three of us to begin with and then two.</subject>
\par <anchor>Was it a double bed or did you each have your own bed?</anchor>
\par <subject>No, we had our own beds.</subject>
\par <anchor>In Comely Park did you have a bathroom, a room where you could have a bath?</anchor>
\par <subject>For the house? Yes. Oh definitely. Can't remember if there were two. I think there were two. Was certainly a bathroom. I remember - going along to the end of the corridor and - yes.</subject>
\par 
\par <anchor>What about clean clothes, did you get them whenever you need clean clothes or was there any special time that you would get them?</anchor>
\par <subject>No, when we needed them.</subject>
\par <anchor>Whereabout did the adults eat their meals?</anchor>
\par <subject>Where did they take their meals? In the dining room.</subject>
\par <anchor>What about the children?</anchor>
\par <subject>They were in the nursery.</subject>
\par <anchor>What age would they graduate to the dining room?</anchor>
\par <subject>Hm, you've got me beaten there.</subject>
\par <anchor>When you had your meals in the nursery were there any adults with you?</anchor>
\par <subject>Nurse.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did she eat with you as well?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Have you any idea what kind of cooking equipment there was in the house?</anchor>
\par <subject>Down in - Comely Park. It was a large - coal range.</subject>
\par <anchor>That was all they had, they didn't have a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid7811105\charrsid6824016 gas}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid3302345\charrsid6824016 
 cooker as well?</anchor>
\par <subject>No. No. Not in these days.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you have all your meals in the nursery?</anchor>
\par <subject>As far as I remember, yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>So your parents would have their meal in the dining room by themselves?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Can you remember what you would have to eat for breakfast?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, there would be porridge definitely. And an egg of some - in some form or other. I don't remember bacon and egg for us kids but I've no doubt we did - it was a varied - we'd never any \{BLANK\} in fact - oh I'm sure there were in 
fact at the meal, but - I don't remember them.</subject>
\par 
\par <anchor>Your next meal would be lunch time?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>What would you have to eat them?</anchor>
\par <subject>Mince and a milk pudding.</subject>
\par <anchor>Were you able to have meat every day?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>What was your next meal after that?</anchor>
\par <subject>What we could call today high tea.</subject>
\par <anchor>That's a traditional Scottish meal really?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Was that something cooked as well?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. Might be - scrambled egg or something like that.</subject>
\par <anchor>On a Sunday was there anything different to eat?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh yes, there was - always roast beef on Sunday.</subject>
\par <anchor>Can you remember if the servants made their own bread or jam?</anchor>
\par <subject>Never. Jam yes. But never bread.</subject>
\par <anchor>Bottling fruit at all?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, they did a lot of that.</subject>
\par <anchor>Pickles?</anchor>
\par <subject>I don't remember pickles, no.</subject>
\par <anchor>What about wine or beer, did they ever make that?</anchor>
\par <subject>Never. No father was not a teetotal but he was very nearly one. And a non-smoker, he tried to - be with the boys and smoke the cigarette like this, but never enjoyed it.</subject>
\par 
\par <anchor>Were fruit and vegetables grown in the garden?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Was that enough to supply the household or would they have to buy more as well?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh they would have to buy i
t, but we grew a great deal. I remember when we used to go to Lundin Links for our summer holidays, took a house there, and took along one or two of the maids, and father arrived in the evening with a magnificent hamper of vegetables. From the garden. All
 looked forward to that, it was enormous.</subject>
\par <anchor>You had a gardener who looked after the garden?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you keep any livestock at all?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, a lot.</subject>
\par <anchor>What did you have, chickens?</anchor>
\par <subject>A pest I was. Oh not - not - no, but the kids, we had every conceivable type of - of - of pets, yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Dogs and cats?</anchor>
\par <subject>These are the two things we didn't have.</subject>
\par <anchor>Everything but?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>What did you keep then?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh all sorts of pigeons. Owls. Rabbits and - coneys and - white rats and mice galore, white mice.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you find them or did you buy them?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh we b
ought them. Oh yes. The mice were a menace of course, they became a - started this two - am I'm sure I got up to a hundred and twenty at one time. Yes, we were fond of pets. That was all done at the foot of the garden, it was a long garden, down - stretch
ed down to the railway.</subject>
\par 
\par <anchor>Do you know if the children, the servants and your parents had the same food or different food?</anchor>
\par <subject>The same food.</subject>
\par <anchor>The servants would get the same as the family?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>The servants ate in the kitchen and the nurse ate with you? Were you allowed to talk at mealtimes as a child?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Could you choose -</anchor>
\par <subject>You were encouraged to. I think so. At least I never remember being - reproved - oh I daresay we were - talking too much but we were never discouraged - without - within reason, yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Could you choose what you wanted to eat from what was cooked or did you have to eat what was given to you?</anchor>
\par <subject>You had to eat what was given to you.</subject>
\par <anchor>What happened if you left anything you didn't like?</anchor>
\par <subject>That was kept - for the next meal.</subject>
\par <anchor>And put down again?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, very often. If they felt you were playing up. If you were definitely off colour as they - if was all very humanely done.</subject>
\par <anchor>If there was something on the table that was out of your reach could you ask for it?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, definitely. And taught to.</subject>
\par <anchor>What about a second helping, we you allowed to ask for that?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Were you made to hold your knife and fork in a special way?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. Taught.</subject>
\par 
\par <anchor>And to sit at the table properly?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. Very strict.</subject>
\par <anchor>Were you allowed to bring toys or books to the table?</anchor>
\par <subject>No.</subject>
\par <anchor>When you were finished were you allowed to leave straight away?</anchor>
\par <subject>No.</subject>
\par <anchor>You had to wait 'til everybody was finished?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, or ask - to be allowed to leave, if there was some reason.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you ever eat with your parents at all?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh yes. Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Was it always a special occasion?</anchor>
\par <subject>Early on, yes. I rather think on Sunday - I'd like to check that up.</subject>
\par <anchor>Can you remember ever being sort of dressed up because you were going with them?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh very definitely, yes. Oh we had to - we - oh yes, I think we had to be -</subject>
\par <anchor>Did the nurse go with you when you were having the meal with your parents?</anchor>
\par <subject>No. No.</subject>
\par <anchor>She would eat separately then. Did your mother and father take an interest in what you had eaten and how you had behaved at the table?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh very much, yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Who taught you the table manners, was it the nurse or your parents?</anchor>
\par <subject>The nurse.</subject>
\par <anchor>Your mother, was she an easy person to talk to?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, delightful, yes, very easy. Great charm, very affectionate, yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>If you were worried about anything would you go to her?</anchor>
\par 
\par <subject>Yes, in a way, I - I was - I was always a bit reticent.</subject>
\par <anchor>But your brothers and sisters would?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh I was always helped, if - I was never turned down - by father or mother.</subject>
\par <anchor>What about the nurse, would you go to her if you were worried about something?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, she was a - yes. Yes, one - we all thought she was a - a friend.</subject>
\par <anchor>How did your parents expect you children to behave towards them?</anchor>
\par <subject>Politely, lovingly, but politely, yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>How did they expect you to behave towards your brothers and sisters?</anchor>
\par <subject>Well I wouldn't know that - they had to make great allowances for that. They - they taught us boys to - to - respect - women, and - our sisters, to treat them as such.</subject>
\par <anchor>How did they expect you to behave towards your nurse?</anchor>
\par <subject>Very deferentially. Oh they were very hot on that Mrs Morrison.</subject>
\par <anchor>How about the nurse, how did she expect the children to behave towards her?</anchor>
\par <subject>Just as - our parents did. Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>If one child hit was by another child would they be told to hit back or not?</anchor>
\par <subject>No. But not to turn the other cheek.</subject>
\par <anchor>Who would tell you this, was it the nurse or your parents?</anchor>
\par <subject>Who ever was there at the time it happened, the parents would come in very quickly on that if -</subject>
\par <anchor>What kind of people do you think your parents hoped the children would grow up to be? You said they wanted you to be God-fearing and honest? Did they consider certain things important in life?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh very much so, yes, they were both very - upright themselves and - oh they had very high principles and expected their - that from their children too I think.</subject>
\par 
\par <anchor>What about your nurse, did she teach the children what she thought was important in life too?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, I don't remember - individual case of that but she did, she was a high principled -</subject>
\par <anchor>You think she was similar to your parents in attitude?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Do you know what your parents thought about swearing?</anchor>
\par <subject>About?</subject>
\par <anchor>Swearing?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh took a very dim view of - swearing. Mother especially. I've never heard father swear - never heard father swear, or mother of course.</subject>
\par <anchor>What about your nurse, what did she think?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh she'd be very hard on it. Yes. The old school.</subject>
\par <anchor>When grown ups were talking were children allowed to join in?</anchor>
\par <subject>No, not unless they were invited to.</subject>
\par <anchor>If a child did something their parents disapproved of what happened?</anchor>
\par <subject>They were rebuked but not punished. There weren't - physically punished.</subject>
\par <anchor>They were given a talking to were they?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh yes, definitely.</subject>
\par <anchor>Was that your mother or your father or the nurse who would do so?</anchor>
\par <subject>Mother and then father called in as a reinforcement.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did the nurse ever tell you off?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh yes, sometimes - smacked - spanked us too. Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did it happen very often or not?</anchor>
\par <subject>Fairly frequently, but -</subject>
\par 
\par <anchor>Do you remember any special occasion when you were punished for anything?</anchor>
\par <subject>I remember being punished by father. For telling a lie, that's the only time I was ever - smacked by him. Laid across his - knee and - smacked. Mother took a - a dim view of that, but - he was right. Yes, that's the only time.</subject>
\par <anchor>Would you say that you received the ideas you had about how to behave from both your parents or from your father or from your mother?</anchor>
\par <subject>Both.</subject>
\par <anchor>What about your nurse, did she have much influence on your behaviour?</anchor>
\par <subject>A lot, yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>How did you feel about her?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh - I was very fond of her, we all were. She was a - a - delightful under - standing woman - must have been. Oh we were very lucky, well as - as my sister said she was with us for twenty years.</subject>
\par <anchor>Were children birthdays any different from any other day?</anchor>
\par <subject>Childrens birthday? Yes. Birthday cake and that sort of thing, birthday presents and -</subject>
\par <anchor>Any visitors?</anchor>
\par <subject>Other children, yes, we every often had a birthday party. Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Would you play games?</anchor>
\par <subject>Definitely. Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>And a birthday tea?</anchor>
\par <subject>And a birthday tea, yes. At which mother and father - father would appear if he was home by that time. Oh yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>What about Christmas Day, what did the family do on Christmas Day?</anchor>
\par <subject>Christmas presents and - father Chri
stmas, we all hung up our stockings of course and - in these - in these days you didn't hang up a pillowcase, but - oh that was a real occasion, everybody playing with the other one's toys of course. Rows and - joy and - generally a Christmas Day.</subjec
t>
\par 
\par <anchor>Did you have a Christmas meal at all?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, Christmas dinner.</subject>
\par <anchor>Was that at lunch time or at night?</anchor>
\par <subject>I think at lunchtime of course that was in the dining room, that was an occasion. Not always n
o, it was up in the - nursery as - a kids party. But - I don't remember - back that far when I was a kiddie. Just what happened then. Later on of course was a - a Christmas dinner. When we were a little older.</subject>
\par <anchor>That would be at night time, in the evening?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. Of course when I say Mary was - she was nine by the time Betty was born so that - there was a continuous - age - spread.</subject>
\par <anchor>If you had your Christmas lunch or your Christmas dinner with your parents would it only be the older children or the whole family?</anchor>
\par <subject>I think the older children to begin with.</subject>
\par <anchor>Until the other ones could sit at the table probably?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, yes. Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you have any musical instruments in your home?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, piano. Both father and mother played the piano a bit. Both of them sang. I never did either.</subject>
\par <anchor>What about your brothers and sisters?</anchor>
\par <subject>Later on, yes, Edith played - the cello and Mary played the violin.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you have musical evenings together?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh they did but - I never - the boys were never any good at that.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did your parents ever play any games with you as a child?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh yes, well as I say father used to have pillow fights with us and then - well - croquet and that sort of thing on the lawn. Tennis - no. Not other - father golfed and so did we when we got a little bigger. In fact the only prize I ever won
 was a - a - the only golf prize was playing in a ladies competition. Whether that was because I wore a kilt or not, I don't remember how old I was then, I must have been very young, but I won the - the prize at that - Ferryhills golf course at Queensferr
y.</subject>
\par 
\par <anchor>What about your nurse, did she play any games with you?</anchor>
\par <subject>No. No. I don't believe she had a minute to.</subject>
\par <anchor>You would have books in the house did you?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, lots. Mm.</subject>
\par <anchor>Newspapers?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Magazines?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Do you ever remember your mother or father reading aloud to you?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. Lots of times.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did they read aloud to each other?</anchor>
\par <subject>The children?</subject>
\par <anchor>Did your mother and father read aloud to each other?</anchor>
\par <subject>No. Unless there was something of special interest.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did your nurse read to you?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>When you were young do you ever remember a funeral in your family?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh goodness. I've a vague recollection of a funeral but I can't think whose it was.</subject>
\par <anchor>Can you remember anything about it, what happened, who was there?</anchor>
\par <subject>No, I honestly can't. No, I'm sorry.</subject>
\par <anchor>When you were a child were you taken out visiting neighbours or friends or relations at all?</anchor>
\par 
\par <subject>Yes. On Sundays father - of course he - he - after - we went to churc
h in the morning and in the afternoon - a very common visit was down - we walked down from here to Pitreavie Castle, which was the headquarters of the Eighteenth Group - where my aunt - father's sister lived. And we went there. Oh - were met by this grand
 lady, we had to behave then. That was a regular visit. And we - we've - I don't remember, we did visit other - lots of other houses.</subject>
\par <anchor>Were you ever taken out shopping?</anchor>
\par <subject>I'm sure we were but I don't remember it. We were probably more of a pest than a help then, in fact I'm sure we were.</subject>
\par <anchor>Were you ever taken to visit your nurse's family at all?</anchor>
\par <subject>To visit?</subject>
\par <anchor>Your nurse's family?</anchor>
\par <subject>You know we were, but I can't remember - can't remember what her family was. Sorry.</subject>
\par <anchor>Do you remember at all what they would call you, her family?</anchor>
\par <subject>No, I don't.</subject>
\par <anchor>When your father took you to Pitreavie and so on - did you go just with your father, did your mother stay at home?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you ever go out on Bank Holidays for instance?</anchor>
\par <subject>On Bank Holidays?</subject>
\par <anchor>Were there any family outings then?</anchor>
\par <subject>No. There would 
be a family outing at the week - on Saturdays sometimes - Yes, and - in Comely Park - we had a - pony and trap. And very often would - I can't remember how it was arranged which would be there, those who wanted to go I suppose, would go for a trip to - po
s
sibly Saline, where my uncle was minister, we'd visit there. And later on - when would that be, 19 - at the very beginning of motor cars we would - hire a car from - Goodalls and go for a real trip, six miles, and invariably broke down the six miles out, 
that was the rule, yes.</subject>
\par 
\par <anchor>Did your nurse go with you when you went on these outings?</anchor>
\par <subject>Now and again I think yes, but it was usually father was involved in that. On a Saturday.</subject>
\par <anchor>What about your mother, did she always stay at home or did she ever go with you?</anchor>
\par <subject>Not very often. She didn't come up very - out with us very often, she wasn't terribly strong.</subject>
\par <anchor>You went away every year to Lundin Links for your holiday, was that the only place that you went to or did you ever go anywhere else?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh lots of places. {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceName}}Cruden{\*\xmlclose} {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceType}}Bay{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
. Torphins up in Aberdeenshire. Other - other places too. {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Largo{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}. {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Upper Largo.{\*\xmlclose}</subject>
\par <anchor>Was it in the summer time always?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, always the summer, mm hm.</subject>
\par <anchor>How long would you go away for?</anchor>
\par <subject>Fortnight or a month.</subject>
\par <anchor>How many of the family would go?</anchor>
\par <subject>All who were at home.</subject>
\par <anchor>Plus a few servants?</anchor>
\par <subject>Two older sisters went - fairly early to St Margarets school at {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Beaumont{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
, as - day - as permanent - boarders. All would go at - to begin with, all six I think. All the kiddies and - and nurse. And - mother, father of course would go too but travelled in to work every day.</subject>
\par <anchor>What did you do when you were on holiday, how did you spend your time?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh it was all - almost - well at the Lundin Links it was - bathing of course and playing in the sand and - on the golf course. Oh we loved Lundin Links, we had a great time there.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did the nurse still look after you really on holiday?</anchor>
\par 
\par <subject>Yes. I don't remember what happened when nurse was on holiday, because she must have had them.</subject>
\par <anchor>You always got new clothes as a child?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh yes, yes. Well, no - with three boys I got my - older brothers - hand downs all the time, yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Was that always within the family, did you ever get them from outside the family?</anchor>
\par <subject>No, always within the family.</subject>
\par <anchor>And shoes?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, the same thing.</subject>
\par <anchor>If you were needing new shoes or new clothes was it any special time of the year that you would get them?</anchor>
\par <subject>No, I don't think so. Not that I know of.</subject>
\par <anchor>Just probably when you needed them?</anchor>
\par <subject>When school term started - I mean the - the local school wed get togged out then I've no doubt.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did your father have much to do with you as a child? Did he ever help you in any ways, perhaps helping to bath you?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Or read stories to you?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, he would read stories, he didn't do any of the domestic chores. No. He would help with lessons. In the evening.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did the children have to help each other?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>The older ones helped the younger ones?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, yes. Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>What sort of things?</anchor>
\par 
\par <subject>Lessons or any - anything they were doing. And my sisters were very tolerant with me, I - oh I think generally they - there was a helpful - attitude - possibly less with Edith here, and Misie was of course being the oldest Mary, th
ey - had the - responsibility of the family on her, it's always rather bad luck on the oldest - daughter I think.</subject>
\par <anchor>When you were a child can you tell me how you spent a Saturday? When you were at school were you at home on a Saturday?</anchor>
\par <subject>Before - before - the age of bicycles I can't remember. After bicycles we were - out cycling the whole time, either in the public park or - see there - there wasn't the - motor car danger in those days.</subject>
\par <anchor>What did you do on a Sunday?</anchor>
\par <subject>Went to church - invariably.</subject>
\par <anchor>Which church was that?</anchor>
\par <subject>Congregational church.</subject>
\par <anchor>Was that in the morning that you went to church?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. And only the one. And we did not go to Sunday school. Mother - took us at Sunday school at home.</subject>
\par <anchor>In the afternoon was it? Or after church in the morning?</anchor>
\par <subject>It wasn't - I don't think in the afternoon, I think it was after church or before church. We had a church - we had prayers in the morning -</subject>
\par <anchor>Was that just on a Sunday or every morning?</anchor>
\par <subject>No, just on the Sunday. Yes, in the drawing room. Everybody came in, maids and all. Yes, I think that's right.</subject>
\par <anchor>You said you had prayers on a Sunday morning?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. Father took them.</subject>
\par <anchor>You think you had perhaps your Sunday school teaching then, and then you went to church?</anchor>
\par <subject>Possibly, but I'm not sure about that.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you have different clothes to wear on a Sunday?</anchor>
\par 
\par <subject>Oh yes. Yes, we had to dress up, were dressed up.</subject>
\par <anchor>Were you allowed to play at all on a Sunday?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Your parents didn't mind?</anchor>
\par <subject>No.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did your parents go to church as well?</anchor>
\par <subject>Did we - yes, regularly.</subject>
\par <anchor>That was both your mother and your father?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>And the family as well, did any of the servants go with you?</anchor>
\par <subject>No. I think they went to their own churches. But not all - all - no, I don't remember that. But they didn't come with us.</subject>
\par <anchor>Were there any other social activities organized by the church that you took part in?</anchor>
\par <subject>None.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you ever belong to any youth organisations?</anchor>
\par <subject>No.</subject>
\par <anchor>Or join any clubs at all? To do with the church.</anchor>
\par <subject>No.</subject>
\par <anchor>Do you know if the congregational church here ran a temperance club?</anchor>
\par <subject>No. Not at that time, at least I don't know of it.</subject>
\par <anchor>Was grace said at meals in your family?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. Always.</subject>
\par <anchor>Who would say it?</anchor>
\par 
\par <subject>Normally father, then - if we were having meals together the children - would be asked to - say grace, I remember - being - I was off - laid up, I had an accident, was laid up two or three - weeks, when I came back to the - family table at meal
, I don't know how old I'd be then - I was asked to say grace and I remember bursting into tears, I - I was so - nervous and - having been away. But I wasn't a very sense -</subject>
\par <anchor>Quite an or deal for you then?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Were you taught to say prayers at night?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, always. Mother would come in at that time very often, but nurse did too. And father quite often too I remember father kneeling down with us at -</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you ever have family prayers other than a Sunday morning?</anchor>
\par <subject>I don't think so.</subject>
\par <anchor>Do you know if your father was interested at all in politics?</anchor>
\par <subject>Was interested? Father was chairman of the Scottish Liberal Association for the whole of Scotland.</subject>
\par <anchor>So he really was interested in politics?</anchor>
\par <subject>Very much so, Liberal, and Lloyd George and Henry Herbert Asquith and - Campbell Bannerman, all stayed at home. Stayed with us.</subject>
\par <anchor>Do you know why his views were Liberal at all?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. I think so. I think at that time - Liberal - the Liberal party stood - stood for what its name implies. And he was a very liberal minded, and - was - I think very advanced for his times, there was 
no Conservative business - in his make up - he - I may say introduced the - half past eight start in - the works in Dunfermline, much to the con - it always was six o'clock of course. And I remember him telling me that - looking out - from his home and se
eing people passing at six o'clock and he decided - that was no time to start, he started the - eight or half past eight - in Dunfermline.</subject>
\par <anchor>What about your mother, was she interested in politics?</anchor>
\par <subject>No. I don't think so.</subject>
\par <anchor>I assume that your father would be voting in general elections, did your mother vote at all?</anchor>
\par 
\par <subject>Oh always, yes. Oh yes, yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Do you know if your mother voted Liberal as well?</anchor>
\par <subject>I'm sure she did, yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Do you think that was because she followed your father?</anchor>
\par <subject>I would think so, I've no idea what her father was. I would think he was Liberal too, I don't remember - in fact I never saw him.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did your father work for the Liberal party at election times?</anchor>
\par <subject>Very much so. I remember our Mp Ponsonby was here, father would go - out and chairman nearly all the meetings, the local meetings.</subject>
\par <anchor>Other than at election time did he campaign much at all?</anchor>
\par <subject>Well of course he was chairman he was involved the whole time. 'Cos they had a permanent - organisation.</subject>
\par <anchor>When your father wasn't at work how did your parents spent their spare time? What sort of amusements would they have at that time?</anchor>
\par <subject>Father gave quite a lot of time to us in the evenings, apart from meetings, he had a great many meetings.</subject>
\par <anchor>Was he out a lot at these meetings?</anchor>
\par <subject>Quite a lot of meetings.</subject>
\par <anchor>What about your mother, did she have any interests outside of her home?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, she was Chairman of the Female Beneficent Association for years and did a great deal of work with that.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did she ever go out just to enjoy herself?</anchor>
\par <subject>I'm sure she did but I don't quite know how - where - they had a good many - in these days, dinner parties. Father and mother would be out to dinner quite often.</subject>
\par <anchor>Would these be mainly business acquaintances or friends?</anchor>
\par <subject>No, mostly friends. And politics.</subject>
\par 
\par <anchor>When did your father usually get home from work in the evenings?</anchor>
\par <subject>About six.</subject>
\par <anchor>And then he would have his dinner and go out again mostly?</anchor>
\par <subject>Mm. Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>You said that your father liked golf, were there any other sports that he enjoyed? You played croquet didn't you as a child?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, and he - he enjoyed riding. He didn't get much opportunity to ride in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Dunfermline{\*\xmlclose}
 but later on - he bought a - delightful house out - outside Newborough, we kept horses there. At least I did. But that's after the war, I brought home my own two horses and kept them up there.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did he ever attend any races at all?</anchor>
\par <subject>No. No.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you ever hear your father or mother talking about belonging to any sort of savings clubs? A lot of the less well off people belonged to a boot club or a funeral club, did you ever hear ab
out your parents talking about saving clubs at all?</anchor>
\par <subject>No, I don't remember - I think did - very early on. But - now I can't tell you, I don't remember.</subject>
\par <anchor>How did you get on with your brothers and sisters?</anchor>
\par <subject>I think - we were a very happy family by and large.</subject>
\par <anchor>Was there any one particular person that you were particularly close to?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, I think my younger brother and - and Betty. That was more - I don't know how - that was more a group on its own and the three older ones.</subject>
\par <anchor>When you were a child who did you mainly play with? Was it your brothers and sisters or did you play with neighbours children and so on?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, my younger brother was usually in on it, and neighbouring - children. When we were in Comely Park.</subject>
\par <anchor>In Benachie you wouldn't have many neighbours would you?</anchor>
\par <subject>I beg your pardon? Well, no close neighbours, none.</subject>
\par 
\par <anchor>When you were there was it just your brothers and sisters that you played with?</anchor>
\par <subject>Well by that time I was getting up and - see I was what - I was seventeen then wasn't I? Fifteen.</subject>
\par <anchor>Whereabout did you usually play, inside or outside?</anchor>
\par <subject>Down at {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceName}}Comely{\*\xmlclose} {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceType}}Park{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}, or outside whenever we could.</subject>
\par <anchor>Was that in the garden?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, and we had a tennis court - and the tennis court was - treated - with a - waterproof - oh sort of macadam, and lined at the sides and then in the winter it was flooded, so it - it was a - a - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid7811105\charrsid6824016 skating}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid3302345\charrsid6824016 
 rink there. And - we played there a lot and we played a great deal of ice hock - of - bicycle hockey, much to the -</subject>
\par <anchor>On your bicycles?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. On - on this tennis court you see because it had sloping sides. We got very good at that. Yes - the - most of the games are - in the garden. Nearly all our time was spent.</subject>
\par <anchor>Were you ever allowed to play out in the street at all?</anchor>
\par <subject>In the lane at the back of Comely Park.</subject>
\par <anchor>Were you allowed to play in other childrens houses if you were asked?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh yes, yes, there was no restriction - I - I don't remember any being put out of bounds.</subject>
\par <anchor>Were you allowed to get dirty when you played?</anchor>
\par <subject>Allowed to? Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Nobody minded?</anchor>
\par <subject>I wouldn't say nobody minded but we were never - smacked for being dirty.</subject>
\par <anchor>Were you free to play with anyone you pleased?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Was there anyone that you can ever remember being discouraged from playing with?</anchor>
\par 
\par <subject>As being not nice? I can't remember them. No.</subject>
\par <anchor>When you were at school you spoke about having a multitude of pets, did you ever have any other kind of collections? Any hobbies or collections of any kind?</anchor>
\par <subject>At the - the early school? I went to - I was a delicate child and I - I was sent to - a boarding school, a preparatory school a
t Bridge of Allan, because I was - bronchial - with my younger brother, and I was always very good with my hands and I - we'd an excellent - local joiner who was the carpentry master, and I was so good at it that I was - given the job of - making - window
 
boxes, for Stanley House school and it had - forty something windows. And the scoundrel of a headmaster would point to all the window boxes and say, one of my boys did that. Well of course I did no work that term at all, I was - and I've always been very 
fond of that work a ever since. I still am. That and cycling would - we did a great deal of cycling in school.</subject>
\par <anchor>Gardening, did you enjoy gardening as a child?</anchor>
\par <subject>Not really, no. I pottered about, got in the way of the gardeners.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you go fishing as a child?</anchor>
\par <subject>No, un - well now and again, yes, I did, we went up to Glen Far now and again, father - took us up there, took me up there, I was keen, none of the - neither of the other two - boys wer
e keen on fishing. And I'm daft on it now of course.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you do much walking?</anchor>
\par <subject>Not very much.</subject>
\par <anchor>When you were cycling who did you usually go with?</anchor>
\par <subject>My brother, and - oh at school, the school - pals.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you take any part in sports yourself, you said later on you played golf?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh yes, I had to play rugger. And - tennis. I was - had to play cricket, I was never any good at that. I was never much good at any of the games, but - oh yes, took my share of all the games.</subject>
\par <anchor>When you were of school age did you ever go to a theatre, a concert or a music hall or a cinema?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, we certainly were taken to - one or two concerts. But the parents decided it would be - interesting I suppose or good for us.</subject>
\par 
\par <anchor>Was that musical concerts?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, and now and again we - nipped along to the local music hall of course.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you get pocket money as a child?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, I did.</subject>
\par <anchor>Can you remember how much you got when you were small?</anchor>
\par <subject>Well it was very little, I think it was threepence.</subject>
\par <anchor>Can you remember what you did with it?</anchor>
\par <subject>Sweeties.</subject>
\par <anchor>All of it?</anchor>
\par <subject>Always.</subject>
\par <anchor>You'd get quite a lot threepence at that time would you?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>You had an aunt who lived with you to help your mother, what sort of things did she do to help?</anchor>
\par <subject>Nearly - all the sewing. Which was a great deal. For all the kids and the household. She did all of that - and the clothes, made a lot of the clothes - for the children. And knitting. She often - nurse was away. Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>If your mother was ill was she the one that helped out as well?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. I can't remember mother being ill.</subject>
\par <anchor>She was in bed when the younger children were born for instance?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, I don't remember that, I don't remember either of these being born. Of course at that time I was only three when Betty was born so -</subject>
\par <anchor>There were servants in the house anyway?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. Yes. Yes.</subject>
\par 
\par <anchor>Did you have relatives living nearby?</anchor>
\par <subject>Down Comely Park - two uncles. One either side.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you see much of them?</anchor>
\par <subject>Not a great deal, no. No, I was never terribly fond of the - my cousins I regret to say.</subject>
\par <anchor>You spoke about your parents going out for dinner at night, to friends, did they share the same friends or did your father have friends and your mother have friends?</anchor>
\par <subject>No, they would - nearly all shared.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did they have people to the house as well?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Was that usually for a meal or just for a casual invitation?</anchor>
\par <subject>Usually for a meal.</subject>
\par <anchor>That was a formal invitation for a meal was it?</anchor>
\par <subject>I rememb
er better after - Benachie, but they had a lot of - dinner parties - chiefly political - big noises, it would be a real do and - I remember -we kids got at the back stairs and - waited for the meals coming out and raided it when - when they left overs wer
e put down on the - service tables.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did parents friends call in casually without an invitation at all?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, there wasn't a great deal of dropping in. But they did - some - the - closest ones, I remember - J.C. Mc Beth who was Provost McBeth but was our - was father's lawyer, now he would drop in quite a lot.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did neighbours ever call in?</anchor>
\par <subject>The - not very much, no.</subject>
\par <anchor>People often made their own amusements in that time, when your parents had friends in to dinner and so on did they have any amusements afterwards or was it just a dinner party?</anchor>
\par <subject>That was all. And chatting. Yes. Yes, neither were keen on - bridge or whist.</subject>
\par 
\par <anchor>What about music, did they ever have any music?</anchor>
\par <subject>Not musical evenings. Now and again they did - yes, they'd pull in the children to - my two sisters to perform, but very seldom. And that was pretty close friends I hope. I don't think it was ever to the extent of - being a trial.</subject>

\par <anchor>Many people divide society into different social classes, in the time before 1918 did you think of some belonging to one class and some to another?</anchor>
\par <subject>Did I think? That they should do?</subject>
\par <anchor>Were there different social classes at that time?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh very much so, yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Before 1918 there was?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Was there much division between people at that time?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, I would say - even more.</subject>
\par <anchor>More than now?</anchor>
\par <subject>I would think so.</subject>
\par <anchor>What would you call the classes at that time?</anchor>
\par <subject>The working class. The middle class. And the upper class.</subject>
\par <anchor>Which class would you say that you belonged to?</anchor>
\par <subject>I would have thought the upper class, but that was - that was my own idea.</subject>
\par <anchor>What other sort of people belonged to the upper class too?</anchor>
\par <subject>Do you mean locally?</subject>
\par <anchor>Yes.</anchor>
\par <subject>I would say most of the - manufacturing families. Of which there were very definitely - leaders, the - the top - the owners of the firms.</subject>
\par 
\par <anchor>The employers?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. And they own - actually owners, it wasn't so much directors and people like that, they were - partnerships rather than - Limited Companies. And they were - the owners there.</subject>
\par <anchor>What sort of people belonged to the working class?</anchor>
\par <subject>The actual - mm - the actual workers. The - all the - manual workers in - in - in the - in the factories. I'd have said the tradesmen. But then - the tradesmen - the vast of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid7811105\charrsid6824016 tradesmen}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid3302345\charrsid6824016  I think were the middle class.</subject>
\par <anchor>That was the craftsmen and so on?</anchor>
\par <subject>Well - their bosses. Yes. Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>What other people were in the middle class?</anchor>
\par <subject>Generally speaking - teachers. Many of the - lawyers and doctors and some of them were - I would have said in the upper class - in my view in
 these days. I never sat down and just figured out you were in the upper class, it was - sort of came naturally somehow.</subject>
\par <anchor>Can you remember being brought up to treat people of one sort differently from people of another?</anchor>
\par <subject>Never. Father was very hot on that. He }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid7811105\charrsid6824016 invariably}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid3302345\charrsid6824016 
 said, he's as good as you are.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you ever have to lift your hat to anybody?</anchor>
\par <subject>To ladies always. And very insistent on that. And to men - of course it was sir.</subject>
\par <anchor>Can you remember anyone showing respect to your parents in that way?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. Quite a lot. And in these days it was touching your hats of course, to father.</subject>
\par <anchor>What did the ladies do, would they courtesy?</anchor>
\par <subject>No. Only on - father was knighted of course and on state occasions like that the - they - did if mother was all dressed up and there was a - an official reception, but that was all. Father was Lord Lieutenant of the County.</subject>
\par <anchor>In the district you lived in in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Dunfermline{\*\xmlclose}, who were considered the most important people in that district?</anchor>
\par 
\par <subject>Oh dear me. I wouldn't know that. It's a very large - depends - who are you thinking of, who - who - whose opinion are you - the senior citizens, I - not - not - civically so much. I wouldn't know.</subject>
\par <anchor>What about shopkeepers at that time, were they important people or not?</anchor>
\par <subject>Not important, no. They were always very deferential.</subject>
\par <anchor>Who did they associate with?</anchor>
\par <subject>I don't know, except other shopkeepers but -</subject>
\par <anchor>What about ministers?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh yes, well they - they would treated with deference and respect and -</subject>
\par <anchor>And teachers?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, to a certain extent, yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Not so much as ministers?</anchor>
\par <subject>No. Oh not as much, no, or doctors.</subject>
\par <anchor>What about farmers, how were they treated at that time?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh as being pretty tough cases, able to look after themselves and - I don't think there was respect - felt towards them, as there was to doctors and lawyers.</subject>
\par <anchor>And employers?</anchor>
\par <subject>Employers, yes - they took that for granted that they -</subject>
\par <anchor>What sort of people would you say went to church at that time?</anchor>
\par <subject>A whole of the - a section of everybody. Yes, everybody. A lot of our workers at the factory were very regular churchgoers. And - for whom I have a high regard as workers. I thought the
y were more reliable than the others, as a rule. But that may have been a - biased opinion.</subject>
\par <anchor>In Dunfermline did all the people in the working class have the same standard of living or was there a difference within the working class?</anchor>
\par 
\par <subject>Oh yes, there'd be a difference - but not in all that extent I think. They were all - oh yes, there was, there was a - a difference.</subject>
\par <anchor>What sort of families would be different?</anchor>
\par <subject>I think it depended more on the - well on the man but largely on - on the - wife - as to the standard that was kept up.</subject>
\par <anchor>We were talking about different standards of living within the working class.</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, I find that very difficult to - nearly all the houses I went into were - delightful, very pernickety, things had to be - they were much more particular about the - etiquette - than I ever was if they came to my home and -</subject>
\par <anchor>Do you think that any one group felt itself superior to the rest?</anchor>
\par <subject>No - part - no one particular group I think great many thought themselves, the teachers for instance - always felt they felt themselves superior to others. And the professional - all the professional people too.</subject>
\par <anchor>Were some families thought of as rough and others as respectable?</anchor>
\par <subject>Very definitely, yes, yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Do you remember any distinction between craftsmen and labourers?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, the labourers usually considered pretty rough,
 the labourer then was - was a labourer, not like today that a young fellow will take a labouring job for - a few months and - push on to something else, but a labourer then was - a labourer more - or less a professional, he was a professional labourer, a
nd they were usually rougher, especially the casual labourers who the lodging houses were kept for. Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Do you remember at that time could people move up a class or down a class at all?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh yes, if - if we promoted someone a foreman - that certainly - brought -</subject>
\par <anchor>Brought them up a bit higher?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Could people go down as well?</anchor>
\par <subject>I would say chiefly through the courts.</subject>
\par <anchor>If they got into debt was it?</anchor>
\par 
\par <subject>Yes. Yes. Or into trouble.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did your mother and father have the same attitude to people in different classes?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, definitely. Possibly father a little more than mother. Although they both were - they both knew they'd come up from that themselves and - they - they remembered that, they didn't try and forget it.</subject>
\par <anchor>Do you think your mother saw herself as belonging to a particular social class?</anchor>
\par <subject>I'm sure she never thought that - in that way, in a crude way like that but she - it was taken - I think taken for granted by her. She expected - she always showed respect but she expected to be treated with -</subject>
\par <anchor>Was that because she had been brought up that way?</anchor>
\par <subject>I suppose just because - father had made good.</subject>
\par <anchor>She was reflecting your father really?</anchor>
\par <subject>Well, yes they have - have - social status had certainly - what would you call, had improved because of - it's largely a question of money, they were able to - do more, have more.</subject>
\par <anchor>Do you remember anyone being described as a real gentleman or a real lady?</anchor>
\par <subject>Lady, mm. Nothing to do with money there. No, no, that was - purely - I think outlook on life and - and manner.</subject>
\par <anchor>Do you remember seeing a policeman around when you were a child?</anchor>
\par <subject>Seeing who around?</subject>
\par <anchor>Policemen.</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh yes, yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>How did they treat the people then?</anchor>
\par <subject>In my day I think - very thoughtfully, there was - no - none of the harshness - that one - associate with policeman earlier on. No, I feel - I would say that the - they were all friends together more or less.</subject>
\par <anchor>If you were ever naughty did your nurse or your mother say I'll get a policeman?</anchor>
\par 
\par <subject>No, I don't think so, nurse might have said - I don't think so, no.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did your home belong to your father?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. Finally, not - not Douglas Street.</subject>
\par <anchor>Was it a rented home?</anchor>
\par <subject>That's a rented home. And I think Can more was too. Certainly Comely Park was father's.</subject>
\par <anchor>Do you ever remember feeling your parents had a struggle to make ends meet at all?</anchor>
\par <subject>Had a? The - my parents? I never - but - yes, yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Have you ever heard of the expression rough music? At one time if there was a family in the district that people disapproved of they sometimes forced them out of their house, did you ever hear of that in Dunfermline?</anchor>
\par <subject>No. I'm sure it did happen but I - I - no.</subject>
\par <anchor>Were you ever given lessons other than Sunday school lessons by one of your parents?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh yes. Yes, pepped up on - languages I'm sure. Yes, mother did and father did too - tried to - I - I was far from being bright - at school and -</subject>
\par <anchor>Was this sort of extra lessons while you were at school?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh yes, yes, yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you ever have a tutor or a governess at all?</anchor>
\par <subject>No.</subject>
\par <anchor>You mentioned going to boarding school?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Was that your first experience of school?</anchor>
\par <subject>No, I was at a - at a - kindergarten school, run by a Miss Norry.</subject>
\par <anchor>How old were you when you went there?</anchor>
\par 
\par <subject>I think I was about five.</subject>
\par <anchor>Can you remember what time in the morning you went to school?</anchor>
\par <subject>I think it was nine.</subject>
\par <anchor>Was that for a whole day or half day?</anchor>
\par <subject>Half day to begin with, yes, then the - short afternoon. We'd a lovely time there and she would take us out walks, doing - nature studies I remember.</subject>
\par <anchor>Was it a private school?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Was it mixed, boys and girls?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>After you left the kindergarten how old were you then?</anchor>
\par <subject>I - oh dear me - I went to the High School after, the local high school for - three years I think.</subject>
\par <anchor>What kind of school was that at the time? Was it a board school or was it a private school?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh board school. And - oh - there - there - that's a real mixture.</subject>
\par <anchor>How did you get to it, did you walk?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>The same with the kindergarten?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Who would take you?</anchor>
\par <subject>We walked by ourselves. Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Brothers and sisters?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you come home for your lunch?</anchor>
\par 
\par <subject>Always.</subject>
\par <anchor>Even when you went back in the afternoon?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you like school?</anchor>
\par <subject>No.</subject>
\par <anchor>What about the teachers, how did you feel about them?</anchor>
\par <subject>Some I liked and others I disliked. Must have been a little more at one of them, I didn't go to - Stanley House at - at twelve. Mm. I don't know - I don't think I was more than three years at the high school, I may have been.</subject>
\par <anchor>Can you remember the teachers emphasising certain things as important in life?</anchor>
\par <subject>I'm sure they did but I don't remember.</subject>
\par <anchor>It hasn't made an impression on you?</anchor>
\par <subject>No.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did they consider manners or punctuality, tidiness, the way that you spoke, were these important things or not?</anchor>
\par <subject>The way we spoke, yes. Pronunciation, enunciation
 rather. No, I don't think tidiness - wasn't - emphasised - at the early schools possibly - it was at - at the - at the board school, the primary - the - yes, the - primary board school it was emphasised. And I'm sure it was at kindergarten. Where our dea
r ma'am on the Sunday - on a - winter's day used to stand in front of a - the open fire of course with her skirt held right up and -</subject>
\par <anchor>If you did something the teacher disapproved of what happened?</anchor>
\par <subject>Well at the high school of course was the strap.</subject>
\par <anchor>Boys and girls, did they both get the strap?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, but very seldom the girls, very seldom.</subject>
\par <anchor>What sort of things were punishable offences?</anchor>
\par <subject>Riotous behaviour, fooling about the desk.</subject>
\par 
\par <anchor>Were you ever punished for your actual work if you got it wrong?</anchor>
\par <subject>No, I don't think ever.</subject>
\par <anchor>It was behaviour?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, behaviour.</subject>
\par <anchor>Were your parents interested in your school work?</anchor>
\par <subject>I beg your pardon? Yes, I'm sure they were, they were very depressed at my - reports. Very depressed with them I'm sure, but they were always very good at hiding the fact.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did they visit the school at all to see how you were getting on?</anchor>
\par <subject>Not so see how I was getting on, they visited it on - on visiting days, on the - not to disappoint their children really.</subject>
\par <anchor>At the kindergarten and the high school did the other children come from similar types of home as your own or not?</anchor>
\par <subject>Not at the board school, at the kindergarten, yes, it was all - friends who had arranged to have their children at this - then the board school I was tossed into the real - rough and tumble.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did the teachers ever single out some children for different treatment than other children?</anchor>
\par <subject>One or two teachers did - discriminated. A little, yes. But to any - great extent, no.</subject>
\par <anchor>If they did discriminate was it because that child was very poor or because they were better?</anchor>
\par <subject>Well I don't know, you know, kids - have their own suspicions about things. I thought it was just - I think it was a little discriminatory in the - on th
e parents part and the kid's - position. A little bit but that was the poorer teachers mind that did that you know. There was certainly that at - at my - boarding school, the - the Bridte of Allan one which is a privately run boarding school. Had some ver
y
 bad children and - there the headmaster did discriminate - according to the parents - ability to pay. 'Cos there were no set fees, he just sized up what they could soak them for and - yes. And of course made a fuss of those who paid a lot more. I'm glad 
to say my parents didn't pay a lot more. No.</subject>
\par 
\par <anchor>Can you remember any gangs or groups in school?</anchor>
\par <subject>Any? Oh yes, definitely, the board school. The - the - the board school down here, yes, we - we - we ganged up in order to get home safely.</subject>
\par <anchor>To get home safely?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes - or - when I say safe.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did children chase each other?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. Yes, oh yes, if - lambast us - us going along to - Comely Park, a better - type of home. Oh yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Were there any children who were ever left out of things?</anchor>
\par <subject>Left out of things? Oh yes, we could be pretty cruel, just as they were cruel to me I was left out of things too. I was a bit of a cissy I think. Certai
nly later on when I went to board school my younger brother who was a - a - a - a very good athlete, stood up for me on several occasions when they saw the brother couldn't stand up for himself.</subject>
\par <anchor>You went to a boarding school when you were about twelve?</anchor>
\par <subject>I should think I was rather older, I should think I was thirteen or - yes, twelve, perhaps twelve, thirteen, certainly not - younger.</subject>
\par <anchor>And it was a private boarding school, how many children would be in that school?</anchor>
\par <subject>I think there were about sixty.</subject>
\par <anchor>And they were all boys?</anchor>
\par <subject>All boys, yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>How long did you stay at that school?</anchor>
\par <subject>I think I stayed there for - three years. Think so.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you want to go to boarding school?</anchor>
\par <subject>No.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did your parents ever discuss it with you?</anchor>
\par <subject>As to whether I should, oh yes, father did. And - said he thought - he thought we should, and that he would like us to, but I mean - he did things by persuasion. Very largely. Must be very exhausting.</subject>
\par 
\par <anchor>Can you tell me what a typical day at your boarding school would be?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh that's going back a bit.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you have to get up early in the morning for instance?</anchor>
\par <subject>Not very. I think seven thirty. We had a swimming pool at that school, an unheated swimming pool. And I - challenged a fellow - to swim every morning with me - and we did, ever
yone - sometimes we had to break the ice, a skim of ice you know, swim along as an ice breaker.</subject>
\par <anchor>Was that before breakfast?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, that was before breakfast.</subject>
\par <anchor>What did you have for your breakfast at school?</anchor>
\par <subject>Very much the same thing - possibly -</subject>
\par <anchor>Much the same as at home was it?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. Yes, most certainly -</subject>
\par <anchor>You were fairly well fed?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh very well fed, yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Then did you have your lessons after breakfast?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, from nine 'til - one, and then games and then from four 'til - five I think.</subject>
\par <anchor>Was that actually a taught lessons or did you have to do homework in that period of four 'til five?</anchor>
\par <subject>I think four to five was prep. I think that's right, and there was a - there was some afternoon lessons. I don't think every day. 'Cos sports took a - a fairly big place in the curriculum.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you have your tea after five o'clock?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, we had tea. And prep and - general - reading.</subject>
\par 
\par <anchor>Did you have much time to do as you liked at school or not?</anchor>
\par <subject>No, not very much.</subject>
\par <anchor>Were you allowed at all, to go for walks and so on?</anchor>
\par <subject>Organized walks. No, you weren't allowed - you weren't out on your own, no. One of our favourites walks was up - the Wallace monument. 'Cos there was a shop in - at the - at the top, we liked going up there. The other walks was to the top of 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}Denmark{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}. Oh you won't know {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}Denmark{\*\xmlclose}
{\*\xmlclose} mountain, at the end of the - Cleesh hills. At the end of the Ockles. So we went fairly rigorous - the only time that I remember we were allowed a way of our own was the fall holidays from the - we
re allowed out two - two together. Two or more together, and bikes, if - if you had a bike.</subject>
\par <anchor>Were you allowed home at weekends?</anchor>
\par <subject>No. Half term.</subject>
\par <anchor>Were you ever allowed to wear your own clothes other than uniform during the term?</anchor>
\par <subject>No.</subject>
\par <anchor>Were you allowed any of your own personal possessions?</anchor>
\par <subject>You wore your own - going - of course going to - church I think.</subject>
\par <anchor>Were you allowed personal possessions at school?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. WE had our own - at {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Stanley{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 House we had - I was in the annex - and a different size of rooms there, there were three - three or four beds in a room. I remember our house master, Tommy Brade, he always did himself fairly 
well at the end of the day and he would come round - not quite on the beam. And I remember one occasion the - he came out to put out the lights, it was gas light of course. I remember one occasion one bright lad - Vaseline in the cork and he - couldn't ge
t that. But there we had our own - little dorms there.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did your parents come to visit you when you were at school during the term?</anchor>
\par <subject>Just at the half - at - oh there wasn't many - I think only about once a term. And we went home once a term. They weren't keen coming because - it upset me, I - never - they never left me except me in tears. I got very homesick.</subject>
\par <anchor>Was there anything special that you missed at home, when you were away?</anchor>
\par 
\par <subject>No, not except companionship. The nice security feeling of home. Mm.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did they write you letters then when they didn't come?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. Yes. Oh yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Do you think it changed how you felt about them or not, being at boarding school?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, I was very fond of them and very proud of them. And of - I wouldn't have heard anything said against them or - I was very - very proud of them.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did going to a boarding school change your outlook on life at all?</anchor>
\par <subject>I don't think honestly it did.</subject>
\par <anchor>At boarding school did you meet children of a sort you hadn't met before?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, yes, you - yes, one did. All - from a - from well-to-do families. So one felt at home amongst them and didn't - enjoyed the - their company and - had a good deal in common with them. All of which I'm afraid sounds like a bit of class }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid7811105\charrsid6824016 snobbery}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid3302345\charrsid6824016 , I think it is engrained a little. Yes. Mm.</subject>
\par <anchor>When you came home did you spend your time differently from how you had previous to going to boarding school?</anchor>
\par <subject>That's difficult, no, we didn't, it wasn't the same - way at all as - by that time - of course we bought our bikes back, we were much - more independent than - a
nd would go away for a day - with other cycling friends and - visit friend - people - oh I remember up to Glendes and that sort of thing to other boys homes that were - the boys who were at school. Yes, we did a lot of day visiting.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you still have friends that you had made before, or were these mostly the new friends that you'd meet at school?</anchor>
\par <subject>Mostly new.</subject>
\par <anchor>You stayed at Stanley House for about three years, did you go to another school after that or not?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Where did you go then?</anchor>
\par 
\par <subject>The Valley School at {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Cambridge{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
. Father was a - as I have said we were Congregationalists, he was a non-conformist, Lees is one of the two - non-conformist public schools in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}England{\*\xmlclose}
{\*\xmlclose}. Mill Hill is the other one. And - a great friend of father's - Forester Payton of Paton and Baldwin the wool people who lived at - had great - Liberal too incidentally, and a rabid teetotaller - who didn't even produce wine when he was ent
ertaining Campbell Bannerman I remember father telling me, he was - he admired his nerve but he didn't - he didn't admire the - the - the - the occasion. Forester Paton's son was at - Lees and - had reported on it very well.</subject>
\par <anchor>Was this a boarding school as well?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>In what ways was it different from your other boarding school?</anchor>
\par <subject>The one that we had been to before?</subject>
\par <anchor>Stanley House, yes.</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh - entirely 
different, complete - splendidly run, a real organization - it's a big school - there was a hundred and - sixty or a hundred and eighty there. There were several houses, and the whole set up was - real public school - some prefects and prefects and - a mo
st enlightened school.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you enjoy that school any better?</anchor>
\par <subject>No. Oh possibly a little better, I had more respect for it.</subject>
\par <anchor>But you still didn't like school?</anchor>
\par <subject>But I didn't like school.</subject>
\par <anchor>What happened after that?</anchor>
\par <subject>When I came home? In 19-10, at the end of ten I think, went straight into the works. And then evening school of course as - I was very hot on evening school, weekend school, oh yes, very -</subject>
\par <anchor>What did you do there?</anchor>
\par <subject>At - at it? Four years of evening school, weaving - textiles - Lauder Technical School here.</subject>
\par <anchor>Had you been asked by your father to go or was it your own idea?</anchor>
\par 
\par <subject>I think it was my own idea, but I was quite - I'm quite sure I thought that father would want me to go. My brother had been there too. My older brother.</subject>
\par <anchor>That was just in the evening was it?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. Yes. Oh there was no getting off for it. No, that was all in your own time. And did one a lot of good, did me a lot of good.</subject>
\par <anchor>How old were you when you actually left school, that would be 1910?</anchor>
\par <subject>Eighteen.</subject>
\par <anchor>Do you have any regrets about your education?</anchor>
\par <subject>Any regrets? Yes, I've regrets that I didn't work a lot - harder, but I wasn't clever. I really did rather - try.</subject>
\par <anchor>Do you think you benefitted from attending school?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh yes. Mm. In an odd way, sort of - and it gives one great assurance and - there's no doubt about that.</subject>
\par <anchor>While you were at school did you ever have any means of earning a little regular money? Did you ever have any jobs of any kind?</anchor>
\par <subject>Never. There were one or two bright boys at school who managed to - trade - amongst their - amongst the other boys. No, never.</subject>
\par <anchor>So you went straight from school into the linen mills?</anchor>
\par <subject>Straight - yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Your first job, was that because it was a family concern that you went there?</anchor>
\par <subject>I'm sure it was. Well I had lots of ideas before that. I was rather keen to be a doctor. That }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid7811105\charrsid6824016 appealed}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid3302345\charrsid6824016  but then I - I hadn't the - oh - classical - knowledge or ability, I - I d
idn't work - I remember my - the headmaster at Lees - called me up and said, Robertson I think we'll put you into classics. I'd been modern you see. And after a term he said I was - made a mistake, you go back to modern. And I was hopeless at this. I supp
o
se my greatest regret is - the amount of money of father's I wasted in my musical lessons. We had musical - you - practiced under the main hall with the - in the music rooms in the evening. And the time I wasted there, I wasn't trying at all, I wasn't at 
all. No, I had no music in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname State}}me.{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}</subject>
\par 
\par <anchor>When you went into the mill I think you said you started as a general clerk in the Export Department?</anchor>
\par <subject>Mm hm. But a clerk meant - it was just a - a - a very junior apprentice where first of all you - wrote out tickets that were stuck on to all the - dozen napkins that were made up.</subject>
\par <anchor>Do you mean price tickets?</anchor>
\par <subject>Quality tickets. Quality. Mm. Size and quality was marked on this. And that - that was - and then sticking them on. And then making up the - shipments, recording them.</subject>
\par <anchor>What hours did you work when you first started?</anchor>
\par <subject>I can't remember if it was eight or eight thirty, it was certainly not after eight thirty, I think it was eight thirty 'til five.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you have a half day?</anchor>
\par <subject>Saturday.</subject>
\par <anchor>A whole day Saturday was it?</anchor>
\par <subject>Half day Saturday.</subject>
\par <anchor>No work on a Sunday?</anchor>
\par <subject>No.</subject>
\par <anchor>Can you remember what you were paid when you first started?</anchor>
\par <subject>Four shillings. I remember that very clearly.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you feel that was a fair wage?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. Very proud of the four bob.</subject>
\par <anchor>What did you do with it?</anchor>
\par <subject>I saved a good deal of it. I can't remember how I saved it, whether I gave it to mother - of course - one's ambition was to save up enough to get a motor bike. That was the ambition then.</subject>
\par <anchor>How did you get on with the other people you worked with?</anchor>
\par 
\par <subject>Very well.</subject>
\par <anchor>There wouldn't have been any difference the fact you were the boss's son?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. There's no doubt - yes, yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>They treated you just that little bit differently?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. The nice ones it made a difference that you got a little preferential treatment. The others rather took it out of you 'cos of that. But it did make a difference one way or the other, I'm very conscious
 of one or two - of the - senior men taking it out of me as being the boss's son.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you like your work?</anchor>
\par <subject>Very much. Loved it.</subject>
\par <anchor>After being a junior clerk what happened next?</anchor>
\par <subject>Well you see everything was upset and - 19 - in 1913 I - \{BLANK\}
 was very anxious for - one or two officers for the Territorial Army, and I - my brother and I tossed up and I - went into the Gunners and he went in to the Yeomanry. And that was in '13 and of course i
n '14 - finis. Just - went off - four years complete blank.</subject>
\par <anchor>You served during the war in the army?</anchor>
\par <subject>In the Army, yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>When you came back after the war what did you do then?</anchor>
\par <subject>Went straight back to - business.</subject>
\par <anchor>Were you still a clerk then?</anchor>
\par <subject>No, no, I was in charge of a department then.</subject>
\par <anchor>Which department was that?</anchor>
\par <subject>Well that was still the Export Department - when I say in ch
arge of it I - sort of - there - on tolerance with the - with the real Departmental - head - and through time just automatically - well now - you see, as I said - earlier on - with - when father asked me what I wanted to do before I went into the business
 I said I'd like to be in business. But I said, I'd rather be in a - I'd rather be in charge of a little business - than partner in a big one. And just then, he was offered a firm in Kirkcaldy and bought that.</subject>
\par 
\par <anchor>Was that Greig's that you were talking about?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, yes. Yes, Peter Pye came along - offered the business to father and he bought it - I think with that in view. In any case I went along, started - to - learn that trade, as well as Hay and Robertson. And then - the w
ar came and then when I came back I - I really took over Peter Greig's.</subject>
\par <anchor>You were saying that you came back from the Army and went into Gr}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid7811105\charrsid6824016 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid3302345\charrsid6824016 ig}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid7811105\charrsid6824016 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid3302345\charrsid6824016 
?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. I - I really - had to take charge of Greigs because they - father would 
- it had been a strain on him through the war, and father of course had been - in - very - had - a good deal to do but he had a great deal to do apart from the business in the war. So dad - I went along to Peter Greigs - right away when I came back, and s
pent a good deal of time there. In fact I spent all my days there to begin with, and then half the time between Peter Greigs and Hay and Robertson.</subject>
\par <anchor>Until eventually you became joint managing director?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. And - with Peter }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid7811105\charrsid6824016 Greigs}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid3302345\charrsid6824016  too.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you ever belong to a trade union or professional organisation?</anchor>
\par <subject>No, Manufacturers Association, but that's for the firm not some individual.</subject>
\par <anchor>Do you think that employers and workers had the same interests or different interests?</anchor>
\par <subject>Employees?</subject>
\par <anchor>Employers and the workers?</anchor>
\par <subject>Employers. Oh a great deal of - a great many common interests. Especially in the sporting end, we all met - in your tennis
 club and - cricket club and all that sort of thing, yes. I think a - great many of similar interests, and kirk, I was never - I was never on - an officer in the church, I was never - an elder, a great many of our people were elders of course. So I had to
 be in church along with them. Then of course the Territorials are - are - are an excellent }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid7811105\charrsid6824016 leveller}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid3302345\charrsid6824016 , you met your own chaps there.</subject>
\par <anchor>Would you say that full time work changed your general attitude to life in any way?</anchor>
\par <subject>Full time work? Yes, I think it sobered me up. I realized the - the importance of - of - oh I - I think I could say I realized the - the - my responsibility to the community. I really - did feel that.</subject>
\par 
\par <anchor>After you left school did you continue to live at home once you started to work?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did working change your relationship with your parents or your brothers and sisters at all?</anchor>
\par <subject>No, I don't think so. More independent, you made your own - your own friends and your, your own - games and - found them.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you spend the Sunday any differently once you started work? Did you continue going to church in the morning?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. Yes. When was that now - father was faced wit
h a difficult - when motoring came in - and this - the question came up of course, should - people motor on Sunday? I think father and mother saw rather differently on that. But father very wisely - compromised and said, if you go to church in the - in th
e morning, you certainly can have the car in the afternoon and push off, so that's the arrangement which I thought was a very sensible one. But we bought our afternoons - motoring - by going to church in the morning.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did your mother go with you in the afternoon?</anchor>
\par <subject>Sometimes, not very often, no, it was young - young people.</subject>
\par <anchor>I wondered if she disapproved of it whether she agreed with your father if they went to church then it was all right?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh I - I thought meant - did she go personally with us. Oh no, she - she - thought that was excellent. Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>So she approved of that idea?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh approved.</subject>
\par <anchor>Were you interested in politics at that time?</anchor>
\par <subject>No. No.</subject>
\par <anchor>You weren't at all?</anchor>
\par <subject>No. I never have been.</subject>
\par <anchor>What about your own wife, was she interested in politics at all?</anchor>
\par 
\par <subject>No.</subject>
\par <anchor>And yet your father was such a staunch man with the Liberal party?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, that's possibly why.</subject>
\par <anchor>Reacted against it?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you -</anchor>
\par <subject>Children of the kirk are very often - \{BLANK\} aren't they?</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you ever vote in a general election before 1919?</anchor>
\par <subject>Did I ever? Goodness me - I can't -</subject>
\par <anchor>There was one in 1918 at the end of the war, can you remember voting?</anchor>
\par <subject>When did one - oh of course I must have done. I certainly - voted Liberal. All the way through until - the Liberals fell on bad days. Yes, I voted - then.</subject>
\par <anchor>Were you ever a member of a political party?</anchor>
\par <subject>Never. Until now. Not there - not - not in those days, no.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you ever work for any of the parties at election time?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. Motoring. People into the -</subject>
\par <anchor>Taking them by car to vote?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. Yes. Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you ever take part in any activity other than at election time?</anchor>
\par <subject>Never.</subject>
\par <anchor>When you first started work, did you continue to spend your spare time as you had when you were at school, cycling and going the odd walk and so or did you do anything diffe
rently once you started work, obviously you went to night school, that would take up part of your time?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, that took up a lot of my time, and I was in - when - by that time I was in the Costing Department - when are we up to now?</subject>
\par 
\par <anchor>This is after the war.</anchor>
\par <subject>After the war? Yes, I was - going in for Costing then and I - the Costing Department in the works, and I was back at the works nearly every night that I wasn't at - yes, practically every night and at w
eekends too. -It was very foolish, I - got almost to the point of thinking I was - the - company couldn't get on without me, it was absurd. And - but I found it so much easier - thinking quietly, at that time when the pressure was off and - the daily - th
e daily work. Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you make any new friends at this time?</anchor>
\par <subject>Any new friends?</subject>
\par <anchor>Once you started to work?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, one or two of the - other manufacturers in town. Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you go out with them at all?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh in the evening, parties, yes. Dances and all that sort of thing. One or two parties, yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>That was mostly boys was it?</anchor>
\par <subject>Was boys.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you have any girl friends any that time?</anchor>
\par <subject>No, I was a - cissy? I - I would like to start again.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you have any special friends at that time?</anchor>
\par <subject>Close friends? Oh yes, one or two - one or two of my - wartime friends too - that were in the battery. See I was in the same battery all the - right through the war.</subject>
\par <anchor>So you had time to make friends?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. And got to know some very well.</subject>
\par <anchor>Where would you go with them, just to dances and parties?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, largely yes, and -</subject>
\par 
\par <anchor>Did your parents meet your friends?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. Oh they - yes, always.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did they expect to know where you were when you went out?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, I think they did, they were always told. Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you have to be home by a certain time once you started to work?</anchor>
\par <subject>No.</subject>
\par <anchor>You were married in 1929?</anchor>
\par <subject>They no doubt ragged me if I was late and - find out where I'd been, what I'd been up to.</subject>
\par <anchor>They didn't lay down the law that you had to be in by a certain time?</anchor>
\par <subject>No, no, no, no.</subject>
\par <anchor>You were married in 1929?</anchor>
\par <subject>Mm.</subject>
\par <anchor>So you'd be thirty-seven?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>How long had you known your wife at that time?</anchor>
\par <subject>Mm, well - that's in '29 - she was over here in '26 - playing for the Australian Ladies, in the Australian team, and I got a
ctually engaged then, in '26. And we broke it off. And went our own ways and - neither she nor I met anyone that we would rather have and - she came over again '29, I fell for her - hook, line and sinker and we were married then. So I had known her three 
years.</subject>
\par <anchor>Would you mind telling me about how you met?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, well out in Melbourne - my - my - my wife - of course was a very big shot in the tennis world out there, and Edith was a keen tennis player then, and had met - Esna
 at - her Kuyong tennis club and got to know her very well. And like the two - they liked each other and when - when - Esna came over here with the Australian Ladies - team - Edith wrote to my mother and said would she show some kindness to Esna. And whet
her you could it kindness or not I don't know but that's what happened. Esna came and stayed with us at - Benachie.</subject>
\par 
\par <anchor>And she came from {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Melbourne{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} itself did she?</anchor>
\par <subject>From Melbourne, yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you save up before getting married or not?</anchor>
\par <subject>Did I? Yes. I don't know if I actually - I don't think I can honestly say I saved up - with that particular thing in view.</subject>
\par <anchor>You just saved up hoping that one day you would get married?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. Yes. Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did your parents help you in setting up a home?</anchor>
\par <subject>No. Father was dead then. And - no, I was able to finance myself. I was - doing quite well, and quite well off then.</subject>
\par <anchor>You were engaged in 1926, and you broke it off and you got re-engaged and then shortly afterwards married?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Can you remember your wedding?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, pretty well.</subject>
\par <anchor>Whereabout were you married?</anchor>
\par <subject>In Edinburgh. St Cuthbert's.</subject>
\par <anchor>That's at the {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}West End{\*\xmlclose} isn't it?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>How many guests did you have at your wedding?</anchor>
\par <subject>There were a lot. I don't remember now how many. The - the reception was in the Caledonian - Station Hotel. I think there were about two hundred.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did your wife wear a long white dress or not?</anchor>
\par 
\par <subject>Yes. Yes, and -</subject>
\par <anchor>Did she have attendants? Bridesmaid?</anchor>
\par <subject>Her older sister - came over from {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Melbourne{\*\xmlclose} to the wedding, as well as her father and mother, from {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Melbourne
{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} and - oh the sister was - matron I suppose you call it don't you? Yes. And then we had - train bearers and - in fact there's a picture of the wedding here. I think.</subject>
\par <anchor>Was it a morning or an afternoon wedding?</anchor>
\par <subject>Goodness, I think afternoon. Yes. Think so.</subject>
\par <anchor>You went to the Caldonina Hotel, was it a set meal that everybody sat down to or was it a buffet?</anchor>
\par <subject>No, a recep - buffet.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did people give lots of presets at a wedding at that time?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. Yes. Yes, I've a lot still.</subject>
\par <anchor>The guests that wife invited to the wedding, were they relations, friends, neighbours, how did you choose your guests for the wedding?</anchor>
\par <subject>I think I can claim nearly all friends, all friends, one or two - that one - you know - that you felt - you must ask, but - generally speaking friends and friends of mother's and - my - wife's friends too of course.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did anybody come from {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}Australia{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} for the wedding?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes - there were two - two of Esna's girl friends came. And then she had - a few relatives over here, but a lot of tennis friends of course there were, 'cos she knew - she knew so many tennis players here.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you have a honeymoon?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, indeed we did. It was rather an original one, we went to Algeria.</subject>
\par <anchor>That was original at that time wasn't it?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. Went to - through the Sahara.</subject>
\par <anchor>How did you travel?</anchor>
\par 
\par <subject>We travelled - travelled by a train down to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Marseilles{\*\xmlclose} and we flew - yes, we flew to - {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Algiers{\*\xmlclose}
{\*\xmlclose}. And then by bus - to Busada. 
Most remarkable journey - one or two - even in these days, very modern hotels. You were motoring on - made up tracks, you know, the way they lay tracks down - on - if you went off the track you got - completely swamped in the desert, either in mud or in s
and.</subject>
\par <anchor>It must have been very interesting?</anchor>
\par <subject>Then we flew home from - {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}France{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
. In a one - in a single engine plane, my wife thought I was - trying to do us in, we had a rather precarious trip home.</subject>
\par <anchor>Where did you live after you were married?</anchor>
\par <subject>I bought a house outside {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Dunfermline{\*\xmlclose}
. Had - to get a lot done to it and stayed with my mother for - five or six months I think. See Benachie was big enough to be able to - get a wing to ourselves. But we joined them for meals - still had the - joy of her - cook and things.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you live for along time in this house outside {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Dunfermline{\*\xmlclose}?</anchor>
\par <subject>In Bonnerton. Yes, and - until my wife died.</subject>
\par <anchor>How old was your wife when you married?</anchor>
\par <subject>She was exactly thirty.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did your wife work before she was married?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, you asked me that, she didn't. No. She worked very hard in this tennis, it was very professional -</subject>
\par <anchor>They just didn't get paid at that time?</anchor>
\par <subject>No, they didn't get paid, but she was offered - oh - just after six when she was in Melbourne - to go out to be - trained, but - tutored at tennis, with one or two of the leading Australian players who were very keen to see her.</subject>
\par <anchor>You had two children, a boy and a girl? Were your children born at home?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did your wife have a doctor or a nurse or a midwife?</anchor>
\par <subject>Doctors. Mm.</subject>
\par <anchor>Were you there?</anchor>
\par 
\par <subject>Yes. The first time - kept out of the way by heating bottles - kettles and things, yes. Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Can you remember how long your wife had to stay in bed after she'd had the children?</anchor>
\par <subj
ect>It was a long time by today's standards, but she was - as you can understand she was very fit. She was very athletic. I think it was - both - births were fairly straightforward, and I think - I think I'm right, about four - four to five days I think.<
/subject>
\par <anchor>How did you manage when she was in bed, did you have servants in the house?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. Yes. - Yes. Yes, these are the halcyon days.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did your wife have a nurse to stay with her?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes. Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>How long did the nurse stay?</anchor>
\par <subject>I think the nurse was there for a month. And then a nanny.</subject>
\par <anchor>After the nurse left there was a nanny?</anchor>
\par <subject>Mm.</subject>
\par <anchor>When your children were small did you have much to do with them at all?</anchor>
\par <subject>No. I was a very privileged man.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you never feed them or bath them at all?</anchor>
\par <subject>Very seldom.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you ever change their nappies?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes, I think I did a few times, I'm quite good at that actually now.</subject>
\par <anchor>You have more practice now than you did then?</anchor>
\par <subject>Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you play with the children when they were pretty small?</anchor>
\par <subject>Play with them? Yes. Enjoyed that. We were out in the country you see and - we were - playing outside a lot and I played indoors too a lot. I had a - childish mentality.</subject>
\par 
\par <anchor>Did you ever take part in getting them to sleep at night?</anchor>
\par <subject>Now and again but not often. If - if - if nanny was away at the weekend, say the odd weekend - I think it was my wife who heard them. Although I - I - yes, it usually is.</subject>
\par <anchor>Did you ever take the children out without your wife?</anchor>
\par <subject>Oh yes. Yes.</subject>
\par <anchor>What sort of things would you do with them?</anchor>
\par <subject>I would take - when it was - the perambulator, I'd take the perambulator out and probably - Bill the - the son running at the side, down the country roads. Then we had a pony, I used to take them on the pony - pony back.</subject>
\par }}