{\rtf1\adeflang1025\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\adeff0\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang2057\deflangfe2057{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}{\f38\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f39\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f41\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f42\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f43\fbidi \froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}
{\f44\fbidi \froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f45\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f46\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f48\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}
{\f49\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f51\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f52\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f53\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f54\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}
{\f55\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f56\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden 
Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs20 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}}
{\*\latentstyles\lsdstimax156\lsdlockeddef0}{\*\revtbl {Unknown;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid281643\rsid2359735\rsid2700016\rsid5646288\rsid11557774\rsid13328894\rsid14303064\rsid14888113\rsid15806095\rsid16008431\rsid16392069}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 11.0.0000;}{\info
{\title Information about interviewee}{\author SEENU}{\operator lhorto}{\creatim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min9}{\revtim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min9}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords41695}{\nofchars237665}{\nofcharsws278803}
{\vern24613}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 http://schemas.microsoft.com/office/word/2003/wordml}}\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1800\margr1800\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0\ltrsect 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\donotembedsysfont0\donotembedlingdata0\grfdocevents0\validatexml1\showplaceholdtext0\ignoremixedcontent0\saveinvalidxml0\showxmlerrors1\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace180
\dgvspace180\dghorigin1800\dgvorigin1440\dghshow1\dgvshow1\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\splytwnine\ftnlytwnine\htmautsp\nolnhtadjtbl\useltbaln\alntblind\lytcalctblwd\lyttblrtgr\lnbrkrule\nojkernpunct\rsidroot14888113 \fet0
{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}\ilfomacatclnup0\ltrpar \sectd \ltrsect\linex0\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ltrpar
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid16392069 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\ul\insrsid16392069\charrsid16072257 Information about interviewee}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid16392069 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid16392069\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tx2057\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid16392069 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392069\charrsid16072257 Date of birth}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392069 
   \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392069\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392069  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid11557774 1891}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392069\charrsid16072257 

\par Gender}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392069           \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392069\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392069  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid11557774 F}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392069 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392069\charrsid16072257 Marital status}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392069 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392069\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid16392069  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid11557774 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392069\charrsid16544153 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392069\charrsid16072257 Occupation}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392069 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392069\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392069  
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid11557774 Cinema attendant}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392069\charrsid16072257 
\par Geographic region}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392069 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392069\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392069  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid14303064 L}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid11557774 ondon}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16392069\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\qj \fi-490\li518\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin518\itap0\pararsid16392069 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Your name please?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Suzie Annette - Hills it was then. Freeman now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 And your address here?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 249 Ladbroke Grove. W.10.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 And you're a widow?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon? Yes, I am a widow.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Do you remember what year it was you got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 1910.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Do you remember what year it was you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 The twelfth of November - 19 - 1891.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Where were you born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 373, Portobello Road, the corner of the next turning.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 How many years did you live in the house where you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Five years. And then we moved into - Ladbroke Grove. And - I lived there for many years, and
 then I went down to - Westcliffe to live with my aunt and uncle.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Where at Westcliffe?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 3 Finchley Road, Westcliffe.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Is that in Sussex?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Westcliffe on Sea, Essex. And - then I - I came back here - and - we lived at - 390 - I think it wa
s - Portobello Road, but it was at a junction, and the front of the house - was at - was in Portobello Road and the back of the house was here, it was right up on the corner there.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You say you lived in Labroke Grove for many years, about how many years?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
I've lived twenty - twenty - wait a minute, twenty years - I lived in - at 249 Ladbroke Grove, and I've been here thirty-four years, and I lived in Chesterton Road - five years, that's the second turning from here. That's - the only places that I
've lived in except at Westcliffe.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 But you say when you moved from Portobello Road to go to Ladbroke Grove when you were a little girl?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 How many years did you stay in Ladbroke Grove?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh we stayed in Ladbroke Grove 'til I grew up, I mean - well, I don't know how many years.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 About ten or fifteen years?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes, must be. Fifteen to sixteen years.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 How old were you when you went to Westcliffe?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 I went down there first - when I was taken ill - after I had been ill, and 
then - I - I - came back - I went to school down there a little while and then I came back here, and - I went to work in - in the Post Office, but I was only there a few months - when I got scarlet fever, rheumatism, etcetera, etcetera, and - I went back 
to Westcliffe - no, after that I went to do some writing for about twelve months to a lady in Ladbroke - Ladbroke Grove.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What kind of writing was this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon? Oh I used to write letters for her. Answers to questions and - make a - answer to appo
intments, to make appointments, and - and then I went down to Westcliffe - she recommended to me - a German who was a - come over from - where they make all these - tobacco merchant he was, and he was a - a German and he had children in - in - Germany and
 
he bought these other children over to Westcliffe, and I went to live with them to show them - I was with them about - eighteen months, I went to live with them, as the family, and show them all round Westcliffe and - teach them little bits o English that
 
they didn't understand sort of thing - and - then I got married from there. I was married at Westcliffe. And - and I lived at Westcliffe until my baby was born - in 19 - 12. She was born the eleventh of September, 1912. Well, when she was - nine - months 
o
ld I had - to come up to London, and I was in hospital - for four months, owing to the - through something happening through the birth. Well my mother-in-law looked after her. And my husband was working, and then the war broke out. And - my husband went t
o
 - join the Royal Fusiliers. And then he - his father - claimed him into the - Army Service Corps, and they were sent out to France and they were out there all through the war. Well - I - stayed with a lady - in - Oxford Gardens, and - her name was Miss B
e
ulah Tripp, she was an opera singer, and - I lived with her for a little while, and then my furniture was bought up here, and - I lived in - I had my furniture bought up here and I lived there, well she died. And then I moved to Chesterton Road. Well of c
ourse the war was on. And the first - Christmas of the war, I - I did the Post Office - service just for two or three days, you know how they did. How it was arranged, and then - I -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What were you doing with the Post Office?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon? No, in the P
ost Office - delivering letters, it was to do - delivery, anyway - after that - no, where did I go after that, when we moved into Chesterton Road - I went with my friend into whose house I'd moved - and - we went on munitions at Park Royal, I was a checke
r. Of components. Well - I - my little girl was very ill and I gave it up - and then I went to Clement Talbot}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14888113\charrsid5646288 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
s it was then. And - in Barby Road, and I did work there on those statistics - a department and all sorts of things we did there. And - then - I wa
s recalled - I made an application to - go on the - I can't think of the name - Ministry of Pensions at - we had a house there - there - Gloucester - Gate, Gloucester Terrace, Kensington, and then I worked there right until my husband came home from the w
a
r. And - of course then when he came home, his friend opened a shop in Portobello Road, confectionary and toys etc. etc. And this man, he wasn't married, so my husband made me leave that job to go and manage his shop. And I was there 'til - oh I was there
 
about three or four years and then - the shop - collapsed, well it didn't actually collapse, but the lease ran out and he wouldn't renew it. And then I moved to 297 Ladbroke Grove and I lived there twenty years. And - my son was born in 1922. Well I did n
o
 work from - 1922 'til he was eighteen months old. And then I worked twenty years at the hospital, as a hospital orderly. And - I worked in the laboratory and I got - I was ill, and the doctor said that I wouldn't work in the laboratory any more, and - I 
s
aid, well then I would leave the hospital, they wanted me to take up - work in the sewing room and all that sort of thing, but I said, no, I didn't want it, so I - went up to Country Hall, and - he told - told me that hereafter I would only be only to do 
clerical work. Well then - I had an appointment}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14888113\charrsid5646288  at the Associated British Cine}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
mas, Golden Square, and I was accepted and I worked there for fifteen years 'til 1958, when I collapsed in the street, just round the corner there and I've done no work since.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you ever do any part time jobs while you were at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Pardon? No. Oh no. Only what my mother taught us to do, we all had to take it in turns, one day somebody swept the stairs down, the next day someone bought the coal up, the next day some
one went shopping with mum. And - we all had to - make our beds, shook our beds in the morning, and go to school, Mornington Road Board School. And - no, I didn't - I didn't have any - any other job after that. Only at home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Going right back, you say you lived in Portobello Road and then you moved to Ladbroke Grove?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 And then you moved back to Portobello Road?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Can you remember why the family made these moves, why did your father and mother change houses?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Well - we -
 we only had - somebody come to live - with us, to look after us children because - my father had a bad operation, and he didn't do much more work after that. And then my mother went out and she used to take on - on - cooking - but she used to supervise -
 
continental cooking and do soirees and dinner parties for all sorts of people you see, and - this old lady and gentleman, he was a retired - sailor, and - she was very elderly, well they used to look after us you see when mum - perhaps mum would be away t
wo or three days if she had a big dinner party for perhaps two hundred people or something like that. But we were never left alone. And the -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 How many brothers and sisters did you have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon? I had - well my mother had, in all, twelve children,
 there were six boys born by her first husband. And - her first husband and two children died and one child was born dead and that left me with two brothers And my mother married my - her first husband's cousin. And our name was changed from Wheeler to Hi
lls, and then my mum had five girls.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 So by the time you were born there were just two boys?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 There was only my two big brothers.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 How much older were they than you?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 They were ten years older than me. And - then my mother had me. And eig
hteen months after my sister was born. And - I think it was two or three years after that - my mother had another little girl. And she died when she was eight months old, she was born without a spleen. And then - my sister - May was born and my sister Kit
 and that's the only one I've got left now, my sister Kit, down - who has just lost her - daughter-in-law and son-in-law.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 How much age difference was there between you and the youngest daughter?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Me and - me and my - youngest - sister? Oh - ten years.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 So they were quite evenly spaced out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes. There was ten years be - between us. And - yes, that was it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You say your father had an operation?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Well, if he -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 How old were you then, were you still at school then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh I was still at school, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What was the operation for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
And - he - he - he had an operation on a - on his groin, and they cut a - a sinew and his leg was - one leg was shorter than the other, you see, well then he - he did a little bit of jobbing gar
dening but he couldn't do much because he - become an invalid you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 That was his job was it, gardening?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
That was the - that was the job when he died you see, but - he hardly ever did any work, that's why mum had to go out you see, but we were
 brought up strictly - under - there was never any drink or cards or anything in our home. I know somebody bought me a game one Christmas, snakes and ladders, and - oh no, it was my birthday, I beg your pardon, it was my birthday and this lady sent me a -
 snakes and ladders, you know, that we used to play with, and - we had this children}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14888113\charrsid5646288 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
s party as they were then, not like they have now you can bet, and - I know I - we had a red rent book - and I wet it put some - and painted my face red, and I went down - 
stairs and saw my dad. And he looked at me as if I'd got fever, he said, there's something wrong with her, he said, we'll send for the doctor at once, he said, something dreadful's happened to her. Well I'm terrified out of my life. So I said, it'll all w
ash off, it'll all wash off.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 How old were you then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Ten. Because my youngest sister was a baby in the - a cradle. And - anyway I've never, all my life, I've never used make up, I've never used a lipstick in my life, or anything, we never were al
lowed to and I never did. But we were bought up and this lady bought this snakes and ladders and my father made me tear it up.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Why was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 That's how strict we were. But believe me - I think I was about the naughtiest in - that ever went to th
at Sunday school. But - nothing - nothing wicked, never steal or anything of that but just - devilment you see, I'd got these brothers older than me, and they made a god of me. And of course they're both - died now, since the 1914 war. One died and buried
 in Eton churchyard, and his son is buried there and my other brother is buried at Wimbledon. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Were you close to your brothers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14888113\charrsid5646288 I beg your par}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 don?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Were you very close to your brothers before they died?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh yes, my dear, yes, I - id
olized them and so they did me. I know - I know once I did something, I don't know what it was now, something very trivial, and my mother said, if you do that again, she said, I shall slap you. My youngest brother said, no you won't. He said, you hit me, 
d
on't you hit her. But I was a little devil. And - of course I know one day the men came round, we used to call them the clickers because the men used to play those bones - spoons, you know, and I was out there dancing and my father came along - he said, i
n
doors. Of course all the kids used to dance to the organs in the street and have a - then another time I had a - rope thrown over the lamp post - I was swinging round the lamp post this way and this way, and - then we used to sit in the - on the kerb and 
p
lay marbles and - back and fore stones and - hopscotch, we always made our own pleasure, then - twice a year - at school, for a penny you could buy a ticket to go to the magic lantern, and - it was the time of the boat race, and they used to give us - a l
i
ttle - blue bow or - Oxford bow or Cambridge bow, whichever you belonged to as you came out from this. You had to buy the ticket at school, and at Christmas you got - perhaps an orange and an apple or something - or something like that. And - that was our
 pleasure. Then -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you make anything of birthdays in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Would you make very much of birthdays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh yes, my dear, we always had children}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14888113\charrsid5646288 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 s parties. And - oh yes, I was a born actress my dear, I had to be the head one
. And I never forget once - oh I was about - I wish I had that photograph to show you now, I was seventeen, and - I wrote this - little play, and we played it up at - a church in Harrow Road, Chu}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14888113\charrsid5646288 r}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 ch Hall in Harrow Road, and my sister was in it and that bli
nd girl, she was in it, and - I had a - that was a - I had trouser suit on you know, oh my dear I thought I was lovely. And I was the Prince, 'cos I had to be.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You say you wrote it yourselves?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes. Yes, I always wanted to be a writer. But of course I was never educated up to that pitch. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Where did you start off at school, was it round here the school you went to to begin with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Five years old I went to Mornington Road Board School, that's just up the top of that road.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 How do you spell that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Wornington. Wornington Road Board School. And I was there 'til I was about fourteen and a half.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Then you say you went to Southend Technical School?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes, I - I - because I - I wasn't the age to leave school you see then. I pa
ssed the ex seventh and - and - according to - winning the scholarship I should have stayed on and perhaps worked my way up to - something different but I didn't do it. You see? But of course I had this -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What did you specialize in at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh
 - I wanted to take up - I wanted to be a writer, I - I mean I - those days it was different to what it is now, I - I always wanted to - to do something that - something that - on my own, on my own initiative if you know what I mean. I know I sat up all n
i
ght to write - write that play, it was called two Kings. My sister was a - was a Prince and I was the King or - vice versa, I don't remember now. And we did it one evening, and there were all about - what - I suppose fifteen or sixteen could have been I s
u
ppose. I can't remember our ages now, not looking back on it. But we always had - had - we used to get - I - on a Saturday - a Friday evening I used to go round to a Jewish lady that lived in Bassett Road, and - I used to light her gas, because - they wer
e
 - strict orthodox Jews, and the Friday - evening until Saturday evening - sunset, they mustn't touch light you see, so I used to go and - light the gas - for her, and I used to get sixpence. Well out of that sixpence - I used to buy a tuppency - screw of
 tobacco for my dad - and I used to give my two sisters a penny each and I had a penny each, and a tuppency bunch of - a penny bunch of - daffodils or whatever you got for your - for your mum. That's how that sixpence was spent. Well then -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Why don't Jews have light between the hours you say?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Well it's something in their - in their religion, I don't know what it is, I don't understand, and - I know I used to go round there, they were lovely people, and - I know - what - what I used to love about 
it was, she - I always had - this - fried fish. Piece of their fried fish, oh was nothing like that. Oh I used to think that was marvel}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14888113\charrsid5646288 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 ous. I didn't even want to take the sixpence. Of course sixpence those days was a lot. And I know this - aunt of ours, w
ell she wasn't really our aunt, she was a lady's maid to Lady Brassey, in Berkeley Square, and she used to}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14888113\charrsid5646288  come and see my mum}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
 'cos mum used to arrange dinner parties there, and she came over to see us. Well, if she came on a Sunday I had to go to church w
ith her. And I used to count fourteen hundred with the sermon - while he was preaching, I hated it. And - but we used to go to Sunday school, we were quite happy there, and I took my little sister on one occasion, she was in the baby class, so I said to h
e
r - we always used to have a - a penny to put in - in the plate. So - the teacher said to her, when she had to put her penny in the plate, she said, whatever you give to the Lord, you will always get something in exchange. Well after Sunday school was ove
r
 my - kid sister's still waiting in the seat - in the - the pew. So I said, come along. She says, I'm waiting for me ha'penny change. So - they put that in the magazine, they thought it was very funny. But - as a child - I must have change. Now if - if I 
h
ad a penny I would spend a ha'penny. But I must have change. Now that - that - that's stuck to me all my life you know. But there's so many things that - I look - back on now, that have changed - very very much today. People have changed. And - attitudes 
o
f people. But there's not the - kindness and the - severity in people as there was those days. I mean my mother and father they were very very kind but they were also very severe. And - and - we daren't - not even by a look - show any animosity against th
em.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you sort of resent that at the time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Oh no. No. No. I - I wished I could have brought my children up the same, but - my daughter, in all her life she never answered me back. I never had a rude answer from her, she was lovely - and everyb
ody loved her around here. They - they always called her Phyl, Phyllis her name was, everybody, and the day that - of her funeral, I shall never forget. The whole crowd out of there, bunches of flowers - from - all the trades people. I never never expecte
d it and they collected about - ten pounds to give to her little boy.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Going back to your mother and father did your mother work when you were born, just after you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh no, she didn't - she didn't go to work then. Because -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Haw old would you be when your father had the operation?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
I think all this happened about when I was - a - about ten or eleven. When this old couple came to - live with us, their name was Cheetham. And of course we had extra room in the house then, why we move
d we - we had the offer of a flat with more rooms you see, and also the landlady of the house where we lived - her son got married and she wanted our flat, but I mean there was no animosity against that, you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 So which flat were you in at this time, was this the one in Ladbroke Grove?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Had a top flat in Ladbroke Grove up there, and I had - we had the upper half of this house here, my - daughter and her husband and two little girls, and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 But just before your father had the operation, where were you living at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh we had three rooms in - in Portobello Road. I think -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You say you moved from Portobello to Ladbroke Grove then - back to Portobello, then you went to Westcliffe on Sea?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 When the two people moved in with you, which house was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14888113\charrsid5646288 Oh }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
in Port - in Portobello Road. Yes. I think the number was 390. Portobello Road. And - oh it was different to what it is now my dear but - all here - the - people along here, they - they had their carriages, and i
t was a treat for us on a - Saturday morning to have a penny ride up to - Westbourne Grove and see all these people going in the shopping in all their crinolines and - black high legged boots. And - I know my - two sisters had - new ones. And my mother ha
d my old - my Sunday ones, mended for me for school. And I carried them to school for a week in my hand, I wouldn't wear them. Because the other two had new ones and I didn't.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 By and large did your mother make the family clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon? Make ou
r - make our clothes, my mother made - made everything for us. Yes. And - we - we all had very very long hair and sometimes - oh it - how - however late she came home at night she used to wash our hair, and - and see that we had everything clean for schoo
l.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 This is when she was working?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Yes, work - this old Mrs Cheetham her name was, Auntie kate we used to call her, she was dear old soul. And of course the old boy, he - he used to tell us all stories about over the sea and - and - 'course some were true and some were not.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Was this the couple who lived with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Yes, this was - and then you see - old Mr Cheetham died, he was about seventy odd, and a little while later - no, Mrs Cheetham died first, she had pneumonia, and - he died a few weeks later in - he just didn't want to live.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 But it was your house they lived in your house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Yes, oh yes, they lived in - they - they lived. They had a room in our house you see. And - they - oh - no, they didn't work, they didn't have any pension, not - it's only what mum earned that kept the lot of us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 How did you meet them initially?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Pardon? They came to see the - the people next door, and - the people - who let - had lived next door had moved away. They came up from Chatham, and t
hey said they had nowhere to go so - mum took them in. And the old, lady had - at that time used to work at Bradley}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14888113\charrsid5646288 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
s but - she - had to give up the work for some reason I know - and I know my mum was very very worried. Because of - of - things were very hard for us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Apart from the Cheethams did you ever have any other lodgers?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 The Cheethams weren't really lodgers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No, w}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14888113\charrsid5646288 h}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
enever - never had any lodgers, and - we always had - children in to - tea parties, mum used to make cake an
d - ice it and - and - we used to play games and so forth and so forth, but - nothing like today, I mean you didn't have - elaborate presents, I know Christmas we used to get - an orange and an apple, and - a bon-bon, and a - a toy from Woolworths, sixpen
ny toy from - sixpence ha'penny toy rather from Marks and Spencer}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14888113\charrsid5646288 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 s or whatever it was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Would you have anything special to eat on Christmas day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Well - on Monday - we always had - on Sunday we always had - either - a piece of beer - or - a leg of
 - lamb or mutton it may have been. Tuesday - that was - a cold dinner and beetroot and a baked potato in it's jacket, and bread pudding. And we come home tonight - at night, and in the - in the winter - in the fender - in front of the open grate, there w
a
s a big dish of - dripping toast. And - every night at nine o'clock we had to go to bed, after saying our prayers, and my dad would bring in to us a cup of - condensed milk made with - Nestles milk, we had that in bed and he'd tuck us up, and that would b
e the end of our day.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 When would you have the main meal, would that be at night time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
No, we came home from - school to - dinner, and - then we had - Tuesday - Tuesday mum - or - Auntie Kate used to get or mum used to get - used to buy - oh - meat was then only four}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14888113\charrsid5646288  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 pence a pound, sixpence a pound, she used to buy - big - beef, carrots, onions, potatoes - I mean you could get a dinner for a family for a shilling. And - potatoes were fou}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14888113\charrsid5646288 r pound for tuppence. And - or}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 anges - four a penny. And - what
 we had - we had much better food than what we get now, much more nourishment in it and no tinned stuff. Only tinned milk, mum used to get for us, Nestles milk, and - then on a Tuesday - on - on Tuesday we'd have this - stew, and - Wednesday perhaps we'd 
have - shepherds pie. It was - it was a routine. And - we never - always at Christmas we had a big big joint of roast beef. And we - never had chicken or anything of that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you have many relatives come round on Christmas?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No. No. Mum - my moth
er's - relations we never saw. Nor my father's. He had twin sisters and they lived at Luton. And we never - my dad was born in Luton and my mum was born in Shropshire, Bridgnorth, and - we - we never saw any real relations. There - old Auntie Kate was the
 
old lady that looked after us, and - no, she wasn't our real aunt - that was old Mrs Cheetham, we all call-d her Auntie Kate and Uncle Jack, and then the - oh we idolized her, she was dear old soul, and then we used to have - this lady used to come and se
e
 us occasionally, and - I know she came one Christmas time and she gave me a two shilling piece a florin, so - I said to my two sisters, I'm the eldest, you can have sixpence each and I'm having a shilling You see? So - I went round to the - shop, and I g
o
t a shilling and two sixpences, I had the shilling and I give my two sisters sixpence each. So my mother said to me, what have you done with that money? I said, I've given them their share and I've got mine. My mother took my shilling - she gave the kids 
a
 each - a penny each to go out and buy sweets, so I got nothing. So she took my shilling away - so as my sister went out to buy her sweets, I waited for her to come in, I snatched them out of her hand and I went in the lavatory and ate them. And what I di
d
n't eat I put down the sink. And when I came out my mother said, for that you get nothing. She didn't hit me. She said, you get nothing, she said. When somebody gives you something between you, she said, you must share it equally. And she said, you do tha
t
 all your life. And, she said, a slice off your loaf, and a cup of tea out of your pot you will never miss, and she said, always give. And do you know, that stuck into my mind 'til now. We never heard a bad word in our house, no cards or gambling or drink
.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Is that both your mother and father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes. My mother wouldn't have brandy not when she was dying.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you find your mother an easy person to talk to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon? Oh yes. Yes. She was - very well educated. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What did she do before she was married? What kind of work did she do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
She - she lived with - both her parents died - and - she lived with a relative, and there was some money left for her but she never had it because when her parents died and she went to school down - do
wn there - these people were supposed to be very religious, but - I think she was only about seventeen, as far as the tale goes - and - she was married in the morning - to this man who - knew that she had this money, and his - father - his uncle was - a m
i
nister. Well they were married in Wales - and - she was with this - these people who were looking after her - and - they were married - she was - they were married in the morning, and in the afternoon - this husband - and the - uncle - were drowned in Bal
a
 Lake. She was married and a - and a widow in twenty - less than twenty-four hours. That was a - that was when - that was her first marriage, and then of course she came to London, and - I don't know what became there, my father was a gardener at St James
's Palace, and li}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14888113\charrsid5646288 ved at - lived in there in a bof}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
fey they lived as under-gardener, and - my mum - I suppose, as far as I remember, she was in - in domestic service. As far -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Was it your mother that had the two boys or your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 That was my -mm?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Your two elder brothers, were they your mother's sons or or your father's?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Oh yes, yes, they - you see, she was married - I mean that was nothing, that was - that was just one day. But - she never got any of the money or anything, she came up
 - up here to London. Of course all - most of the kids that grew up with me, I mean when they left school they went in gentleman's service, you had two of everything and a pair of black stockings and - or two pairs of black stockings and a little wicker b
asket and off you went in gentleman's service.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You say you had two elder brothers who your mother had by her first marriage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 But you say her husband died on the same day that they were married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No. When she was - sixteen or sevent
een - she was - married to this man, and he was drowned the same day. And instead of my mother having that money, I don't know what it was through or anything about it, this is only what we my mum told us - as we grew older, she came to London, and she ma
rried - and - she - had these boys -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 So she was married three times in fact?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes. And - she was married, and she had these boys, and she lost her husband - in Farraday Road.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 That's round here is it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Next turning. 53 Farraday Road, she 
had these - opposite the Fire Station, she had - there was Willie and Walter - Charles - a dead baby, Jack and Sam. That was the boys. That was my - her first husband.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You say there were only two when you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes. Well - her first - her h
usband died - she had a dead baby, and her two little boys died, one was three and one was five. And the school board man came round, and those little children - that big house you see at the corner, the little window that's in the side that's a foot clin
i
c now, the men used to make the coffins in there and my two little brothers, of course I wasn't born, used to go and talk to these men. Well both those boys died - with black measles. And the school board man came round - and their father had only been de
a
d a few weeks - and the school board man came round - and he said - you haven't sent the children to school, and so my mother said, no, go and look where they are, there was two little coffins in the front room. So - that was that. And then I don't know h
ow long after that that she married my dad. And of course I was the first girl, I'm the seventh child of a seventh child. My mother had -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 That's supposed to be lucky is it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 I had six brothers - she had six brothers older than her. But my two brothers - one - one worked for Buchanan}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14888113\charrsid5646288 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 s the - whisky people. He - he was a - driver, and my other brother, he joined the army - when he was fifteen. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did they live in the same house as you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Who?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Your brothers, or did they leave home after a certain time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Oh no, no, they - they - my next brother was ten years older than me, and the next one was - was - fourteen years older than me, the eldest brother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 But did they still stay in that home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes, yes, of course they did. 'Cos their - their - their - my father was their - cousin you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 How many rooms did you have in these houses?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Four.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Which house is that now, all of them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 The - the - top of the road here, in - went - right through the Portobello Road 
there was - two rooms in the front and two at the back. And the - the front - the - two rooms looked out into Portobello Road and the two - other rooms looked out into Portobello Road, right up on the junction here, at the end of the road, where it joins 
Wornington Road.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 That wasn't the house you were born in though was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No, I was born - in the corner of the next turning, and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 How many rooms were there there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 And we had all the upstairs there, four rooms upstairs there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 So you had four rooms in both places?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Was the second one bigger?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Probably you moved for that reason?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes, we had four rooms all the time. And of course when - when - my - when - when - we had this old couple come to live wi
th us, they - had a put you up, we had a put you up, my sister and I - in - in the - in the front room, and - and - of course then my brothers and left home, one - one was in the - army and my other brother - he - he went to - oh I think he got married as
 far as I remember.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 How old were you when the Cheethams moved in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Pardon? We - every - everything happened as - as near as I can remember about - ten or eleven. Everything seemed to happen that year, as far as I can remember as regards ages.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You know you said you got the scholarship and went from Wronington school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Do you mean you went to Southend in Essex Technical School?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes. I went there because - I - I'd had a bad - I'd had pneumonia, and my aunt and uncle had a boa
rding house - at Westcliffe, and I went to stay with them you see but - I had - I went - had to go to school down there but it was only for a few weeks because - when I was better I came back home, I wouldn't stay with them. But - when I went to - to - to
 Mrs Collier - it was through them that I was introduced to - these German people, they bought a house, Clemhilly on the Lees, down at - Westcliffe and of course I went and stayed with them until I was married from there you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 So it was a different place in Westcliffe the second time, you went to a different place in Westcliffe the second time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
We were brought up strictly - I mean children today - they're - they turn their people out when - if - if they want a party. But no. Our mum and dad - was to us - they were our god.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You say they were quite strict with you, but in a very sort of kind way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh yes. Oh yes, we - I know - I - I know that - we would - never allowed to use bad language or - I know one day I came home and I
 - I said to my mum - do you know what? So she said, no, I don't know what. So I said, well the lady in Ladbroke Grove that lives next to the church, that's an old girl used to live down there, she used to sweep the church out, we led her a dog's life, an
d
 - I said she said bugger. I ended up with a clip, she said, don't let - don't you dare let me hear you say that word in this house again. Now my dear it's a figure of speech. Never bad - never a bad - we were poor - but we were happy. We never knew - any
thing - as I - as I told you, since that man nearly strangled me down here -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Was it a very rough area round here?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon? No. No, no, no, not - although it's quiet now, we never have any trouble here, but the other end of Ladbroke Grove and throu
gh Portobello Road there's terrors there, but not here. Round St Stevens Square and Condal Square, a dreadful place. We never hear - we never hear anything here. As it is now you know - the only thing we have here is the traffic.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 When you were a little girl I'm thinking of.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Was it very bad then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
No, we - we used to think it was funny, there used to be a man go about here, he was about six foot six, and we used to call him Long Nell, his name was Neil. Well as we were kids he alw
ays used to give us a ha'penny in the dinner time, he was a labourer, and - he didn't have any wife. Well when we saw him coming up the road to go in the Eagle public house, of course us kids, we all used to talk to him. Sometimes he - he'd buy a big bag 
o
f sweets and give us, another time - we - I know once he gave me a new ha'penny, I thought that was wonderful. He said, it's a brand new one, only just been made, and I took it in and showed it to my mother. And - he used to give us a ha'penny each, well 
he used to go in the pub, used to get a half a pint of beer, a penny. And he used to go in the pub and it was beer then, well by the time he came out - he was drunk, and there was always a fight. Well -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 This was at lunchtime was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes, oh this
 is in - yes, sometimes in - in the afternoon this was, of course the pubs were open all day then. 'Til twelve o'clock at night, oh yes. So of course us kids - I only lived opposite the - right opposite the Eagle we lived. And - in fact my elder daughter 
w
as very friendly with the people who had the Eagle then, the Olafs, and - anyway - we used to watch old - Long Nell - he - he would always fight. And - somebody would argue with him and they used to do it for annoyance really. Well he was always too drunk
 
to hit anybody. But he - he was miles high we used to think, and these long dirty old trousers, and he used to fight like this. And - then we'd see the police - two policemen come up, and then they couldn't get him up to the police station 'cos he was fig
hting so they used to get the trolley. It was a long - like an invalid carriage with a shade up. And they used to strap him on that and us kids used to follow him to Harold Road police station.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What did the employers think about him being drunk all the time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Oh my dear, he was - he was only on a Saturday. Yes, he was a labourer, everybody loved him. I mean the - even the police, they - they only took him when he - broke a window up there and when he got spiteful, but - otherwise - you'd see - he u
sed to be fined ten shillings. Five shillings or ten shillings.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 That's quite a lot though isn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh yes. Those days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Was there much rowdiness?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Rowdism here, no. No, I can honestly say no. Not this end of Portobello Road, Labroke Grove or Portobello Road. I'm sure -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You've always lived up this end have you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Yes. Yes, I've never lived - past the station. No, the shop - the - I managed - down Ladbroke Grove was just opposite the entrance to Portobello Road school, just - a f
ew shops from Tavistock Road. No, I was very very sorry when - I had to give up my job there because I could have been there for many years, I was doing - the - dead soldiers - effects, you know, all their - paying out and all that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 This is after the first world war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes. That was the first world war of course.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 That was during the first world war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Yes. Yes, I was there - all - all that time. But I loved it - I loved it on - when we were on munitions, especially night times. I was on t
he Ambulance Brigade and we had a terrible raid there one night. And there was six of us doing the first aid. Well we had this bomb fell and it - demolished a house in Harrow Road, and - 'course it wasn't as bad as this war - last war was, and - I know we
 
stayed on the bus to see the damage - be - as we came off night - duty, and this particular night - when I looked round for the people we had a train in there that used to - we used to load up with the - components, I used to have to count them and weigh 
t
hem at the end of the bench you see and book them, and - of course the girls, all along the bench, about twenty girls, ten each side, used to do all the polishing and assembling and I used to be at the end count and weigh them you see, there was so many i
n
 each box. And then I - of course I used to have to keep a sheet you see and - write it all out. And - then - at a meal time - someone - had an old piano there and they - we used to sing all the old songs for an hour you know and then get back to work. We
l
l one night we were there and there was a - we thought it was a terrible raid, it was indeed, and - when I called out for a - called out for the - to go round to the benches - I couldn't find the other five. So the train was in ready to - go the length of
 
the dock, so the better - and I could feel these lights overhead so I dived underneath the engine, and I stayed there 'til it was over, I didn't have any casualties. Oh no, I was very - as a child. I was very very happy. And I knew my husband when I was f
ive years old, and I've had a very happy married life.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 How did you meet him, you say he was at Westcliffe?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 He lived opposite to me in Westcliffe - he lived opposite to me in Ladbroke Grove, five years old.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 And then he went to Westcliffe and you went to Westcliffe?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 He came to Westcliffe to live with my aunt and - and uncle, he got a job down there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 I thought you meant you met him at Westcliffe?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh no. No, he came down to Westcliffe, we got married down there because my mother
 said I should never marry him, because he was a Roman Catholic and I wasn't. And we were, we were married at registry office and I sent him home with the marriage lines, I never came. And - then we were received in the church. But - I loved him -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you have to become a Roman Catholic?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
No. Neither of us did, we didn't change, but - my children were Roman Catholics and until they were old enough to change. And their children are Roman Catholics so - my - that granddaughter's Roman Catholic and h
er two little boys, but Margaret, she's gone back to Church of England. You see - you - when children - earn their own living they must do as they like. But as my father always said, as long as you - are under my care you will do as I bid. Not as I ask bu
t as I did. And that's what we had to do.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Who do you think gave most of the guidance in your house, your mother or your father or both?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Well, it was both because I know one day I wanted to go somewhere - and I asked my mother. No - she said, you 
can't. All right. I'll ask daddy. I went into my daddy, he was reading L}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14888113\charrsid5646288 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
oyds newspaper, I can remember it so plain. So I said - daddy can I go so and so? He looked up, and he said - what did mummy say? I said, mummy said no. Well then no it is, and he wen
t on reading. Never - never any unhappiness in our house at all, and - my daughter and her husband were married and they lived happily, but no one - ever went up into their home - they - all the children had all their parties in my room - he's an extrover
t, he is now, he's taken that little boy away to Hemel Hempstead, they do all their own washing, cleaning, cooking, no woman goes in their house only his two daughters.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What about when you were a girl, did you have anyone come in to do any washing for 
you or did you do all the washing yourselves, did your mother do the washing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
No - my mum used to do the washing in a big tub. A great big tub and a - and a wringer on the end. She used to do all that washing and ironing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did she ever take in washing for other people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh no. She had enough of us. No, we always - and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you ever help your mother because you were the oldest girl, did you ever help - around the house?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 We all had our jobs, on - on a Saturday - I used to go round 
with mummy shopping one Saturday. And - my sister had to sweep the stairs down. And - clean the stair rods. My brothers had to - get the coal up. Clean the windows. When my dad couldn't do. And - the - little one, she used to have to hearth stone the step
s. We used to get - tuppence each for that, and that's what we spent Saturday night, after we'd had our bath, and our hair washed - Saturday afternoon we used to go down Portobello Road and spend that tuppence.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 That was your pocket money, was that just for the day or did you get pocket money for the rest of the week?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
No, we - a - perhaps we'd get a ha'penny or a penny, well they couldn't afford it. But my mother used to buy - she used to get a pound of mixed sweets, four}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14888113\charrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 pence a pound, apple drops
 and pear drops, we used to get - some in a bag after our dinner every day, just a few. That's all we had. And I know someone gave me a penny to post - some letters for her, an old lady, and - and - and I had - I got her a bottle of stout, and when I told
 
my mother - I got it from the off licence you see, so I said Mrs Birch - a poor old soul, she died in the work house - she used to come to us on a Sunday after - about once a fortnight, to have a cup of tea and - and - then she used to go back on the bus 
to work house in Kensington. And - she was another old neig}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14888113\charrsid5646288 h}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
bour. And - now something else I was going to say all of a sudden. That's what goes from me when I'm trying to say anything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You say you'd got two older brothers, did they help you younger ones in any way? Apart from their tasks for your parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
No, you see they - they both went - they both went into the army, my younger brother went into the - into the - army Service Crops, and my older - elder brother - of - of course he - that's his - before 1900.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 But before they went away did they help you in any way, you were about ten when they went away weren't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No, they used to - come home - from their jobs, I don't know what - I can't remember what jobs they did, and - come home an
d - wash and go out to the pictures or - or something. Sometimes they'd give us three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14888113\charrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 pence each to go to the }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14888113\charrsid5646288 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288  three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14888113\charrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 penny hop down Portobello Road. Then we had to ask could we go.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 But you'd be older then wouldn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 And - yes, and - but after that - and of course I - I was about twelve and - my sisters younger. You see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 As the oldest sister did you help the younger girls in any way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Help what dear?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Your younger sisters?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No, no, we used to go - Sunday school, Monday - we
 used to go to the Band of Hope. Wednesday - we used to go - to - the - Guild of Holy Innocents, over there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Is that a Catholic one?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 And - it was a high church, it's - it's higher church now than it was, and - Fridays - we used to go - we had a 
shopping - Thursdays - we could go - to the club, and that was an old - old shop that had been painted out, belonged to St Michaels, and - was a sewing class, and Fridays was games. So that was all - we had, but we didn't want anything else. We - we didn'
t - we didn't - have anything, and then - in the winter, my dad used to come and meet us. And we only had to come across the road.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 This would be after school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh yes. Yes, a little - six to seven.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You'd have these roast joints and things like that in the middle of the day would you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Oh yes, yes, we - we went home to dinner, because our school was only sort of that road. It was only as far from here - not so far as from here to the station. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Would all the family be there then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 All of - we always went home to dinner.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Your father as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Yes, all of us. No, daddy didn't used to come home to dinner, not when he was at work, but - when - when he - after he was - he gave up his work, of course he was home altogether
, well then of course the old gentleman and the old lady had died by then. And - dad used to look after us, I can see him now peeling the potatoes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 He did help around the house did he?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 We - we - only had to do our jobs that we were told to do, we had to strip our beds, in the morning -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Your father did odd things around the house as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon? Oh yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did he ever wash the clothes or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh no. No, mum did that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What about things like washing up, would he ever do that, or cooking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
No - sometimes I'd help - I - daddy used to wash up and I used to wipe up. And then my next sister used to put the things away. The little one didn't do anything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did your father ever do any cleaning around the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Who?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Your father? How about decorating or repairs to the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
No, he didn't do anything of that. Only - only pot plants that we had on the window still. We had all sorts of that, and - clean the parrot out, I hated the beast.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 He used to do that did he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did he ever sort of help to dress you or undress you and bath you or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No, mum used to buy our clothes - do you mean buy our clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did he help get your clothes on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No. No, I mean -
 no, because - well of course he was working then, mum used to see to us, and when she didn't see to us of course - we used to help each other.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did he ever give you baths or anything on Saturdays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No. No. We had a big bath tub. That was - we had
 to wash down every night at the sink and - and - strip down to our waists and wash every night at the sink and at nine o'clock we went to bed and dad used to bring us - when we were in bed he used to bring this - this cup of milk made with Nestles milk. 
I
 can always see that. Always - we always had tinned Nestles milk, but - always on weekends - we used to get - we used to get a pint of - pint of skimmed milk for a penny, that used to make Yorkshire puddings and that sort of thing. But - cows milk we - us
e
d to call it, 'course it's all cows milk more or less, and - but - always - we'd always - mum'd always make a - about twice a week, a - a bread pudding, and - we'd have that hot for our tea, when we came home, or else she'd make a - a pastry with the bits
 
of - currants or something in it. We always had something. We never - we never came home to - piece of bread and butter, and we never had margarine in our house. We used to get a pound - a pound of best fresh butter, shilling. I can always remember that. 
A
nd I know once when we were very very hard up - my mum cut her hand on a soda water bottle, and she couldn't work, and - she was home for some time, she had it all stitched up, and I know we were - very much on the rocks and the boys used to bring their m
o
ney home - and - I know that - we - we didn't go short but - we knew there was something wrong. And then I said to her, to my mum one day, I said, will you - will you let me go out - out cleaning doorsteps? My mother said, no I will not allow you to go cl
eaning doorsteps. But I said you get a lot of money. So she said, no.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Do you remember ever having anything to do with the Parish?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No, we never had anything - never had anything from the Parish, only - once - Doctor Ensal came in and saw my fathe
r - after he'd come home from Kensington Infirmary it was then where he'd had the operation.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did your father ever read to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh yes, and - and not only that he used to tell - tell us - history stories. He was a great reader. But - while I was 
at the shop, in Portobello Road, my daughter was - seven or - now let me see, no she wasn't, she was nine, my daughter was nine - I was at the shop, and my - brother was sent home wounded. And - my father was looking after - my dad used to come down to th
e
 shop, and - my mother was away looking after my brother when he came home, I told you he had germs of TB injected into his back, in Daresalaam when he was a prisoner, and he died and he - and he's buried in Eton College grounds. He was maintenance engine
e
r there. And his wife used to do all the lovely laundry for the wives, you know, the teachers - the - teachers' wives. And of course they had their lovely house there, beautiful place. There were six houses there called Willow brook, between Slough and - 
a
nd Eton. Well - I was in the shop one day and - my dad came down, so he said - he used to come down - to have dinner with us or tea with us you see, and - of course my husband was home from the war then, and that's - when he played me up - he - he didn't 
go}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14888113\charrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
to work for a long time when he came home. Because his father, I told you, he dropped dead in Ladbroke Grove, and he came home from the war and it was a long time before he took up work again. Of course I was - managing at the shop. It seems a long time 
but it could have only been a few months or a year perhaps - looking back on it I - I can't remember the exact time, well my dad came in on this - day to have his dinner. So he said, Mr Tennison's come over, that was an old colleague of his, and he said h
e
's come over from Ireland, he said, so - I won't stay. So he said - I'm going back home, he said, and I'm going to look after - Willie, that was my sister's boy, he was ten, and he said - Harry and May, that was my - brother-in-law and my sister, they're 
g
oing out somewhere on some business, so he said, I'm going to babysit, I'm going to look after him So she said - he said - she's left her some sandwiches - for me and Mr Tennison and we'll stay - and look after Willie. Well - my brother and - brother-in-l
a
w and my sister went out somewhere, and my dad went home. Mum was away down at Eton, Windsor - and - or rather Eton, and - the lady that lived - in the basement, she came up with a telegram, and - Mr Tennison had just left, and my dad was sitting reading 
t
he paper, looking after the little boy, and - the telegram came from my sister-in-law to say that my brother had died. That was on the fifth of March. Well - my father opened the telegram and he dropped down unconscious. The lady downstairs - called the p
olice, and he was taken into Kensington Inf}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14888113\charrsid5646288 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
rmary - he'd broken a blood vessels - the ar - aorta blood vessel, and he'd - he was dead. Well -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What year was this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 192 - 3. 1923. That was - yes, that was 1923, my - brother died, he was thirty-six.
 On the fifth - of March, and my father - died two days later. Well my mother was away - and - well - when - I went down to my brother's funeral, and - I said to my sister-in-law, I said, will you tell mum that dad's dead. We didn't tell mum at the time, 
because she was so upset.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Where was your mother at this time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
So - pardon? She was looking after my brother which - and he only called out for his mother, he didn't want his wife or anybody - when he was dying. 'Cos he died in - in their house do
wn there. 'Cos they brought him home from a hospital at Reading, and - the - mum was looking after him, well anyway, he - dad died two days later, well the next morning my sister-in-law bought my mum up, it was only a shilling fare then workman's train up
 
to Paddington, and my husband went and met them, and brought my mum round to the shop. Exactly twelve months to the day that my father died my mother was buried. Five days later after my mother was buried, my elder brother died, 'cos he was shot - all his
 - his back was all shot away, down at - at - Wimbledon. And - my mother was dead - exactly six weeks when my little nephew, ten years old, came home - and - a boy had hit him in the ear with a pencil box. And - it caused an }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14888113\charrsid5646288 abscess}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288  - a ti}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14888113\charrsid5646288 t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
us media, an }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14888113\charrsid5646288 abscess}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288  in the middle ear. They operated on him - in Ken}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14888113\charrsid5646288 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
ington Infirmary and he died. Exactly six weeks after my mother, so we had five deaths - in - in a year. In thirteen months. And we've just had the same again. Two brother-in-laws, Hilda's husband, and -
 Leslie's wife, and - Ken's cousin, twenty-three. That's - that's all happened - since - November.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Going back a bit can you remember how old your father wo}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14888113\charrsid5646288 
uld be when you were born rough}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 ly?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh I - I can't remember, I must have been -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 He was sixty-three when he died you say?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes, and I - I - my daughter was born - I must have been - I must have been - thirty. 'Cos he never saw my son.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 So he'd be about thirty-six when you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Was he older than your mother or younger?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
The same age as my mother. With - within a few months. Mum's birthday was the eighth of April, my dad's was the fourteenth of February. My dad was about two months older than mum, that's all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Apart from when she went out to arrange this cooking she didn't do any other work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Yes. No, she didn't do any other work, that was all she did, I mean, she was - a trained cook, and - and she used to arrange all these things and - and - she used to go out doing these - soirees they called 
them or something, she used to go for two or three days at a time preparing you see, and she used to supervise it all, she was a marvellous cook. She - and I know this time that I'm trying to tell you that we were so hard up she went to work - she went to
 work at - from a Royal Society, Burlington House for some people named Harrison. And she went there on three occasions, to - cook for them, at different parties they had, and - she used to walk home from Pi}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14888113\charrsid5646288 cc}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 adilly to save her fare, come home - walk home a
t midnight so that us kids'd have something to eat. She used to walk home from there so our kid - us kids had something to eat. We never owed anybody anything, and what we didn't have we went without. But we were never hungry, we were always kept clean.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Who would look after you while your mother was away?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Dad, yes. Yes. Yes, that was sad the way my dad passed out like that, he - he just - passed right out, of course the boys they called him dad, they didn't - make any difference, they loved him.
 I never saw him in a temper. And I never heard - heard a bad word out of his mouth.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You say that he was quite strict with you but he would never hit you or anything like that when you were children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What hit one of us? Yes, he hit me with a new
spaper once, and I cried and cried and cried 'til the people next door come in and asked what was the matter. The woman said, yes, and if I was your mother I'd give you another one.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did your mother ever hit you at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No. She threatened us lots of times.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 How would she threaten you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
She said that - if I - you - are you telling me the truth? Yes. Are you sure? Yes. All right. If I thought you told me a lie, she said, you'd never forget it. But - that was all it was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 So it was all words?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What she said went my dear, one look.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What kind of person do you think your parents hoped you'd grow up to be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon? Well - my mother hoped - that - I would do anything except go into domestic service. And - that's all I did, cleri
cal work. My two - my - two sisters, they work - worked as shop assistants. One - one used to serve in the grocers. And one in a sweet and toy shop. And - my brother}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14888113\charrsid5646288 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288  used to work for Buchanan}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14888113\charrsid5646288 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
s, I don't know what he used to do there, I can't remember, and then my - other young brother, he - he was about sixteen and something, he - he went in the - he joined the army.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What kind of things do you think your mother and father expected you to hold up to in life, what kind of standards to live by?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Wel
l they always thought that we would try to live like them which we did. Because - my daughter - they - they - they just idolized her, and - and my - my mother and my son, and - well we just bought them up - the same as we were you see, I never drank, I ne
v
er used a cosmetic, and no drink was ever brought into my home. My husband used to drink occasionally, but - never any drink brought in our home. And my son-in-law, he never looked at a drink. He smokes. My son smokes and he drinks, but I mean - not to ex
c
ess. But - as regards - drink and smoking, gambling or that, I'm not interested. Somebody said to me the other day, you're so fortunate with the different things that you do, she said, even at your age, she said, why don't you do the football? So I said, 
no, I - I haven't got any - inclination to do the football.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 When you had these houses in Portobello Road and Labroke Grove when you were a little girl?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What was the sleeping arrangement in them, you say you had four rooms, were they all bedrooms?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
No - we three - three little girls - the three girls had a bedroom. At one time, and the two boys had a put-u-up - in the front room, and mum and dad's bedroom, and - but - of course - my brothers had left home when the old people come to 
live with us, so they had their room, you see. So - and then us - us - girls had a - had a put-u-up.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What do you mean by a put-u-up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Beds that you put up, folding beds, mum - mum used to put them down at night and fold them up in the daytime, th
ey looked like two tables.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Would those rooms be used for other things then as well as bedrooms?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Of course they were bigger rooms than this, I mean -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 But were they used as bedrooms during the daytime or were they used as living rooms during the daytime?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
No, we had one big living room, and then you see the boys had their put-u-ups - in there at first. Well then after that - my sister and I had the - had the - put-u-up, 'cos after - after that you see I went down to Westcliff and then my 
two little sisters - had the put-u-up, and - the boys had left home, and - well then there was only those two there then. Well after that when I came back there was only - mum and dad and - me and my two sisters in the - in the four rooms you see. So we -
 oh we had heaps of room to play.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What about kitchen and bathroom?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 We never had a bathroom. We had a big bungalow bath. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What's a bungalow bath look like?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 A big iron bath. And - we only had those here. They used to have - we used
 my kitchen - as a - as a bathroom, I had a boiler in there, and there was a toilet next to it. And - this big bungalow bath, that used to be under my bed in the other room, upstairs.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What about when you were a little girl, was the bath in the kitchen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
No, we used to have a bath - bath in - the kitchen and our hair washed, there was a big sink and - mum used to get this bath, used to hang up outside on a - on a - big zinc bath and - we had a - a - a boiler, a gas boiler, and that - we used to hea
t the water on that, we never had hot and cold water, I never had hot and cold water upstairs.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You used to have a bath every Saturday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh we used to have - we used to have to wash down every night. And we - and we'd have our bath and our hair wa
shed on Friday night or Saturday, Saturday morning, all depending. But we had to strip every - every night. Oh no nonsense with that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 When did you have clean clothes to put on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh we'd change our clothes - mum used to take our - we used to wear 
our clothes for a week I suppose, our underclothes and - and - we'd have a clean pinafore on every day, white pinafore, and - until we had the school uniforms and - navy blue things, and - blue bloomers and - Sundays we had white knickers, I never had any
 lace on mine.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Would your mother make all these clothes or would she buy them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
My mother made everything. She used to make - she used to buy remnants and make our clothes. The only thing that she did buy was our coats or our mac}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16008431\charrsid5646288 k}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 s, and then of course she bought our school uniforms as we got older.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Were they very expensive?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
No, four and eleven you could get one. Five shillings a pair or our shoes. Oh right up until I went to work, across the roas was only - we only paid five shillings fo
r - I took that parcel in for that woman over there, too much trouble to come for it, there it is down there. Yes, and - we used to -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What about shoes, what would you do for shoes or boots?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh we had - we had - black lace shoes - for - weekdays
, and - and - black patent shoes for Sunday. And in the winter we had brown - heavy shoes for Sunday. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Children get through shoes quite a lot don't they, would they mend them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Eighteen pence it used to be to mend them, soled and heeled, one
 and six, old Gerry used to do them. An old man that we used to know. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Was he a cobbler?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Oh yes, yes, he - he - used to sit there in his shop and - he used to wear a tribly hat and a - clay pipe hanging out of his mouth and - used to see him doing the - put the - if he didn't have his pipe in his mouth he had a mouthful of nails. That was -

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Were there a lot of craftsmen and a lot of traders round here?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh every - everybody here, I mean, 'cos there wasn't the traffic on the road I 
mean there were horse buses, right until - the - the - the - and ordinary buses that we got now - came up here because old Jack used to be the old man that used to wash the buses out. Yes, you could go all the way to Pic}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16008431\charrsid5646288 c}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 adilly I think - the most I ever paid towards - my fare to Pi}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16008431\charrsid5646288 c}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 cadilly was eight}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16008431\charrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
pence each way and that was - 1958. Otherwise it - you could ride from here to Whiteley for a penny.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did they have trams and things like that round here,
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh yes, the old trams along Harrow Road, that 
used to be lovely. Used to watch those come along and - oh if we had a penny to ride on there from - from the top of the road here to - Harrow Road, then come back over - over Westland Park Bridge, you know, over the canal bridge, and - or else come down 
the steps in Harrow Road and come down Kensal Road, oh that was a treat for us, but never allowed down that road. Never for Nottingdale, Lancaster Road or anywhere there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Was that a bad area?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No, my mother would}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16008431\charrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 never allow us down there. And she
 said, if ever I do find you go down there, she said, I'll thrash you, and she said, you'll never forget it. After that - after I was nearly - I tell you I was nearly strangled, and - I - I don't know what saved me.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Where were you going exactly when that happened?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
I was going to meet my dad down the station, see, he used to buy the Evening News every night, it used to be a ha'penny and I used to have the ha'penny out. Sometimes I'd - buy a ha'porth of sweets and - we'd count t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16008431\charrsid5646288 hem out. We used to get five jam}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
 deserts for a ha'penny. They was a little - covered with packers chocolate like sealing wax - candle fat they used to be but we used to love it. We used to have - one each - and - sometimes if they were small we'd get - two each, or something
, and then if there was odd one over, we used to give it to the dog. The dog - wasn't our dog, it was the dog downstairs, but it - if it could get up with us and get in ourbed it would. Used to love us, he was old Brick.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you have many pets around the house, you say you had a parrot as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Oh yes, we had parrot and - Trilby, the cat. Trilby. Yes. We - because it always sat with its head on one side and I put a paper cap on it one day, when it was a kitten, so we called it Trilby. Oh yes, we 
cried when that was buried in the garden, it - when - when it died, it was put in a box and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You used to have a garden did you in the se houses?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 We used to go down and play in the garden, well it was a yard with a little bit of earth all round.
 Much better than these kids up in these places. Old Mrs Green lived downstairs and - she used to say - her husband was a train driver, she used to say, you can go down and play in the garden if you sweep it up after you. We used to love that, go down the
re, I know - and she let us have a bonfire down there once, oh we thought that was lovely.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Where would you get your sticks and things from for a bonfire?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh we had - old bits of furniture and that - you collected, we went round picking up twigs a
nd bits of - of wood. Oh we was proper rakes as kids. Well then of course all round where Barbary Road is now }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16008431\charrsid5646288 w}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 h}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16008431\charrsid5646288 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 re Clement Thomas is, that was where we used to - we used to go right over there and play, we used to call it over the fields.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What's it called now?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
It's - all - St Quintin's Avenue, that wasn't built then. St Quintin's Avenue and all where the printing works was and - Clement Talbot's, what's the name of that motor works down there now? Oh what's the name of it, my dear it's a big pla
ce. And - it used to be called Clement Talbot}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16008431\charrsid5646288 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 s.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 And it was all fields in those days was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 All fields, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 So in fact this area of London wasn't like it is now, built up or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No, and - those houses - those houses, from the
 end of this road, where those other houses, are, they were all lovely big houses and in St Charles Square they all had their servants.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 But you had lots of open spaces to play in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh yes, the fields - over the fields there, yes, and he little Sc
rubs and the Big Scrubs. But - we only went to the Big Scrubs when there was a fair on, and we used to have a roundabout and a swing and a coconut }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16008431\charrsid5646288 shier}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 . Then come home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 How often did they have fairs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Only - at the fairs.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 How often a year?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Easterand Whitsun. And August Bank Holiday we used to go there. But most times we - my - we used to go to Kensington Gardens, and - my mum'd make up a big - parcel of food, and we'd go and play there and - she'd come up and; take us home but old Aunt
ie Che - Cheetam used to come with us, she used to sit and knit, and - we used to play round her. But we never never never after that attack on me we never - was allowed - anyway I know when -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you actually get to see your father or did it happen before you arrived?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did this happen before you got to your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Yes, I was going down to meet him. It was about half past five or six o'clock, and we used to go down the station to meet him you see. And that's what happened. It was all done so suddenly, I -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Can you describe what happened?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
I know - old Mr Murphy the policeman, he came round to our house and - he said - he asked me all sorts of - questions, and I was very frightened. And I - I said I wouldn't know them - 
the man again, I said, I - I don't think I would. Anyway, whatever happened - and was a strange thing out, some people opposite - Mrs Green and her family, I've known them for many years, her daughter - until her other - friends had been to a dance at Mam
mersmith Palais - this is not long ago. And - as - as they - when they were in the train - the two girls got at - two girls got out at Shepherds Bush - five of them went altogethe}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16008431\charrsid5646288 
r, two girls got out at Shepher}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 d}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16008431\charrsid5646288 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
s Bush. Another two got out at - Latimer Road, and Rosemary was the only one that came to Ladbroke Grove.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 When was this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
This was about - maybe six years ago. And - as - anyway the - they locked him up, and he was a - a - a drunken Irishman, and he was - lodging in Latimer - Telford Road.
 Well - of course - when - Rosemary got indoors she told what had happened and the policeman there, so they said to her mum and dad, well you'll have to get up out of bed and - 'course it was twelve o'clock at night and you must - have to come up to Harro
w
 Road police station. So - they both went up to the police station. So - they kept this man in - in prison all night - in - in the - police station all night, and then they charged him the next day with assault you see, so he said - that this girl - had -
 
had spoken to him in the train, and she'd asked him to come home with her. And he said he'd - she'd been out with him all night and he'd spent all his money on her. Well she'd been with - all the - of course they got all these other girls and this man - h
e got nine months imprisonment.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 But they never found the bloke who attacked you all those years ago?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Not - not who - not - not with me, no. No, this - this man was - a local man, and she was a very pretty girl. Well she is now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You said you used to go to bed about nine o'clock when you were still at school, who would you put you to bed in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Nine o'clock.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Who would put you to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 All - always go}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16008431\charrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 to bed, we'd undress - we'd undress, fold our clothes up and put on our
 armchair, and - we'd all sit on the floor and my father would sing, and we had a boy that lived next door to us, and his - his mother was a widow, and he used to come in sometimes and this boy had a lovely voice and him and my dad used to sing, and - oh 
w
e used to think that was lovely. My dad used to harmonize and - he used to - he used to come in 'cos his mum never got home 'til nine o'clock at night. He used to come home from school, poor kid, he was older than me though, he used to come home at night,
 and - come home from school, sometimes he'd come in and have tea with us, then he'd go in and light the fire for his mum and she was a - used to go out washing, in the launderette, and -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 They had launderettes in those days did they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon? No, in the laundry. Scrubbing. A}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16008431\charrsid5646288 nd his mother was a widow and E}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
rnie Bachelor his name was and - my mother always had an idea that I would marry him, she was very fond of him, and - anyway his - his mother died and his uncle - left him a lot of money and - he 
had a coal business at Ramsgate. But - of course I - me and my Joseph, well - we - everybody knew us too. My brother was walking up behind us one day - and we were strolling along, of course we were both tall and of course I was skinny then, and he said, 
do you know what you two look like? So I said, no. He said you look like number 11 on the work house door.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 It was always your father, not your mother who put you to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh no, we - we used to - undress and - and - and - oh I - I was - a little -
 about ten and twelve I'm talking about mostly, no, we'd get undressed and fold our clothes and put on the chair, of course we had paraffin lamps then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Who would do it before you were old enough to undress yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Who would help you before you were old enough to undress yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh no, my - mum - you see - otherwise we used to - undress ourselves.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Where did the family have their meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon? ON we all had - in the living room, I mean we never had any sitting roo
m, that was our living room where we played games and - we had to do our homework under a - lamp. We did - did have a slot gas - penny in the slot but - we had a big lamp - in the middle of the table and we used to sit round there, do our homework and wri
ting. 'Course you were never allowed out in the street at night, not - only -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you have all your meals in the same place, in the living room?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You'd never eat in the kitchen for instance?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No, well - no, we - we only had little tiny - little tiny slip room of a kitchen about that size where the gas stove was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 And you'd always eat in that one room then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Even Christmas Day and things like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes, in the - the - it was our living room, there was a 
front room, sitting room, it was everything, parlour and everything. We never had any room shut off.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Was it your mother who did the cooking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes. She done all the cooking. I never did any cooking.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What kind of cooking equipment did she have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh we had a gas stove and cake tins and meat tins and - saucepans, iron saucepans.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What kind of time would you have breakfast?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Half past eight, we had to be at school quarter to nine, and - we used to have our break - our breakfast - per
haps half past eight or - in - in the summer we'd be up and - eight o'clock, and - have our wash and have our breakfast and - off to school early. I don't think I was ever late for school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What kind of things would you have for breakfast?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh we 
used to have - egg - always egg and bacon on Sunday, and we used to have - porridge, and - perhaps we'd have an egg or - or - bacon or haddock or - always had a - always had a good - breakfast to go to school with, but it was oatmeal porridge mum used to 
make it over night. The - the real oatmeal not the stuff you get now all bits and pieces.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you buy it or make it yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 She used to make it all herself and she always used to make us barley water to drink, with real lemons in it in the summer.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did she ever make jams and things like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh yes, jam - jam and pickles and - everything, that used to be a day when we used to tie the jars up, used to get three}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16008431\charrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 pence each that day.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Would she do bottled fruit or vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
No, she used to do - no, we used to buy - fruit was always so cheap. You'd get a pound of cherries for tuppence and - and - penny a pound apples, four pound of potatoes tuppence and pound for three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16008431\charrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 pence, seven cakes for three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16008431\charrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
pence.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 In Portobello there are so}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16008431\charrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 many little shops to choose from as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Mm. Yes, we - I know we used to - I used to go out sometimes in - early morning, and - I'd go round to our butchers - I'd go round, I - I'd get a pound of - pound and a half of - of - lamb chops or 
a pound and a half of lamb, mum used to buy necks of lamb, take all the bones out, stuff it and roll it and bake it, and - we always had good food, and if you - you made an Irish stew my dear, in a big iron pot - and - there was everything in it. Carrots 
and turnips and onions. And - barley and beans. All in together, that's what we had. We never had any mucky stuff you get now, tinned stuff. I know only once -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Was there any tinned stuff around in those days at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No, only - tinned salmon. Some
times - sometimes on a Saturday - we used to get a lettuce - and - a cucumber - and tomatoes - and - mum'd buy a big tin of salmon, sixpence ha'penny, and she'd put it all round in the dish and used to put the salmon in the middle. Well - that was sometim
e
s we'd have that on a Saturday. For our tea. But - after we'd had our - had our dinner, but always on a Monday we had cold meat - and pickles, baked potatoes in their jackets and bread pudding, or if we didn't have that we'd have - have apples and custard
 
or something like that, and then when we came home at night there was - in the meat tin, the big square bread pudding, help yourself, cut what you want and eat it. Or else in wintertime always in - the fender there there was a whole loaf cut up and - and 
all - all the dripping and - and that out the meat, there's no - no fat in the meat now, you've got to buy fat to cook it in.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did she ever bake her own bread?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Sometimes, but - not very often. She used to make scones. Oh yes, we always - we always
 had - she always used to make scones and - I know she used to make brown scones and put - almond in the top, we used to love that and - of course lye sugar on the top of that. We used to love that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You say your father often wouldn't be home for his midday meal, he'd be out working?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
He would - he would always take sandwiches and then when he came home he always had a hot meal at night. But that was his last meal, he would never have supper.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You'd have your hot meal in the middle of the day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
We'd have our hot meal in the daytime, and we'd have something hot for our tea in the winter. If it was only - as I say, a bread and butter pudding with heaps of fruit in it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 But you'd have supper, you'd have your Nestles milk when you went to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon? We always had Nestles milk, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Would you have anything else at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 A biscuit if we wanted it. Or a scone or - piece of bread and butter or whatever we wanted.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You say every Sunday you'd have bacon and eggs, would you have bacon and eggs during the week at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No, we used to have - perhaps a boiled egg or a fried egg. Well used to get - twelve eggs for a shilling.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you have any livestock or anything like that in the garden?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Have what?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Livestock or poultry or anything of your own?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
No. No, only a - only - our parrot, I can still see it sitting there - in its cage. I poked it - I - I'd had whooping cough and I was home from school, and I - I'm doing - knitting on - those big wooden needl
es you know, and she got out the cage. But in the morning she kept sque}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16008431\charrsid5646288 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
king out, mother, mother, mother, she kept crowing out, and I poked her with the knob of this needle. She called out, mother. So - mum come and covered her up, I didn't tell her I'd po
ked her. I didn't hurt her, and - I know - what I hated her for - mum - used to have lump sugar on Sundays in case anybody come, well I took one of these lumps of sugar and she called out mother, she saw me take it, and - called out mother so I poked her 
a
nd - she got out the cage and - my dad's waistcoat and his coat was hanging up on a coat hook on the door, and - a man Mr Cook was going by and my sister caught him and said, our Polly's got out and he's - she's killing my sister. So he come running up th
e
 stairs, put the waistcoat round her, put her in the cage. Covered her up. Yes, we - at night - the Night Queen Victoria died - my father was telling us a story about something - I think he was telling us about the Mouse Tail on the Rhine, and we were lis
tening to it with our eyes wide open and then he was - gesticulating you know, he used to tell you it and - you could see it happening, we always used to sit up the}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16008431\charrsid5646288 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 r goggle eyed watching him, and - then they - we heard the newspaper man come round, Queen Victor}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16008431\charrsid5646288 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
a was dead. My father shut us all up, and go to bed, say your prayers. We used to kneel down and say our prayers. The parrot's covered up, just as we're going out the door it was - Our Father - Father, hah, hah, hah, hah. Used to mock us everything. 
Oh I hated it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Whose was it then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
No, my dad brought it home oh years and - and - it must have been about twenty-five years old when it died. Old enough to go to work I think.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you ever have any sort of wine or medicines for the family made?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Wines?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you make any homemade wines or medicines?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No, mum used to make cough mixture, that's all. Aniseed. That - lumps of li}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16008431\charrsid5646288 qu}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 orice, and aniseed and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You wouldn't have any beer or anything brewed would you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Beer? No, 
we never had any beer in our house, and when my mother was dying she wouldn't even have brandy. No, my mother was a - my - we used to - mum - if we - if we - if we didn't have - if we didn't have - real lemons - or - or - or orange juice, we used to have 
-
 they used to sell that lemonade powder. And it was - we used to put a spoonful of that in cold water - in the winter, we - mum used to make it hot for us, that - but we had tea, we never had coffee. Only weak tea. And - no, I - I - only once I've tasted 
c
offee, I hated it, when this aunt came, mum made - used to make coffee. I know we was ever so hard up and she come one day - and - one Sunday, and - I - I could see this piece of cheese on the table - and - we had bread and butter and jam - for our tea, a
n
d - mum used to make a big square cake, plain cake - anyway there's - a jar of pickles - on the - a dish of pickles on the table and this cheese just before old Aunt Fanny went home and coffee and - she used to - we had a pointed knife - that my dad used 
t
o pick the cheese up with - and mum had put this cheese on the table and us kids were sitting there watching it. All of a sudden we saw the last bit of cheese go so - my little sister called out, goodbye cheese. And - and I know mum - my mother was ever s
o embarrassed. But it was a good job it wasn't me that said it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 How many times a week would you say you ate meat? Every day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 We had - we used to have fish - sometimes on a Friday. Mum would get - fish to fry or fish to boil or perhaps we'd have 
haddock and - and chip potatoes, fried potatoes, and - every day we had - every day we - we had meat - sometimes on a Saturday, we'd have - always - always on a Bank Holiday, when we'd been to the fair - mum used to have for us - dad'd always take us, we 
n
ever went alone, and - not until we were grown up, and - dad used to - take us to the fair, and when we came home - especially Whit - Whitsun and Easter - mum'd have a big dish of fish and chips. Old Boag - he was a German, he used to fry it, and - well y
ou'd get a big - paper of potatoes for a ha'penny, and help you}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16008431\charrsid5646288 r}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 self to salt and pepper.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you have any of these jellied eel people around here?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh yes, I used to love those, oh I never had those 'til I was married. We used to have winkles. I h
ated those too. I - coming home from - church on a - Sunday - afternoon - about four o'clock we used to come out from church, three 'til four was in - in Sunday school, the muffin man used to be going by. With his apron on and this on his head, ringing a 
bell. Well, my mother used to give me }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16008431\charrsid5646288 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288  three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16008431\charrsid5646288  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 pence, three pennies and - she used to give me sixpence in pennies, a penny each to put in the plate, and this three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16008431\charrsid5646288  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 pence that used to buy - seven scone - seven - crumpets or muffins. Seven for - seven for three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16008431\charrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 pence, and when we used to get home in the winter time mum used to - toast them in front of the fire, oh that used to be lovely. And - then there was the - old man, old Chaffinch, he used to come round - jellied eels, four
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16008431\charrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 pence a pound, and he'd only go
t one leg and he used to sit on this two wheeled cart with all these eels round him, and chopping them up, you know. And I know - oh after I was married I bought - bought some eels, 'cos my mother-in-law loved them, and - she - used to come round to our h
o
use sometimes for supper - and - I - I said to - said to my husband, I - I'll get some eels and cook for mum, eels and mashed potatoes and parsley sauce. So - I bought these eels, long ones, he hadn't chopped them up, they were gutted, well I bought these
 eels and I - I put them - I had a big sink and a wash - what - a draining board, and I put them in the calendar, I was expecting my boy at the time, my - baby, and I put these eels in the - in the - colander - and - I put the water on to}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16008431\charrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 boil. When I went 
to get them my dear there was none there. Well I'm - I don't know where the - I - I don't know what happened, I thought to myself, well I couldn't have thrown them away. So - anyway I looked and there they were wriggling all round the landing. Of course -
 
they were full of life you see. So I - I had - my husband came in at the time, so I said, look at them things crawling round there, I said, so he - he got - picked them up and chopped 'em up and put them in sink, turned the tap on, put them in the water a
n
d they were cooked. And after my ma-in-law had eaten them we told her what happened. And of course she knew they were all clean. Oh it caused quite a sensation. Yes, we used to get winkles - tuppence a pint winkles, and - sometimes - we'd have - for our t
ea on the Sunday we'd have - a - celery and radishes, and bread and butter, and - well we always had something but it was all good wholesome food.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You never had any tinned meat or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 any tinned stuff? No, only Nestles milk, that
's all we had, and we used to have - I used to get skimmed milk on the Sunday - and - always got a pint of fresh milk when old - when old auntie came, 'cos she liked cows milk we used to say. I couldn't bear it. But this - big lump - of - Nestles milk put
 
in the - put in your - in your - hot water, my dad used to bring that in for us, with usually a - biscuit or piece of bread and butter, when were' in bed that was when we were small. 'Course as we got older we used to have - do our homework or - we had ho
me lessons to do there right from we were quite small, not til you got in the ex-seventh.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You wouldn't have anything like poaching going on around here would you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16008431\charrsid5646288 A}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 y what dear?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Poaching.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh they used - I'll tell you what they used to d
o here, poach your clothes off the line. Yes, that's - if you left a line out all night they - you'd lose them, and - the boys used to catch pigeons. Mm. They used to catch the pigeons round here. Yes. I know - one boy - Gustav we used to call him I think
 he was half Italian, I don't know which half but still - he - he'd say - I'll bring - I'll bring some, his father had the ice}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16008431\charrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
cream shop, and - he came one day with two pigeons, and he brought them up to my mother so he said, two for a shilling. So my mother said, no you've stolen them, you - I don't want them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What did he do with them, eat them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
I don't know what he did with them. We didn't - we never had them. No, I only - I know I was quite a big girl - there's - when - one of - I was quite a 
big girl when my oldest brother came home from the Boer War, quite - I felt a big girl, and then that was the first - time I can ever remember we had a turkey. And we cried all the time we'd eaten it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Why was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Well, it used to run about like the chickens next door. And I - next - next door they had chickens. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 So there were sort of poultry things kept in this part of London?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh they had a - the old lady, old Mrs Green, I think she had chickens downstairs, next door had chicken
s, all the way along there had chickens. Of course we all had back yards and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 But you didn't have any?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 And - all we had was the parrot, and it - that was a he, that never laid anything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you go anywhere like parks for mushrooms or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon? Oh we used to have - oh yes, we - have had mushrooms, fried mushrooms and that but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You wouldn't go out and pick them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No, never here. Only when - when I was down at Westcliffe we - we used to go out in the early morning ther
e, these - German children and I we used to think it was lovely, but they were very very wealthy. Oh it's a beautiful house they had, right on Southend front on - Clovelly the house was, on the Lees. I think there was about sixteen rooms in that house. Ye
s
, they had a German servant but - I took these girls out - I was - I was married - I - I was living with these people when I was - when I was married, and - this - Hannah, that was one of the daughters, she spoke very good English, so - we all went down t
o
 Southend, and - walked all along the front and - up Southend High Street and came home - on the tram you see, and then we just walked down - Valparty Road into their house. So - the - as we were going in the house they - they had a maid and she opened th
e door, and she said, where have you been? So this girl started singing all }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16008431\charrsid5646288 th}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
e nice girls love a sailor, and they thought it was ever so clever you know. Oh well they were lovely people. They really were. Thought the world of my husband, he - he used to - 
come round and - yes, he left his - job up here. He was working for his - grandfather. He was an upholsterer and loose - made loose covers and - art - all art decorating - curtains for altars and all that sort of thing he used to make. That's where my hus
b
and first - started, you see, but then of course he - he went to work for different big firms after that, and then - he - he met Mr - Kennedy North, and he introduced him to - Sir Edwin Lutchens, well then - that's when they went down and painted the roya
l procession, my husband did the bordering and Kennedy North did the - artistic work on it. Yes, and I - we went down and stayed - my husband then was staying with my sister-in-law, see, at Willowbrook, my brother was working there then. Yes, it's -

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Do you remember anything like your mother having less food?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Do you ever remember anything like your mother having less food at mealtimes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Less what?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Having less food so that the family could have more?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Well only the time 
I'm telling you about - that - when my dad - was in hospital, and she couldn't go to work 'cos she cut her thumb, and I can remember - we - we all had our dinner - and - no, we'd had our dinner and we were having our tea, and we had bread and dripping. I 
n
ever forget that, and - my mum had - I can see my mother having that now, a slice of bread, and she poured some boiling water on it and put some salt and pepper on it, and I never forgot that, and I said, do you remember mum when you had bread and milk an
d
 you never had any milk on it. She - and that - that stuck in my mind. But there was only - oh it only happened a - a - and I know when - when my brothers came home - my - younger brother came home on leave he gave my mother a sovereign. And - oh I though
t - I thought - we were all going mad when we had this sovereign. And then - I had to go over the}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16008431\charrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
road to get some shopping, and the people's name were Shears, and I had a ten shilling - a - a half sovereign and as I was going down the steps - 'cos we had a
ll the floors, they were - old Mr Rogers shop, he was the old boot maker, and he only had the shop and the parlour you see, well we had the - all the four rooms upstairs, four or five rooms, four rooms and a kitchen, in Telford Road, and - he was - as I w
a
s going out this slipped between my fingers. Well I thought I would have gone mad. So - I went back and I told my mother, oh well, she said, it's very sad, she said. Do you know I got up four o'clock in the morning and I raked all in that gutter and I fou
n
d it. I prayed all the night. I never went to sleep, I pray - I said my prayers and I said to my May, my sister - I - I said, will you ask God, I said, that I find that money. I said, because I said - what will mummy do? I said, that's the rent. So - she 
- she said I'll ask God. So we both prayed for it and all through the night I kept saying please God help me to find that money, and I did. And do you know I've had the greatest faith in prayer since then.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Were you allowed to talk during meals do you know?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Well - you - yes, to say please or thank you or pass you something. We was always too hungry my dear, we was always - ready to eat.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Was your father there at breakfast times or was it just you children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 He used to have his breakfast before we - before us. Because he used to leave home - half past six or seven in the morning - those days.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Was he still at St James's Palace in these days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 And - no, he wasn't at St James's Park then, that was before they were married he was at St James Park.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Where was he after he was married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
He was working for a firm, I can't remember the name. Oh McKellars their name were, and he used to do jobbing gardening then you know, go round gardening but - but before that he used to - go out 
and arrange - from the time he left - St James Palace he - and he was married to my mum he used to - go out and arrange these - gardens in peoples houses and do gardening like that. As far as I can remember.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What about your brothers, because they'd probably be out working by the time you were old enough to sort of remember having breakfast?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes, I - yes, I'm very - they were at work but when my - younger brother was - well they were both in the army -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 They weren't even there anyway the time we're talking about?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Can you remember whether you could ever ask for second helpings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Well - I - if we wanted it we had it, but - I mean there was always plates of bread and butter - or what have you on the table but - we were never ke
pt short if you wanted more you could have it, we didn't have two pieces put on our plate and that was that. But - only on that one occasion when my dad was ill and mum had cut her hand, she opened a bottle of soda water and it split her hand right open. 
Oh I can remember that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What was your parents attitude if you left some food uneaten on the plate?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Pardon? My mother used to say - sometimes - your eyes are bigger than your stomach. But - at your age you must leave a clean plate. Because otherwise you will never grow up. But - yes, we were all fine children I mean nothing to be ashamed of.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Was there anything that you didn't like which you were made to eat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No, my dear. Nothing, only - broad beans. I couldn't bear - I couldn't bear those.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you have to eat them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
No. Mum didn't used to put them on our plate. But peas and potatoes and - everything - I know when - the time I'm talking about, we went home one day, and - my mum - fried a big lot of potatoes for our dinner. And -
 we didn't have anything else. And I know that - on the Saturday - we had eggs for our dinner. And my little sister said to me, she said, what - what's the matter with mum, she said, we're having our breakfast for our dinner? She - that's all we had, and 
bread and dripping for tea, but we were never hungry and we never wanted for anything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Could you choose what you wanted to eat from what was cooked or did you have to have what you were given?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What was put on our plate we had, we never asked any 
questions because if our nose went up my mother used to say, there's little children abroad - and they - they're starving, they're living on a handful of rice. And I used to say to myself, fancy chewing that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What would happen if you wanted something like the salt, could you just help yourself or would you have to wait for it to be passed?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
For what dear? No, I used to say to my little sister, pass the salt, or - we used to reach out for it, it was in the middle of the table. There was the cruet and - with the - bottles in it. I can see that now. Vinegar and sauce and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Were you expected to hold your knife and fork in a certain way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No, we - none - none of us were left handed thank God, we - we always - used our - knife and fork, we alwa
ys had to put a - we were never allowed to have - hold our fork like that. You - you had to use it that way. And we were never allowed to use silly words - next door to us there was a little a girl, and she used to say to her mother, I want a eggy for my 
d
inner, and I want this - something silly, and my mother used to say, eggs. And - not gee-gee, horse. You - we were taught - we were taught to - speak properly, plainly, I - I don't know about - educational big words but - we knew what we were talking abou
t.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Could you bring toys or a book to the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
No. Oh no. That was the only thing I can remember my sister having a rubber doll - on her high chair, a little tiny rubber doll, oh no. You had - you had to say your grace and you had to eat your f
ood and wash your hands afterwards, and go to school and you take your -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Who would say grace?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes. And you used to take - take your dirty knife and fork and plate - and put it out in the kitchen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Who said grace?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No, mum used to say it. Or sometimes we used to say it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 When could you leave the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
When we'd all finished you know and put our chairs back and - and - we'd take all the cups and saucers and plates out and put them in the sink and - mum'd take the cloth off and p
ut the coloured cloth on. That's how we were brought up, I don't know about anything else.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 The same table was used for playing on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes, we had a big - big square table - oh great big table like this. That used to be scrubbed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you ever have many visitors come round for meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Many visitors? No, only school children. No, we never had any - my father never had any - we never had any of my mum's or my dad's friends in. And that's funnily enough with my - son-in-law, he never wanted any
body in - in his house, and if anyone came to see my Phyllis they come down in my room He - and he's the same now. People used to say round the corner, when he used to go shopping - they didn't even know he was Phyl's husband, until the - she died and the
n of course when he used to take the little boy out he always had his arm round his - and that - always had his arm round his shoulders, oh we had a dreadful - time when he died - when she died.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did all the family sit at the table for the meal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Pardon? Yes. Mm hm. To - to - well, Sunday - Saturday and Sunday - we always had - had - we - we always had our meals together. Of course dad used to - come home - after we'd had our tea. And - we - we'd go down, we had a little tiny ante-room, little sli
p
 room - well we used to play in there, oh it was a tiny little place, well - we had a board up, my brothers put a board up for us and that's where we used to - we used to - have - acting, we used to do all sorts of acting and playing down there. And the k
ids next door used to love to come in there. But - that's all we ever had, my - the only people that came to see us was - was - this lady I was telling you about and - no, nobody else.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you all have the same places, would you always have the same places?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
No, we used to - mum and dad used to sit at the - each end, and - my two sisters used to sit there and I used to sit next to dad. That was always my place. And when this boy from next door used to come in to tea, if Ernie would - used to come i
n sometimes on the Saturday - he always sat next to me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 How was the meal served, would your mother serve it up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes, always served us up,
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Would she do it at the table or from the kitchen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No, she used to put the - she used to put - da
d used to carve the meat, and mum used to put the veg - veg on - on our plates, and then we'd - all take our}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16008431\charrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
plates out and put them in the sink and put the knives and forks in a big j}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16008431\charrsid5646288 ar}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
 of water, and - then we would - mum would serve up the pudding and we'd eat that and - take - take the plates out again and - mum'd - take the cloth off and shake it and put the coloured cloth on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 When your youngest sisters weren't old enough to eat at the table where would they sit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 They had a high chair.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you help feed them at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
No, I - I don't think so, no, I - I - I think I used to - I used to give my - little sister - bread and milk, my mother fed all her children, but - herself, but - I used to - I used to give her bread and milk when she wa
s - oh get - getting on, you know, we didn't have all this here - fancy things, now you had bread and milk or porridge, you didn't have a - lot of rubbish. I know when I was ill - and had a bad throat, I - I was only - having bread and milk. But I mean th
e bread - it was bread then, not the - stuff that floats about now.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Was there any special order you'd be served in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No, my - my - dad would - the plates - would be in the pile, and we'd pass them round, and - dad would have his - last, and - alw
ays pass them round, put mum's out - and - was all passed round - you know, anyhow. As long as we got it we didn't care how it was served.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Would you say that your father was an easy person to talk to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Easy per - yes, he - he was very well educat
ed man. To - to my mind, because he could speak several languages, and not only that, he was - his opinions were - his opinions - people used to - we used to listen to him and he used to tell us something and - pass his opinion, and sometimes I'd ask him 
a question, and he would go right from the beginning to tell me. In fact in the end I used to be afraid to ask him something because I had to know the - the origin of it and the end. So -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Where did he find all these languages?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 I couldn't tell you my dear.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did he travel around a lot before he met your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh yes, he did. Yes, he'd been to America. It's funny, my son's the same. He's been all over the world except Russia - and America.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 If you had any problems or worries could you share them with your parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Oh I know if - if anyone of us was ill - I know when my - youngest sister was ill, I had to go - I used to have to read to her, or go and tell her a story, and - I know when she - she was very ill with pneumonia once - 
and we all thought she was going to die, and I can remember my mum and dad sitting up with her, and - I went - in and looked at her and mum and dad were sitting watching her, and I went out and made some tea, and - took it in to my mum and dad. And - I - 
I never forget the look on their faces. 'Cos they thought - my sister and I were asleep. But we - we never - no, we never quarrelled or - never -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 It was a very close warm family really?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Well I don't know - I'm - I - I don't know of a family that
 - was like us, there was never any quarrels, never any bad words. We were just poor but we had plenty, we didn't - do you know what I mean? We never looked above - we never used to say to ourselves, oh I wish we lived in this and I wish we had that. But 
- unfortunately, my granddaughter - she - has turned all the other way, she - right from a child - we -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
When you were - you say your parents would never hit you but they would tell you certain things which they expected of you, how would they expect you to behave towards your brothers and sisters?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Well, we were always friends, we - sometimes we'd have a fight and - mum would come between us and - just - send us off, but there was never any bad words or anything but - the little - one - the younges
t one, she got very spoilt. Very spoilt she got, because we lost a little sister in between you see, and - she was very spoilt and - and it's never - it's never left her.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Is that Kit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Kit, and now you see that's her son's lost his wife, and her 
daughter's lost her husband, and Kit's husband is in the hospital now, because he's very elderly and incontinent and - he's useless poor soul. So it - they're just unlucky.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What would happen if another child hurt you in any way, what would your parent
s think about that, what would they say for you to do, would they say hit him back or what?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
If - there used to be a girl lived opposite - next door to us and she was very spoilt, Cissy Stag, well I always had very long hair, and every opportunity she
 got she used to pull it. And - one day I - I'd had a tooth out, a back tooth, and I'd got a swollen face and I'm - I would go to school. And - as I was going up - one of those turnings, she got hold of my hair and she pulled it like that. And I punched h
e
r in the face. I - I swished round like that. And I punched her in the face. Of course, she - ran over to her mother and her mother came up the school. And - the headmistress spoke to me about it, and she said, what happened? So I said - Cissy Stag, I sai
d, she pulled my hair, and I punched her. I said, so my teacher - said - I'd just had this tooth out and I'd had an }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16008431\charrsid5646288 abscess}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
 in my face and she said that - I was working and I was in pain and she said I didn't stay away from school, and she said also that Ci
ssy Stag and dipped the - we had desks then with little inkwells in. Well in front of Cissy Stag sat a little girl, Kathleen Bartlett and she had golden lovely golden hair, she dipped all the ends of that girls hair in the ink well. So the teacher told - 
told Miss Mant. So Miss Mant said - go away, she said, and she said to the mother, don't come here complaining, she said, teach your child how to behave. She said, behave like a child not a cannibal.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What did your parents think about Cissy doing that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Oh my - my mother, she - my mother said, oh you shouldn't have hit her. So my father said, I'm very glad she did. So - I got away with that one. And my Sammy - he was home on leave - he - he said - she had a brother Joey, so he said, I'll see that J
oey about her, so he saw Joey and Joey said - oh those two girls, he said. So - he said, well you tell her to leave my sister - my sister alone, he said, and - keep herself to herself. So for a long time after that - I didn't speak to her. But - I never r
eally struck anybody but I did give her a tuppenny one.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What kind of punishment would your parents give you other than physical punishment, what would they do to make you learn a lesson?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Nothing. They would tell us to do something and we'd do it,
 and if we couldn't do it we would ask their help. There was never - never anything in our home - that - never any discord a - amongst us, only - the only thing was that - I was highly strung and very spoilt - with my - elder brothers. Because - they - I 
mean I was christened Lesley Richard - before I was born, so my sister's son }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16008431\charrsid5646288 is Leslie Ri}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
chard, so I'm Susan Annette. Suzie Annette. And only a few weeks ago I said to my little - great-n}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16008431\charrsid5646288 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
ece, my prayer book - that was given to me - and it was - all my names in it. I was christened at St James's in Northern Square, because my godmother came from there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Norman Square?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Nor - Norland Square, up here. And - over the hill nearly to Shepherds Bush Only - this Mrs Barn - Miss Barnett, she was - I don't k
now how we knew her but she was my godmother, and she was a very nice lady, very kind to me - until she died, I was about seven or eight when she died. But she always sent me something at Christmas, and something each - she always sent me money at Christm
a
s, and - a toy for my two sisters. But I always - she always sent me money. So - I - sometimes - I - I know the first - I - I can remember the first lot she sent me, two half crowns in a little red purse, oh my dear, I thought I was the Queen of England w
ith that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Where you allowed to join in when grown ups were talking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Well we - I mean we - never had any - occasion to you see mum and dad used to talk - after we'd gone to bed or perhaps they'd talk across the table about something, but nothing t
hat - that - we could interfere with. They - they always had their own business, we never knew what was sorrying them, or - or what wasn't.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 When you were talking about birthdays did you ever have birthday cards and things like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Birthday ca
rds? Oh yes. Yes, the other two used to send me a card and - and - we other two used to send each - we used to send each other cards. And always used to send - a - mum a birthday card and dad.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you ever have special meals and things like that on your birthday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Oh we used to - we used to have a cake - a big birthday cake with candles on always, each of us. The boys as well, oh yes. And always a iced cake at Christmas. And - bon-bons and - well the usual, you know, we used to have a -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you have presents and things like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Well - I used to have a doll or a pencil box or a - a book. The last present I remember my - godmother sending me was a a Hans Andersen's fairy tale book, a very nice book, I had that for years. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you have guests round?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
No - only the kids next door or - children from school, about five or six kids we used to have, and then - we used to play games and - and we had a gramophone - a phonograph with a - thing on you know with a big - sque}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16008431\charrsid5646288 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 ky thing and - we - they used to play that and - play - postman's knock and - running round the chairs and - little games like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did your parents ever play many games with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh - well I - I - not that - there was anything for - for them ever to pl
ay with you see, there was us three girls, and we always had somebody in the house, either - Ernie Bachelor or Cissy Stag or - whoever it was. We always had somebody in - during the weekend.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you have any musical instruments in the home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Only - only this gramophone thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You didn't have a piano or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No, we didn't have a piano.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you ever sing as a family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 We - I used to sing alto in the choir.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 But not in the actual house, you wouldn't have family hymns in the house or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
No, we used to - oh yes, didn't we - we didn't have any music, we - we sang to - we sang to - what my dad started off with. He used to harmonize, we used to sing all those - my - greatest - hymn now, and right from a
 child, The King of Love my Shepherd Is. Oh I think that's - We had a man come - I had a man come round here - a very nicely spoken young man but he came round here about a quarter to ten one night, so he said, I'm doing a survey, he said, of something so
m
ething, he said, can I come in? I said, no you can't. I said if you're doing a survey of anything I said you don't mind doing - asking in the morning I said - no, I'm much too busy. So - he went. But I - what the survey was I don't know. Then I had anothe
r
 letter come, would I - tell them - any complaints I had about - traffic on the road and so forth and so forth and - I said well I - I didn't say I never got out, I said - I don't know much about the traffic now on the road, I said, all I hear is this her
e - passing, I said, buses, fire engines, ambulances. Cars.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 There's a lot more traffic now?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Oh yes, my dear, I can ; I was sitting there one afternoon list 1 summer time, we had a summer last week - last year wasn't it, on a Wednesday I think, an
yway I was sitting by the window - and from teatime - from lunch time 'til - while I was sitting there having me cup of tea I counted four hundred cars. Going both ways you know, and I must - I could have missed some out but I thought to myself, well woul
d
 you believe that. Because I often wondered when - said - thousands of cars a day I thought to myself well how - how could they know, - how can they count them. You - you - I think I'm like my dad. If you asked him anything - you had to sit there and wait
 from the origin to the final, because you'd have to know it all. Didn't say, oh yes and no. It - was started from this and this started from that and - like the mouse}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16008431\charrsid5646288 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 tail on the Rhine, we had to sit there and hear the whole history of that. And of course it was very interesting.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Would he ever read aloud to you, your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon? To us? Yes. He used to read - he used to read - stories to us, but mostly history.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Were there many books around the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 And Bible storeys he used to te
ll us, he used to tell us Bible stories. And - all the parables and - and - Abraham and - and finding Moses in the bulrushes and - the crossing of the Jordan and the - the - the Red Sea rather and - how our Lord - fed - us - with five loaves and two fishe
s and I know my little sister said, cor I bet they didn't half get a little bit each. It had its - it had its funny - sayings with it you know. Oh, poor old dad.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did your mother ever do any reading to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did she ever do what? No, she never had 
time. She used to read our school reports, that's all. I've got my daughter's school report in there, in that box and everything is excellent. I've kept it all these years. I showed it}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16008431\charrsid5646288  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 to - lady downstairs the other days when I opened that box and found everything missing. Well I didn't find everything missing, I - I didn't find anything. So -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What kind of things did you like at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Well - when I was - I - I liked - history and geography and - I - I don't like mucky - reading. I like - I like
 good books, I used to like Warren Deepens books, and - I've forgotten all the names now, reading. Detective stories I like.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Were there any newspapers and magazines in your house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 When we were children? No. No, only - Ch}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16008431\charrsid5646288 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 tterbox, a big book - a 
big book like that my father bought us, about that think. Chatterbox. Annual. Wasn't it? Oh yes. But - I know once my brother bought me a book with Billy Bunter in it. Cor, and me eyes went round and round like two gooseberries with reading it, and Harry 
M
orton, oh I - I thought that was lovely. Billy Bunter and Harry Warton and all the boys at school. My father used to read to us - as we got older, or he let us read it - I can't remember the now - name now - I've seen John Mills on the play here, he was t
h
e - he - he married the girl - of - the - the daughter of - man who owned the business, and he was a shoemaker or something, I've forgotten the name of the book, I can't remember the name of the books now. And - he did let us - read us that. So that was s
ome - Charlotte Bronte books I read once, but we were grown - I mean I was about twelve or fourteen then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you ever get any books for Sunday school prizes or school prizes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Ever}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16008431\charrsid5646288 y }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
what? From the library? Only a hymn book or a prayer book, and -
 for full attendance I had a certificate, you know, and - and a prize for the race I won a - a boat, a china boat with a - hyacinth in it that I took home to my mother, I thought that was lovely. Well they - they used to take us for races down - over the 
Scrubs - or down here and then we used to go in St Marks Hall - St Martins Hall and have our tea, oh that was lovely. All the slosh.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 In the summer was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon? Yes, we used to have a Sunday school outing, the - we had a - a - a - great trou
ble from my mother to let us go in brakes. Well they called them brakes those days, they weren't closed in coaches, and we went to Epping Forest. And - oh we - thought that was a lovely, walking all amongst the trees and - and the smell of that, and the f
l
owers - a smell of the moss and stuff in there, oh I thought that was lovely. And I know when we came home - I said to my mother mother - you - we've been out of this world. She said, you've been where? I said, out of this world, there were no roads, you 
c
ouldn't see the sky half the time, I said, and there was millions of birds. So she said - oh yes, so I believe. So she went on with getting the tea. But when dad told us about - spoke about it he said it was a forest and - and - many things happened in th
e forest. And - lots of things that people would never know about - and - birds and - bird watchers were finding different things out about birds a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2700016\charrsid5646288 nd the little animals and squirr}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 els, and - and we thought that was lovely, but - only once we went. Then I suppose I was - I suppose I was about twelve then. My sister was ten.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you not go on a Sunday school outing every year?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon? No. My mum - my mum wouldn't let us go. I don't know why - for years and years and years we never went past that stat
ion without we had somebody with us. We were all played - up here, we - never allowed to play in the street, only - outside the house - perhaps - she let us play hopscotch and then she'd come with a broom and wash all the chalk off. And - of course as I -
 
when I was about twelve of course we used to - play hopscotch and swing round the lamp post and - go round watch the people dancing to the organ, but as - as small children - wouldn't let us out of her sight. I mean that's how it was. If - if we went to K
e
nsington Gardens - Mrs - Mrs Cheetham had used to come with us or else - mum - we'd go with somebody grown up and then mum would bring the tea along. A girl who lived next door, she had a cousin staying with her - she was an orphan but their name was Stag
,
 Cissy Stag was one - girl we couldn't get on with and this girl was grown up, I - I thought she was a - ever so old but I think she was about sixteen those days. Well we used to get on the bus - up to Westland Grove, of course the fifty-two buses weren't
 
running then, we used to get on the bus, a penny on the bus up to - Arthur's Stores it used to be, that's where the Odeon's built now, and then we'd walk up through the turnings to - Kensington Gardens, and then we had to stay in one place 'til our mother
 came. But - I don't know whether it was good or bad, but - whatever it was it suited her and it suited us because we didn't know any different.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did she ever take you shopping herself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did she ever go shopping with you herself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Go shopping? Oh yes, I - I - we used to take it in turns to go shopping. But - only living in the market I - we used to go and - we used to go and - get - shopping for mum, you know, perhaps a - what she'd - what the dry stuff she didn't buy, she'd send 
us for vegetables or - she used to write down what she wanted from the butchers.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 She wouldn't go with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
She wouldn't take us shopping? She'd took us to Whiteleys to the bazaar there - to see Father Christmas, when we were children. And - that
's what I tell you, we - I've never seen the Tower of London, as old as I am, I've never wanted to. It never occurred to me. And twenty years I worked at that hospital, well - the furthest we ever went, even - with my husband, we - we used to go sometimes
 down to Westcliffe for the day, or - or somewhere, but - I don't think I've - we - I - I know we used to go and watch the boat race on the Thames - at Hammersmith Bridge. But - that was after we were all grown up.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Where is Whiteleys shop?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon? I can't hear you duck. Whiteleys. Up in Westbourne Grove.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 So that's only round the corner really?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Yes. Yes, only - a few weeks ago - I gave my - daughter-in-law - a - some - two - cups - they were printed for Whiteleys - over a hundred years a
go, and - it was Queen Victoria - a picture of Queen Victoria, and then there was the - India and - South Africa and all - all the - dominions that she was the Queen over. And - I said to my - sister when - lot - mum's lots of things was all }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2700016\charrsid5646288 th}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 is - you kno
w, shared between us, they didn't want them, and I said to my - young granddaughter, I said, would you like these? No we don't want 'em Nan. So - when my daughter-in-law came round - oh she said, I'd love them. So - I - I gave them all to her. The - the Q
u
een - King Edward and - and - Queen Alexandra, we all had a - a tiny little box of chocolates at school - pieces of chocolate in there, tiny little box like that, like a cigarette box, and - we had a cup - with the - a mug - with their two heads on, both 
heads together. I gave that to my daughter-in-law only a few weeks ago. I mean it was no good for me to keep it, because - I used to keep flowers in it but -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What year did you get that, 1903?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 We got that - we got that from school, and then also 
the one I gave her of - King George - King Ed - King Edward and Queen Alexandra, King George - and Queen Mary, we - I - we had cups from them - from school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did anything else happen in school on coronation days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No, I can't remember - anything e
lse, only - picture of - of - all the flags, of - of the dominions, and then - I know when - oh that was - after I was married I was looking through this book, and I re - I remember that - as a dominions of - faded out, there was a big red ink mark throug
h
 them in this book. I don't know what became of that book, I lost a lot of stuff her. Not that it was interest to any - interesting to anybody only to us. But all the Sunday school books and that I - I sent - to the - to Doctor Barnardos Homes and these -
 and a dolls house we had and a rocking horse, that all went to Barnardos Homes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Would these be Christmas presents and things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did I have what?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Were these Christmas presents from the past?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No, we had this rocking horse - we had a - thi
s rocking horse and it was covered with real horse skin, stood about that height, and - and - lovely big dolls house we had. And - we used to play - play with that and - dolls prams. We - we had everything that children should have but - games and that we
 never had and there was never a - never a card played in our house.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you ever go out with just your father on your own?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Mum and dad used to go out - yes, they - only used to go and - and - visit - people they knew, but very seldom.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Would your father go out with you, would he take you out walking and things like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did he go out what?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did your father ever take you out walking or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh yes - he used - on Bank Holidays he used to take out - take us out and Sundays
. Sundays he used to take us up to - up to the Round Pond, or - I know as a special treat he took us - there was a - a - boating on the - Serpentine, he used to take us there and we had - bottles of lemonade and sandwiches and biscuits and - oh new though
t that was lovely. But that - that's all that happened in our childhood, we were too sheltered for anything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 I suppose a lot of people went to Hyde Park on the weekend?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh yes. But we used to walk through there with - taking turns carrying the ba
g, a little black bag and - bottle of lemonade and - biscuits and etcs in it and dad used to take the paper, and he used to sit there and read the paper and we - were watching the swimming or boating or whatever was on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you ever go away on Bank Holidays or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Only down to Wormwood Scrubs, only to the fair. But when my father was - was ill - we went away from - school country holiday fund - for a fortnight, I went down to - Crawley in Sussex, and I remember that, we stayed wit
h some people named Day, 9, Albany Road, Crawley, Sussex, I remember that. And I all - always remember when I came back I had to write an essay, and we couldn't make it out that there was only one policeman. And then we went in and saw the pigs killed. An
d
 I thought that was dreadful. And - and we went to the flower show down there. Down in the country and - I suppose it was flowers and animals, I don't know what you - what it was really, it was just a - yearly show they had. And then the next year we - we
 went to Horley in Suffolk.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 The same idea was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
That was - that was with the school. We had to pay to go, we used to take - we used to take a shilling a week - from Christmas - to pay for our stay down there you see, well I think it was only about - I think it was only about a pound for the }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2700016\charrsid5646288 fortnight}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 , it -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you ever go on holidays to the seaside at all while you were a girl?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No. Never went to - the seaside, only - until I was - grown up practically. Fourteen - that's the first time I ever saw the sea.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you have things like circuses round here?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
No, only - only - only down - only down to Scrubs, only once we were taken to the zoo. And that was when - a relation of my mother's came over from South Africa. I suppose I was 
about - eight, and my sister was six, and my little sister was in the - mail cart, she was only a baby but - he took us - to the zoo. Oh we thought it was wonderful, but I didn't like the snake house, I dreamt about that. I hated it. Well I know when I ca
m
e home - my mother said did we enjoy it and we were having our tea, and - or our supperwhatever it may be, we were all sitting there, and - I - I said I think God's very wicked. Why do you think God's wicked? I said, all those lovely lions and tigers, I s
a
id, they've got miles and miles and miles - where they live, and then I said they're all put in cages, and I - I said it's wicked and God's wicked to let them do it. So my mother told us then, she said, it's not God. It's - it's the man that does this. So
 - I said, well why don't God stop it? Then I said, well - she said, I - as you got older perhaps you'll learn, but what you know now, she said, you get that into your head and make sure you know it. So that was that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2700016\charrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
about things like cinemas, were there any cinemas at this time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Cinemas? Never went to a cinema, only from - magic lantern we called it, round - the church hall. We used to - it was a penny, you had to buy a ticket at school. And - that day we - we used to go to - school then f
rom - two 'til half past four or five. Well this day we - if you bought a ticket you came home at four o'clock to have your tea, and then you went to this - cinema, at half past five. And - we saw - oh - Robin Hood and - oh - all coloured it was, oh and t
h
e place stunk with paraffin. A man used to be up on a - great big curtain and he used to get up there and turn this thing round and round, we used to sing twinkle little star and all that rubbish. That's as far as we went. But to - theatre or - pictures, 
no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No music halls?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Never went to - I never went inside a music hall - or a pub - or an off licence - until - I was grown up -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you never go away with your mother and father anywhere?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No. No, the only time we went - out of London wa
s my - we used to - school holidays - except when we went away with the school fund, we were taken out everyday somewhere. Picnics. Taken out on the bus to - Wormwood Scrubs or - and my father took us once to Kew, Kew Gardens, that was - and he showed us 
all these different flowers. But apart from that it was either over Wormwood Scrubs or St Quentin}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2700016\charrsid5646288 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
s Park, or - little - little Scrubs we used to call it, or else - up - up in Kensington Gardens. That's - that was our holiday. But -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 There was a lot of greenery around in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Oh beautiful I mean there - there - there was fields all round here, people had lovely gardens. We used to - have a - when we lived up - up - up on the - up the other side of the road - it was a little bit of a yard and
 then there was a garden, and - we used to have our - our tea out there and - on a - little table like that - some - we had a tea}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2700016\charrsid5646288 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 party in the garden when it was one of my sister's birthday, oh we thought it was lovely, we had - two coloured umbrellas - li
ke, stuck them up there, we - oh we were miles away in our estimation. No I'm very much afraid that - as children - we didn't - go very far away from home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 But you didn't mind that did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 We didn't want - we didn't want to, it - it never came 
into our minds. And I know once when - I tell you I followed the Salvation Army down nearly to Shepherds Bush. That was - my mother nearly went mad. When my dad came to pick us up - pick me up rather, I was in there having - hot cross buns I called it, wa
s buns and - milk and - sweets. I said, I'll - I'll come again one day. They said you won't. Of course - they said, or they'll keep you here altogether.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What denomination were your mother and father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What religious denomination were your mother and father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Church of England. That church.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did they go every Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
No. My father used to go but - my mother used to go occasionally, she used to take us - she used to take us sometimes in - on a Wednesday evening, and - then
 it was the see missionaries that had come from abroad. I know we - we had a coloured man there, well you never saw a coloured man those days, Father George, I can remember that and - he came from - from America, he knew my father strangely enough, and - 
h
e came and - as we came out he stood at the church - door as we came out from the church and - somebody behind me said, if you touch that - if you touch his coat you'll be lucky all your life. So I remember as I come out I touched his coat like that and h
e
 looked round at me, and - he said, have you - have you enjoyed it? We said, yes, it was - lovely, and then again - in the mission hall here - on a Wednesday evening, if they didn't have a - have a meeting at the church, we used to go round to the mission
 hall, 'course it's all }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2700016\charrsid5646288 k}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
nocked down now, just up on the - like the third turning from here, Rackham Street it used to be - and they used to have sale of work there and - games and - some days, and - actually - it belonged to our - it was the church hall fr
o - from St Michaels but it was called St Martins Mission. We used to go there, and - games and needlework and - everything - there was something there about every other night. But Tuesdays and Thursday I think we was home but - Fridays was games and - Mo
ndays I think was needlework, I've forgotten now how it was, but that's how it was, that's the way we spent our time. And in the wintertime my - in the winter and the dark nights my father used to come and meet us.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You say you remembered a Band of Hope as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
No, we didn't go to a Band of Hope, we didn't have a Band of Hope, ours was the mission, it was called St Martins Mission, the Guild of Holy Innocents, I think nobody could have been worse than us kids.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Was your mother ever a member of anything like the Women}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2700016\charrsid5646288 \rquote }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 s Institute or Mothers Union or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Do I remember what? No. She never believe - never believed in that, or Mothers Meetings, she never had time. She never had time for - any of these meetings. The only thing - the only
 place my mother ever - used to go to - and I don't know where that was but it was a sort of place like the school of Good Housekeeping. She - she used to go there sometimes where they taught cooking. And - and I know she used to go there for a refresher 
course but where it was I couldn't tell you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 She was doing a lot of work really so she didn't have all that much time to go about?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon? No. I know when she was home - home - when she - when she wasn't working we'd come home from school and - s
he'd been washing and ironing and - washing every day and - ironing and - we had clean white pinafore every day, to go back to school. And - also - she taught us darning, and - knitting - One thing I could never do, I could never crochet. But knitting yes
. And needlework - patching, we all had to do that. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Were you a member of the choir?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh - we used to sing - sing - on a Wednesday evening over there in a choir. But - they only had choirboys Sundays.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 So you weren't a member of the church choir?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 We only went - we only sang in the church choir at the - at the Guild.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 So you didn't go on any choir outings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did the church have any temperance club?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Have a temperance club? No, not that I can - not that I can r
emember. Singing the pledge as they called it? No, if they did, I - we didn't know anything about it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you have grace at meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes. We always had to say our grace - whether - my mother was there or not.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Who would say grace then, all of you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
You - just used - and we always had to say our prayers, and - as I tell - said, my father used to sing. He'd got a lovely voice, he used to sing and - and with this boy Ernie, he was in the boys choir over there, they used to sing - harmonize an
d oh we used to think that was lovely. But apart from that we - I never forget when we had this phonograph, well - we nearly took it to bed with us, we thought it was wonderful to hear - hear a voice and nobody talking you know, and see - see nobody.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 It would be still quite new in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Oh yes, it was a little cylinders like that, you put it on like a roll and wind it up and there's a little trumpet, and at - then I know my father bought one - a second hand, he bought it - off a f}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2700016\charrsid5646288 riend of his, with a big trumpe}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 t, His Master's Voice. Oh that was wonderful. All the kids in the street come to hear that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you have any friends popping in and out of the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did we have many friends? Only school friends. Only - friends that lived n
ear. We used to go in their house sometimes and they used to come in ours, but - it was just that - well we never - we never wanted anything - there was - my dad was always home in the evenings, I can never remember my father going out at night, never. Ne
v
er my - when he came home from work - he used to bring the Evening News - and - he'd wash his hands and put his slippers on and his paper under his arm and he'd come and have his tea, and then - he'd read the paper and we'd do our homework or - whatever w
e were doing, painting or sketching or - whatever it was in the - and unless he took us out, down as far as Workwood Scrubs for a walk. But I can never on any occasion - all our lives remember my dad going out on his own. Never.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Would he ever go out with your mother, just the two of them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Sometimes they used to go out, but - but very very seldom, it was only to - to see somebody - who he worked with or - somebody that was ill or something.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 I suppose after he had his operation he'd be at home all the time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Oh after - after his - after he'd had this operation he was - he walked very lame, we - he didn't - go out at all, I can remember he used to see somebody who wrote books, and - this man used to come to our house and - named Delamere, M
r Delamere, and he used to come to our house and we all got a penny each when he came, if we'd be quiet while my dad was talking to him. And he was writing a book on flowers, and - we thought after - we used to call him the flower man. Dad, here's your fl
ower man come. Yes, we used to get a penny each those days when he came.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 He came to ask your father about flowers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh yes, all about gardening and - this man used to draw plans, I know, I can remember that. I know used to have big sheets of paper
 like this and he used to draw, and I used to think, I wish I could draw like that. Used to sit down and do this, a path, and so forth, there was the bed and - then he'd do this and sketch it all on the table, we'd sit and watch him, we used to think it w
as wonderful. But apart from that - we used to - be downstairs in our little sitting room, our ante-room as we called it, we got some kids in there - we were acting, playing - Cinderella and all that sort of - things.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 How did you get on with your brothers and sisters, you say you got on very well with your brothers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 How did you get on with your sisters?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 With my sisters? Oh we - we never quarre}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2700016\charrsid5646288 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 led - the little one was the - trouble. I know when - oh, how old was I - I must have 
been twelve and - Joey Freeman, that was my husband - was, he lived at number three hundred and thirty-three Portobello Road, and - they were Roman Catholics, they were Irish, and - he - I used to meet him after school, and we used to play together, well 
on this particular day - my mother }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2700016\charrsid5646288 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
aid - you - is your - you're going out to play, she said, don't go far away. And Mrs Cheetham will call you in - when it's time. Well - they were - laying wood blocks on this road then, and at the - outside our house wher
e we lived, a corner house - that was - opposite to this house - on that side, well we lived this side. Well we used to play on those steps - those were our steps you see, but on this side of the road. And we used to play there, well outside there there w
a
s a - a big bin full of sand. Well - Joey Freeman's - it was his birthday I think, 'cos it was in the summertime, it was his birthday, and - I can remember we sat on top of this bin - and - my sister started to cry, so we said, there's a policeman coming,
 
Mr Manfred's coming. And she - we put her inside and we sat on the top. Eating this pen'orth of broken biscuits, and - keep her quiet, she was nearly dead when they got her out. Yes, old Murphy came along and he said to my mother he said, I'd give her the
 
biggest tanning on her backside, he said, if I was you. My mother said, I know what to do with her. We didn't realize the danger. But that's how - the trouble - the only trouble we had with her, and right up 'til today - there was - that animosity between
 us, the youngest one of all. And she's just the same now, I had a letter from my - n}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2700016\charrsid5646288 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
ece this morning who lost her husband. And my sister lives at Bracknell, and this is her second husband that's already in the hospital. And that poor girl, she's only lost
 her husband a week - a fortnight - Saturday, she wrote in her letter this morning, I don't know what to do about mum, she said - she thinks I should go down there and stay with her. I mean that girl's got everything to settle up, all her husband's busine
s
s and - and everything else. And - it - the strangest think in the world - she - she's take - taken to drink as soon as she left school. She used to drink - she used to buy tuppeenny bottles of stout, and that's grown on her, she's a real alcoholic, in he
r
 letter this morning Hilda said to me - she's seventy-five now, she said, we bought mum three bottles of Guinness - and she said, and Reggie, that's her son, took mum back, and - she said, oh don't take me right home from - Basingstoke to Bracknell, she s
aid - I'll go round the pub, so that's - she said - Les - Reggie left her - his gran at the pub.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Was she the only one in your family that did drink?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 That's the only one in our family that ever drank. Oh my brother used to like - oh he thought it
 was ever so big if he had a - penny glass of four ale, he - he was a man. Bigger than anybody - in his own estimation. But my other brother didn't drink, although he worked for Buchanan}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2700016\charrsid5646288 
\rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 s the whisky people. Used to work in their office.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Was there any one of your brothers or sisters that you felt you particularly close to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Any what? Oh I was very fond of my - my younger brother Sammy. But our John of course he - he was - quite - big and old to us, if you know what I mean. He was twelve years olde
r than me. But - our Sammy was our - hero. Didn't matter what - if - when he used to come home on leave, you know, they didn't get much money those days - soon as our Sammy came home we all - we all had pennies to spend and do what you like and - buy bags
 
of fruit and - chestnuts, buy chestnuts and roast them in the fender. But - our John never gave us much, he was too - high and mighty. And when his girl came to see him we had to be quiet. I know - one day, my - John - answered a - I went to answer the do
o
r - answer the bell, and my John went down you see and he pushed me at one side. So I said, I was only going to open the door. He looked at me like that, and of course in come my daughter-in-law - my sister-in-law that was - Martha, and she same in, she s
a
id, oh hello. So I didn't smile at her or anything and she went by I went - like that, so - my brother said, you do that again and I'll slap your face, and my Sammy said, you won't. There was nearly a fight on the stairs then. But we - we never had any - 
w
e never wanted to go anywhere. Our lives from Monday 'til Friday - in the home, was - always the same. And - Saturdays and Sundays - as I tell you we used to go down Portobello Road - and we used to think it was lovely if we bought fish and chips and - at
e
 it going along. Nothing could be better, and only cost a penny. And then I know - in the early evening - there used to be a man sell fish, and used - he was selling there one day, s found sixpence. And I looked round to see if anybody had lost it. Or loo
k
ing for it but they wasn't, so this man was selling this fish and there was a - I can remember it now, he got a piece of - paper, there was a haddock - and - four kippers - and a bloater, a smoked - herring, and he said, sixpence. Well I carried that home
 my dear as if I'd robbed Buckingham Palace of all its jewels. I took those home to my mum, so she said, where did you get them? I said, at - Mr Marsh was selling them on his - standing up on the stall, with the old }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2359735\charrsid5646288 naphtha}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288  lamp burning and he'd got all the
 fish boxes round him you see and the - us kids were standing round watching him, and we used to love to watch that, then they used to hang up - hold up - chickens, and you bid for them, and - that - that was our pleasure on the Saturday.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Were you allowed to get dirty when you played games at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 If you got dirty was that all right?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Well I don't - I don't know what my - after we'd had a - after - before we had our meals we had to wash our hands, and - when we went indoors - a
s I say we had to strip down to the waist before we went to bed or - have a bath or what have you. And - I know I went once to the - swim - swimming pool, a swimming bath down - Lancaster Road, and I went with this girl - well that was while my dad was in
 the hospital, and I went with this girl - I never forget my mum, what she - she said, do you think you - we want any more trouble, she said, your dadd}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2359735\charrsid5646288 y}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 's in the hospital, she said, I've got my arm in a sling - opening a bottle of soda water to give to dadd
y, and she was cut right across there. I can remember she had a - like a - a - little block of wood in her hand like a sort of broom handle to keep her fingers out straight, I can remember that. And she - and - and she said, and you go - I said I was only
 
watching, I didn't get in the water. She said, no, she said, you could have fallen in the water and been dead, then what I would - what would I have done? Of course then I realized you know that - we shouldn't disobey her. But of course children of today,
 
if I told them that - if I were to tell that to my grandchildren they'd laugh at me. Say fancy - fancy you - fancy our grandmother - great-grandmother being like that, they - they'd look at me and laugh, but that's how we were bought up and we're none the
 worse for it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you have any hobbies in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Any hobbies? No, we - oh - we had a parrot, and - window box, the other time - in my box I had - mignonette, and - mignonette and two daffodil bulbs at Christmas, that we grew for my mum, an
d these daffodils bulbs were put in a pickle jar - and then when we saw this flower come out oh we thought that was wonderful. That's all we had.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you have any other pets?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 We had - we had a - little bit of garden and - my - my - one of my sis
ters, she grew some lettuce, and then we had two or three - sticks that we had some beans on, but - apart from that - nothing else.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you have any cats and dogs in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Cats and dogs? No. No. We - there was a cat Tim that lived downstair
s, that - belonged to Mrs Green that's all. But he - she used to come up - every opportunity she - she could come up, but - my children had animals. My children all - always had dogs and birds. But - and - and John now, he's - I think he's got - he's bred
 fourteen or twenty birds by now, he's - he sells them, now I buy tea - and - I get a coupon - a three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2359735\charrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
penny coupon - on this tea, and I put them on a card, and - I get ten shillings. Well when I get that ten shillings I send that to my grandson to buy - seed -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you collect many things in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you collect anything when you were a little girl, like cigarette cards?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh, cigarette cards, yes, I've still got some in the other room, flags, yes, I - but - I collected - silver three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2359735\charrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
penny bits, I gave those all to John. Farthings, I gave him - when he came up the last time I gave him - I think ten - farthing, and about a dozen three }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2359735\charrsid5646288 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288  three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2359735\charrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 penny - silver three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2359735\charrsid5646288  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 penny pieces. And I know my Sammy made me a - a - a bracelet of three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2359735\charrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
penny pieces and joined them with little bits of chain, and I don't know what became of that. And - yes, cigarette cards we used to - collect, the pictures of flags. And - butterflies, I know we - we - somebody next door to us had a beautiful case 
of butterflies, and we started - catching them but they were only white ones. And - I'd got this - butterfly in a jam jar and I took it indoors. And my mother said - a butterfly only lives for one day. And she said, don't ever let me see you - put anythin
g
 in a - alive in the jar like that again. And we had - done - down in the - over here there was a sort of - pool, and it had frogs in it. Oh we caught these frogs and - and we had a little bit of stick, and we'd touch them like that and they'd hop. But - 
we never took them home.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You didn't get tadpoles or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
No. You see we never went - went anywhere to the - we used to tell our mum that we saw these frogs. Oh we had a tortoise. Yes, that - old Joe. I think he - must be about a h
undred now if he's still alive. Yes, we - we used to bring him in - put him in the - put him in the fender, used to sit there and we used to see him head come out, and - if there was a sound his head used to go in. And we said, well - how does his head go
 in and out like that? Yes, I - I think - I think old Mr Cheetham bought that for us. I think it only cost about sixpence. OH then - if we had any }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2359735\charrsid5646288 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288  crumbs}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2359735\charrsid5646288  of bread }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
or bits of bread, there was a man lived next door to us, Mr Tanner - and - he sold birds foo
d. Ad - hay, little packets of hay, and - birds, and we used to save the - save the crust off our - off our - off our bread and butter and take in to - to feed these birds. And - any stale bread that mum didn't use for bread pudding we used to take in for
 the birds.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you ever have a bird table yourself in the garden?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No, we - only - oh we had a - in the way of pets was this parrot, and I loathed it. Hated it from the - as long as I can remember.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You say it was rude on Queen Victoria's day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 I said to my mum one days I said, I hate that boss eyed parrot. My mother said it's not boss eyed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you ever have anything like a bicycle?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 OH yes, and we - we - we had a - we bought a second - we bought a - a - a - my dad bought us a 
second hand bicycle, and we were only allowed to ride it on the sideway, of course there wasn't the traffic there is now. And then - when I was thirteen - I had a - chance - choice to have a - a new bicycle or a watch. And - I said, well as I'm going down
 
to - stay with auntie - I'll - I want a watch and I had - a - lovely watch and a strap. But I can never wear a watch, it stops immediately. And - I used to have it on a little fob in my - in my pocket. I - I made it out of a bit of wash leather, I tucked 
-
 tucked inside like that, and I cut a hole in, and I used to have it in that pocket on a little fob, on a little - piece of black satin. But - I didn't want - I didn't want the bicycle, we - used to have such fights over it. I don't know what became of th
at, I - I think we had punctures galore with that. We had to mend them ourselves.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 How old were you then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 This - this - when I can remember much - was between ten and twelve.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 How far out would you ride on it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh only just round the block, not on the main road.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Your mother wouldn't let you go very far on it would she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
I mean we - well there was nothing on the roads then, only horses. Horse buses, we used to start from the Eagle, right until - my son was born. Yes, old Jack, he used to - wash the buses out, they used to go from - they used to go from there - to - Pic}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2359735\charrsid5646288 c}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
adilly - and - coming back they changed horses up in Westland Grove, there was a horse trough, used to be the bank there, I don't know what it is now. And - they us
ed to - feed the horses, and - we used to sit and watch them sometimes - on the Saturday, if mum took us up to Whiteley's, and course you could always walk all through there, you needn't buy anything but - she used to buy us sometimes - few sweets or some
t
hing, biscuits or something, we used to walk round see all these ladies walking in their lovely dresses and that. But I never never once had a - thought I would like to be like that. No, that never occurred to me to ever want to be like these people, beca
u
se - I can remember my mum when she went to a funeral, she had a black dress and she had a - this - tight fitting dress and this - bustle thing on, oh that - I can remember that, with - with mum. In fact, right until after the 1914/18 war I had long skirt
s right down to me ankles, and - when my husband came home of course I'd got a short skirt and high leg boots and he nearly went round the bend.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You say your mother went to a funeral in a black dress, do you remember any funeral when you were a little girl?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
No - I can remember - I can remember - my mother going to a funeral - I can't remember who it was now, and - I can remember the lady, she had a - widows weeds, and black crepe on the bottom of her dress like that, and I can - I can remember tha
t and do you know that put horror in me, when I saw that - lady, Mrs Mak}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2359735\charrsid5646288 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
ntire her name was, and - she belonged to the church over there that - they took - took th}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2359735\charrsid5646288 e - the body in the church. And}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
 said, well are they going to leave it there? So they said, no
, they were going to put it in the earth. 'Cos there wasn't cremation those days, not in the - nor for our station - my mum and dad and my brothers - brothers that would have been my brothers when - if they'd have lived, my husband and - and - all his peo
ple, they're all buried up in Kensal Green. My husband was cremated and his ashes were scattered up - there. My daughter was cremated and my son-in-law's got the - ashes in a - urn unfortunately.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you ever take part in any sports when you were a little girl?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
No, only - only races from Sunday school. They never seemed to have any those days, we used to - go down and watch the men - the big - big boys playing football, and cricket, that was down on the green. Down the backs of these houses - her
e, where they - where the hospital is, well all the back of that hospital was - was green, right down 'til you got to - the bottom of St Quentin's Avenue. 'Cos they were building those houses, all those houses in Barbary Road have been bought - built in m
y
 time. Oh I know we were broken hearted when we - when it was all - taken for building. We never had anywhere to play. 'Cos one old man over there used to keep two pigs. And then another old man - he had a - a horse, and - he kept it in the garden. And it
 slept in his she'd. And - that was the bottom of St Charles Square.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 So it was very rural round here?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Pardon? Well - that was - that was even when I first went to work at the hospital 'til after I was married that man had that horse, he used to g
o out fetching rags and bones. And - sometimes we'd take a carrot or - something down to give it, well that was long after I was marrie}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2359735\charrsid5646288 d - after my boy was born. 'Cos}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288  he was only eighteen month old when I went to work at the hospital.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Were you free to play with anybody you pleased?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Oh yes. Yes, but - we were all neighbours, we all lived - we all sort of played - with boys and girls in - Portobello Road and Ladbroke Grove, but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You weren't stopped from playing with certain children for instance?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh no. No, we - not - not to my memory.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you say you got any pocket money in those days?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
We'd no - there was a - a boy lived up here and he was a foreign boy, and - he's very spiteful, and - I'd got very long hair, right - two lon
g plaits, and if he could catch me he'd hang onto these plaits and one day - I'd just about had enough of it and - straight - I hit him in the nose and I could see his nose bleed. I - oh I went home to my mother and I thought I'd killed him. And - whateve
r
 was that boy's name? Dominic something. Ever after that we were friends. He'd got a sister, she was blind. We were friendly with her but we could never stand this boy. He was a Roman Catholic. But - after - ever after that when once I stood up for myself
,
 that - that was the end of it I know my Sammy come after him one day - he said, I'll break your neck, he said, if you pull my sister's hair again. But - he was a lot older than us. But - he used to take his sister to church. He was kind to her, but I thi
n
k it was just out of devilment more than anything else. No real spite. I never had - as long as I can look back - I've never had any - animosity - or hatred against anyone. Because - we were bought up - that - there's a reason in everything you do. If - i
f
 - if a child is blind or an imbecile - that's the way God meant it to be. And it's our place to help them, that's what my mum used to tell us. If you see an old person wanting to cross the road or a blind person, you take their hand and take them across 
t
he road. And - when there was a - little girl run over by the side - that lived next door but one to us - there was a - there was a reason that it happened, and we were taught that there - there - there must be a reason for everything to happen, and then 
a
fter - something had happened people would know what to do for the best, that's what we were taught, I don't know whether it was right or wrong. But I know some of the children that lived round here, they had drunken parents and the parents used to fight 
a
nd - this sort of thing, and - and yet - I can never remember one of those boys or girls growing up - wrong. Never, and now - next door but - two or three houses away from - where my husband's people lived - there was some people - named Johnson. Well - m
y
 husband had a little brother ten years old, and Percy Johnson was ten. And it was on the - holiday of Corpus Christi that my husband's mother did - did dressmaking, and she said, whoever shells the peas the quickest for tea - for daddy's tea, she said - 
c
an go out to play. But she said, the - Albert was the - was his brother, he - he shelled the peas quickly, so his mother told him he could go out to play. They were allowed to run in the streets. And - my husband had to take a dress home - only up - somew
here up the road there, well - that boy went up - out to play with this boy Johnson, and they got on the riverbank - on the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2359735\charrsid5646288 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288  canal}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2359735\charrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 bank up here, and there was a b}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2359735\charrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 arge, and they were playing there - and suddenly they were jumping on and off this barge, wel
l suddenly the barge moved and they both fell in - about six feet of mud and they were both killed. And - I can remember going home and - and telling my mum, I said you know mum, I said Albert Freeman I said hasn't come back, he's been out to play. So - I
 
said - I wonder where he's gone. So my mother said, well he - he must be a naughty boy, he's run away somewhere. So - anyway she said - come along, she said, you mustn't think anymore about it. Well the next morning going to school - I went round to Mrs F
r
eeman's. And of course the - we heard then that - his dad had come home from work, and he wasn't home and he went to the police - and they - found the boys had suffocated in this mud. He said you couldn't recognise his face and - that - how they knew it w
as his - boy, his face was all cut to piece, how they knew it was his boy they recognised him because their mother used to make all their trousers and - and - coats you know until }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2359735\charrsid5646288 
they were - big enough to buy s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 uits, and she made them braces of webbing, of wide webbing, and that's the only thing they could identify him by, 'cos the clothes was all soaked in mud.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 When you said your mother used to make the family clothes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You said your mother used to make the family clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Where did she get her materials from?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Oh I don't know, from - Whiteley's or from anywhere she used to buy - I can't remember that. She used to buy - I know - in Telford Road - when we lived in Telford Road, over the - that was the first place w
e moved to - when the shop was sold, when - old Mr Bryant died, we had all the top part of the house, four rooms upstairs, and he had - he used to have as a shop parlour and the bedroom, and he used to sell - the same as they sell now, birds seed and groc
e
ries and all sorts of things, and on the counter there used to be a big glass box, and inside that was lumps of jelly with coconut in, and sometimes - I must shut that a minute - sometimes he'd - can't bear that round my waist - sometimes he'd say, old Mr
 
Bryant, you keep an eye on the shop, my luv, perhaps he'd go out to the toilet, he didn't tell me where he went, and I'd stand there behind that counter and - I used to think, oh I'm so clever. And then when he come back I used to get - five or six of the
s
e - lumps of jelly with coconut in. Well when the shop was sold old Mr Bryant died - we moved across the road into Telford Road, and we had the top half of the house there and old Mr Rogers - he used to sit in the - in the shop mending shoes. And - we - '
c
ourse we - as I tell you, we lived upstairs, well that - that's where when my brother came home on leave that - we - we - were there for years. And - before we moved back into Portobello Road, Mr Rogers died and - the shop was sold. And then we wanted mor
e
 rooms or something, I can't remember but anyway we had this opportunity to move in Mrs Green's house. Well that was the first time we moved back into Portobello Road. Well then we moved to the top end of Portobello Road and Lad - Ladbroke Grove, right - 
t
he top shop but one on that side of the road, as you come over the bridge. And - we used to - the shop - the shop was open downstairs, it sold sweets and - biscuits and all sorts of thing, and then our entrance was at the back but our front room and the -
 
and - mum's bedroom looked out into Ladbroke Grove. But ours looked out into Portobello Road. You see? Was right - right up at the top end. And that shop at the end now where all those - what do you call it, the - freezers and all that sort of thing - tha
t
 used to be the pawn shop and we used to see old - old girls go in there on a Monday, with bundles of washing, I used to say it was, and I said to my mum what - they going - going in with a - a bundle of washing then they come out with money. Well we neve
r
 knew what it was you see, and then - as we got older mum told us she said, that's - that's where the - ladies, they haven't got any money and they go and pawn things and they lend them money and then - they go and get it out at the end of the week. I sai
d, oh - I wouldn't like that. But - that was my first - talk about the pawn shop. Yes, my - and after - after La}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2359735\charrsid5646288 m}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
bert died, Mrs Freeman moved up to - up there in one of those turnings past the - opposite the cemetery, Highly - Highly Road, and - 'course I w
as - older then, I used to go up there and see her, I was very very fond of her. But - my mother never liked them. Never - never - until - never until - my mum died.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What did she think of your husband?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 She never liked him. Oh she - she didn't d
islike him but she disliked their ways of living. 'Cos the father was always drunk. And the mother, she used to go - she used to go with Mrs O'Shaunessy that lived in - in the - opposite road there, they used to go to church - church - and - that was a bo
y
s college then, St Charles College - and the corner up there where - the last - house here before you get to the Eagle public house, that was a bakers and we used to come out and see the boys - coming in there and helping themselves to cakes out the windo
w
, eat them you know. Sometimes we'd get one, sometimes we wouldn't, but - those were the sort of things that we were amused at but - we were never allowed - allowed out at night. Not - go home from school and - you didn't go out unless you came to evening
 - you know, to church - to the mission, or to go to the Guild, but other than that -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did your father ever take an active interest in politics do you know?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon? No. He was a Liberal. I always remember that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did he ever talk about why he was a liberal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 We never knew anything about that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did he vote in any elections before 1919?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
I can remember - I can't remember but I can never remember my father on any occasion - ever going out in the evening when he came home from work, un
less he went out with - with my mother, but where they went I don't know. That's when old Cheetham - Mr Cheetham used to tell us all about - the boats and - how they used to get people on the boats and take all their money and then the boat would go down 
i
n the ocean. Oh and our used to nearly pop out and then the pilots got on the boats, oh - we knew it all then. But - that's all we ever knew, but - I can tell you one thing, myself and my two sisters - we - we were - better educated than some of the kids 
o
f today, because - some - some of them can't spell, and - they can't even speak plainly and they can't write a letter, but of course you can only blame that onto the television, there's no conversation, and the typewriter, there's no - handwritten letters
, only the signature.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did your parents ever give you any lessons before you went to school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No, my - oh no, we - we -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You didn't have a tutor or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 We - we had homework right from - we always had homework, four sums to do - Tue
sdays and Thursdays we had four sums to do, and the next week we used to written essay. And that was the first time - I can remember - that - I had a beautiful book, beautiful prayer book given to me - and they asked me what I would like - would I like a 
b
ook - of - Bible Stories, or would I like a prayer book with my name in it? Well I had this lovely prayer book. And - oh I can see it now my dear, it was in a - in a - it slid into a little case. Was I proud of that. Well - the inspector - we used to have
 inspectors come round the school, and question us. So - he read the essays out that - that we used to write you see in the evening, and so I wrote - I can always remember to this day - the life of a pillar box. And I can remember sa}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2359735\charrsid5646288 y}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 ing that - that - at fi
rst they were big blocks of iron, and then they were melted down - it was melted down - I had to read this all out to the kids, afterwards, and it was all melted down and poured into a mould. And then when it was set - they were all stood up - in rows. An
d
 - the lids were fixed on, of course - I - wrote it different to what I'm saying it now, but this is what it meant. And then I said they were all parked - all put into a place together to be taken to - places - and they never saw - never met anymore. And 
I said they - were taken and placed at the corners of the street, and painted red with - our Queen's initials on. And that was the - life of a pillar}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2359735\charrsid5646288 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 box, and where I got that from I don't know, it was quite original. And ever since then - I always had an idea I wanted to write.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You do write don't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Pardon? Yes. But - I always wanted to do it in a big way. Now - when I was seventeen - or sixteen - this Madam Collier that I told you about, I used to write all her - writer all her - all her lette
rs - and - answer all her - her - answer all her letters, I was - I must have been about sixteen or seven - seventeen, I'd left the Post Office anyway. And - my husband - of course he wasn't my husband then, he used to come in - and - he - she used to all
o
w - allow him to come in and she had a - one servant, Mary, and - she he - he used to come in there and - do little odd jobs for her like - clean the brass so something like that. And - Mary, she was an old woman, but - we used to call her Aunty Mary. And
 
then I used to do - do all the writing, then my - she used to give my husband the letters to post, always trusted him to post the letters at night. Anyway - she had one son. And he went out to Purn and Bucoe - in Brazil, and she tried - they had a baby, h
e
r son was married - and had a - had - they had this first baby, and he went out on this - to work out in Brazil, he was something to do with the - railway - and - they tried all they possibly could for me to go with them. And - my - my mother came down an
d
 spoke to them all about it and - she said, no - she wouldn't - wouldn't dream of it for - a - allowing me to go. Of course I wanted to go, I thought that was going to be wonderful. And then - my father was talking to me one day and my Sammy was home, and
 
he said, if you go out there - he said, you'll never come home to England, never see your mother anymore. Well that did it. 'Cos I thought you could come home on the tuppeny tube. So I said, no, I - I won't go, but she wanted me to go out there as a - sor
t
 of - companion, she spoke several languages and so did he, he was a very clever man. He was - a designer, you know what I mean, a - of all these things. Not an architect you wouldn't call him but - he used to design all sorts of things, very very clever 
h
e was, that was her only - only son, very very nice man he was, and I loved the wife too, she was very sweet. She - had been a nurse - nursing sister or something. But she dearly wanted me to go out there with them and I thought that would be lovely but -
 if I could come home weekends well of course -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 How long would it have been for, about a year or so?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Pardon? Oh my dear they - they stayed out there, they - they - they still - I - I - I suppose they're dead by now, Madam Collier must be dead, a
nd - I mean - he - he must be - twenty-four years older than me. I can remember he was twenty-four - she said he was twenty-four.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 How old were you when you first went to school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Five. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What time in the morning did you go?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Five yea
rs old when I first went to school. In the infants class, and I can remember going into that class. I - I'd got a little school bag. And - a pencil. And a - a scrap book - a - little - writing pad, little tiny one. And I went in the school, I was so proud
.
 And I'd got two biscuits in a bag, that was my lunch, 'cos we used to come out to play lunchtime. I - the middle of the morning, after prayers. Well - Mrs Wilson was the - headmistress of the babies - department, from five 'til seven. Well - as I walked 
i
n that class, she'd got a beautiful - lovely brown dog, Rover, and - as I walked into that - into the hall, I said goodbye to my mum, and I said come and see me playtime won't you, look through the railings, so she said, yes, I'll come and see you playtim
e
, look through the railing, 'course the gates were shut. So - 'course I - I was the only one that went to school you see, my sisters were - not old enough. Oh dear, mum used to come - and have a look at me through the railings for a little while. And - I 
took to that Mrs Wilson - the first time I ever - ever saw her. And right up until I was married - and I met her - on - Ladbroke Grove Station, she used to live at Hammersmith, and I met her on }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2359735\charrsid5646288 L}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 adbroke Grove Station, of course she was very elderly then - a
nd we had a talk, and she said, do you know, she said - I was only thinking about you she said - the first day that you came to school. So - this dog - she always brought him to school with her. And - he used to like - used to lie right in front of her de
s
k, well - do you know that dog - it doesn't matter where w was I'd find that dog with me. And 'course we used to do this exercise in school and - he'd - he'd be right the side of me, well I used to - take him out - take him out on the lead, if the school 
g
ates were open in case he got away, but he wouldn't have got away. And - that dog was very old when it died. And I - of course I was up in the big girls school then, and - I - I went down - we went down and saw Mrs Wilson and - when the dog died and - we 
were very upset about it, and she said, oh I - I'll never have another - another dog, yes, Rover - was - was his name.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What kind of teacher was Mrs Wilson, was she a very strict teacher?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon? Oh was she. My dear was she. But the - the - the u
pstairs one was the worst. She had short hair, grey - oh - she was a crab. Had to stand in the hall always for - assembly. And do you know - long after I was married my name was up on the board there - where - the scholarship, different ages, and - yes, a
n
d - Mrs Frazer, Scotch, she always used to wear a collar and tie, short hair, and a long skirt and always flat heeled shoes. Well one look from her my dear you'd perish. And Mrs Reid - Miss Reid was my teacher in the - in the sixth - class, there was - cl
ass one, two, three, four, five, sixth, seventh and ex-seventh. Well - all the scholarship girls was in the ex-seventh you see - we passed before we got to the ex-seventh. And - I know - Miss Reid was}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2359735\charrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 my teacher in the sixth form, and her father had a butch
ers shop just through that turning and about four shops along in Portobello Road, they had a butchers shop, and there was - she had two brothers, and - they both helped in the business. Well - 'course she was our teacher and she was very clever, she used 
t
o wear - glasses - on a chain on the - you know, on the end of her nose, I can see her now, hair scraped back, done up in a bun. She was very very spiteful - if she didn't like you. But if she did like you you couldn't do anything wrong. That was the only
 - thing that I didn't like about her.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 She had her favourites?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Oh yes, she had her favourites. But she was very fair but - she - if she thought something - if she thought something you had to sort of prove it before anything else - came about. I
 know one day I was going back to school and I bought two oranges for a penny. Well - or for a ha'penny. Well - there was a big one - a big one like that, and a small one. Well - we always used to take our teachers something, perhaps we'd take her a - a s
w
eet or a - or some sweets or - or we'd take her a - a little bunch of flowers or sort of something you know, at the end of - on Friday, and - I know when I - I went back and - I put this - small orange on her desk, it wasn't a small one but the big one - 
I
 put under my desk to eat in playtime in the afternoon. Well - I shall never forget the look on her face. She said - I love children to be generous. But when you have something - to give away, you always give the best away. Well I was choked. So - at half
 
past four I'm coming out from school she's standing there watching me. So I went straight up to her, I said, I gave you that orange - I said, Miss - I said I gave you that orange Miss Reid - because it was all right and the one I had I had to half throw a
way because it was all specked. And so I said - oh she said, I'm sorry. But she didn't }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2359735\charrsid5646288 m}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
ention any names but that's what she meant. And when I went home and I told my mother - so my mother said, well you did quite right, but she said in future, she said, if
 you want to share something with someone always let them take their pick. I said yes all right. Well she wouldn't have picked that one anyway I said so I don't care. So that was that. Well anyway - suddenly - Mrs Reid's - Miss Reid's mother died. Well we
 
- collected money - from all the school to buy - a wreath. Well I came home and told my dad all about it so my dad - I can see him now with this lovely bunch of white flowers - and all tied up with a ribbon, and it said from the school children of - form 
-
 number six. So - in the morning - the d- the funeral was at two o'clock, up at Kensal Green cemetery. Well - do you know that I used to spend hours and hours and hours in that cemetery - with - with my young sister, reading inscriptions on the - on the g
r
avestones. And - the - what - something of Cambridge - had a mausoleum built up there and all the glass was broken and there was all dead birds inside it, and - I know we used to watch - we watched that until - suddenly it - it was all done up and new gla
s
s put in, well - on the day of the - Mrs - Reid's funeral, I said to two of my - classmates, I never forget the girl, Ada Beller, and Minnie Hodgston, they both lived up the top end of Wornington Road. So I said - coming up the cemetery? So one of them - 
K
athleen Bartlett was the other little girl, so she said, oh no, I'm not coming. So I said, well I'm going. So - Minnie Hodgston said, well if you're going I'm coming too. So the other girl come with me. So we marched up to the cemetery, and the funeral wa
s just inside the door, and we}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2359735\charrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
walked in. Well I knew the man on the gate 'cause he always used to let me go in, 'cos they don't allow children in as a rule because they - in case they disfigure something, not those days anyway, he used to wear a top hat an
d a - and a coat with gold braid on, I can see him now, so - he said, oh hello, he said, who have you lost? I said, oh it's my teacher's mother. Oh he said, Mrs Reid? I said, yes. So he said, the grave is just round the corner from the church. So of cours
e we go there and - we - kept out of the way, and - we - 'course Miss Reid naturally had the day off, and then we - threw the flowers down in the hole, we lo}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2359735\charrsid5646288 o}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 ked all down and threw it down. Flowers down. Went back to school. Well - Kathleen Bartlett, she - was quite - alarmed because we dared take the time off so she went straight u}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2359735\charrsid5646288 p to Mrs Hodgston, that was a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
nother teacher there, so she said, Sue Fields won't be in this afternoon. So she said, why not? She said, they've gone to Mrs Reid's funeral. The idea. Well of course we crept}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2359735\charrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
in like three thieves. So she said, go out in the hall. Don't come in here. So we stood out in the hall giggling, you see, so - Mrs Frazer came along. So she said, what are you doing out here? So we told her. So she said to the ot
her two - go - tell Miss - Miss Mrs Hodgston she said that Mrs - oh forget her name at the moment - I sent you inside, but she said, you stay out here. I thought, oh this is it. So she said - come here. She'd got a high - platform like that and a big desk
. And she always }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2359735\charrsid5646288 wore a K and K hat, always wore}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
 his hat. So - she said - so - you took some flowers to Miss Reid? So I said yes. Mrs Reid. So I said yes. I said - I like Mrs Reid because she always used to talk to us, I said, my mum always bought our meat 
there. Oh she said, she did. So I said, yes. So I said, I'm sorry - I'm sorry, I said, that - that we stayed away late, we thought we'd - 'cos it was three o'clock when we got back. So she said - oh all right, she said, I want you to go to the Post Office
,
 and get me some postal orders, it was only down - corner of the - Chesterton Road, and she said and I want you to post me some letters and make sure you post them. I said, yes all right. There were three letters with a - elastic band round. So I went and
 
posted her letters, and - I got her postal orders and - I took them back. So - she said, you can go now and make the teacher's tea. So I went in and I was - so I made the teachers tea, of course they used to - while we went out to play, see, she - and the
 
other poor girls - they had to work - write fifty lines and - I must not stay away from school. So - when I went in the next morning - I - there was a notice for me - write - write these lines in your lunchtime. I had to write me lines all right, but I go
t away with that one. 
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you make tea very often or just that once?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Oh no, that was a - that was only if you was the favourite. No, if you - if you made the tea - if there was any left in the pot you could have it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Was there much truancy in those days at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Oh yes. Yes, we had - one girl there, Cissy, Buckingham - only - we always knew that girl, now - she had a grandmother - oh she was like a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2359735\charrsid5646288 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288  beach}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2359735\charrsid5646288 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 pole and - her - poor Cissy - she was a little girl never had a father, see? 'Co
urse we didn't understand that, well the grandmother used to look after Cissy Buckingham, she had short cropped hair - she was a devil though, and - her mother used to go out to work, well of course poor Cissy - she - the teachers were so spiteful to her 
that her grandmother used to send her to school - and - she had to stay at school and have a sandwich or whatever}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2359735\charrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
it was because the granny went out to work as well. I think the granny worked in the}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2359735\charrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
laundry. A-d the mother used to work in a shop or something, I don't remember, anyway there was nobody home lunchtime. So poor Cissy used to have to bring her lunch and - eat it in the school, and - the - that teacher - was so}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2359735\charrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 spiteful to her, Mrs Hallet - Miss Hallett, she used to slap that girl across her face 
for nothing. They were spiteful to you those days you know. You only had to be late or - or give a cross - look - and - I remember this teacher, she hit - she - caned this girl for something, and she hit her right across the arms like that. And I said to 
h
er, if she hits you again like that - no, she got two cuts of the cane for something, for being late, and then - I said, if she hits you again, I said, scream at the top of your voice and don't leave off, keep scream, scream, scream. Well, she got a whack
i
ng - after that, and the teacher hit her across the wrists like that. Well all the faces come out the street - out the class doors, she never stopped screaming. Mind you, she was in pain, and - then the - then the caning stopped, after that - you only had
 your name put in the punishment book. But - all that - all that caning was finished then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 About how old were you then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 About ten. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 So you didn't have any more caning in school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No, we never had any more canings then, no, and the 
teachers never had a cane, we had cardboard - pointers. They were a - a roll of cardboard and they had like red handles, and that's what we - she used to point on the board, that was all stopped then, because that - that girl was crippled through that cut
. And - of course it was an accident, I mean she didn't mean to hit her like that but she was so spiteful. Well after that -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No, never bothered. And then the - the School Board man went round to the granny and told her that - she'd stayed away from sc
hool, and I know they said if she stayed away from school her mother would have to pay five shillings. You have to go before the School}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2359735\charrsid5646288  Board. But - oh she was a - oh}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288  she was a poor little thing. I know she came to one of my - parties once, a - a children}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2359735\charrsid5646288 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 s party, and she says, I wish I had a mum like you and a daddy. I said - I said, well he can be your daddy I said, if you }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2359735\charrsid5646288 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288  if}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2359735\charrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
you come round, I'll ask my daddy if he'll be your dad as well. She'd come to our}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2359735\charrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
house very often after that, she used to come to Sunday school with us there. We used to say to the - ask your mummy can you come home and have tea with us and - she often did.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 How many teachers were there at your school, about five or six?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon? How many what? Teachers? Let's see now, le
t me see. Teacher Rover was the first class. That was when you come out of the infants, Miss - her name was Rhoda, but we used to call her teacher Rover. Miss Ro - Rhoda something her name was, teacher Rhoda. Mrs Springer. Two sisters Hallett. Miss Reid. 
M
rs Wilson was the infants teacher. I think there was - six - six teachers and a - and a headmistress, and then - but - no teacher - went to another class to teach. That teacher that took, us took everything. Prayers - assembly in the morning and in the ha
l
l, and - then we - we - we would go in and - perhaps it was sums - geography - geography - then it would be lunchtime, we'd - you - you go out to play in the meantime, between the two lessons, and then - you'd come home at twelve and you went back to scho
ol quarter to two. You had to be in - assembly. And - then - but sometimes we used to - go back straight to class, it all depended. And - then there'd be afternoon c}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2359735\charrsid5646288 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 ll, your names'd be called out, the register would be called. And then - perhaps we'd have 
what we called science lesson. And - history. And then - one - all one afternoon we would have needlework and knitting. In the morning we'd have scripture. And drill. We'd go out in the play ground for drill, we used to call it, exercise. And - well that 
- that's how it went all through the - Wednesdays was always essays. And - scripture in the - scripture stories in the morning. And drill. And the afternoon it was - essays.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What kind of drill was this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You - had to write - transcription one day, and dictation the next. And to write}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2359735\charrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
a short story. And - that's what I used to love. And - always - and Friday afternoons from playtime - it was always spelling bee, you all had to get round the class, and the teacher would ask you to spell, if you could
n't spell anything - you had to sit down. If you spelt it wrongly you had to sit down. Well the last one that - last one that was left used to get sixpence.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 They actually gave you money for this did they as a prize?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh yes, yes, every Friday - 
every Friday those that spelt the best - the best was sixpence but - if it was a tie you got a - a silver three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2359735\charrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 penny bit each.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you ever win?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh yes, of course I did. Ever so many times, I was very fortunate, they said, she - she only asks y
ou to spell the words you know. Well she didn't, I've always been - excellent at spelling but I don't know about these big words.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 When you first went to school your mother took you to begin with did she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 How long did that go on for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Oh not long because - next door to ours - next door to us lived the Stags, and opposite - to us lived some children named Finch, we always used to go to school arm in arm. And then wait - and wait to - come home - and then - always at - when I used 
to come out after - having my dinner as we called it, used to come out there used to be three or four of them waiting for me on the step, we used to come - arm in arm back to school, and of course - it's only while I was in the infants school that mum too
k me at the beginning. Until my sister was old enough.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 How long did it take you to get to school? About five minutes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 About - mm. Five minutes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 And you came home for your midday meals in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Came home - yes, sometimes we'd
 - see each other home, sometimes we'd go to the corner of the road - continuation of Chesterton Road where - Cissy Buckingham lived, and we'd - go up and see her indoors first, or we'd knock at the door and ask if - if - if she was all right and - then s
h
e'd say, oh don't - don't tell my gran I haven't been to school. Well we didn't. Naturally. We only had another girl then, Maude Sexton, her father - her people kept a dairy up there, and she was a madam. She wouldn't associate with any of us, her father 
k
ept the shop, and - she went to music lessons, sixpence a time. And - she was there -- she used to play - play the piano for the marching, when we were drilling in - if it was raining - we had drill in the hall, so of course we used to do a sort of a - se
t dance sort of thing if you know what I mean, not real dancing but exercising t the - and she used to play the piano. I used to pull her hair as I went by.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 It was a Board School wasn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes, School Board for London.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Was it nine 'til four?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
We used to go in the morning - a quarter to nine 'til twelve. And - a quarter to two 'til four, if you were in the lower classes, half past four if - you got up to standard six. And - a quarter to five - or five o'clock if you were in the ex-seventh.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 So it was quite a long day towards the end?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes. And we used to have a - ten minutes play in the morning. And a quarter of an hour in the afternoon for the big girls.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you have a playing field or just a yard?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon? No, nothin
g only - two - very big playgrounds. It wasn't until I was leaving school that we had a net - netball, you know, this - but I was leaving school when they erected those.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you play rounders and things in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No, we never - no, never di
d anything of that, was all a stone - playground, but - we used to have - do - exercises - out there and - then we used to have - in the summer - we'd sit out there and sing songs - There'll always be an England and - and - God Save the Queen and all that
 sort of thing. And - but we made our own amusement. We used to play touch and hopscotch - and then old Mr Ivy, he was the school cleaner - if he found out who did the chalking, he used to report us. You see? So - nobody ever split on anybody.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What did the teachers particularly emphasise, did they have a very strong regard for things like manners or tidiness or punctuality?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh my dear, yes. You - you - that's - my mother used to send us to school with a - I can see my mum now, twelve o'clock at ni
ght - ironing and goffering our pinafores, white started pinafores, every day - we had a clean pinafore on. And my - hair was always - right down - I could sit on it right down in two big plaits with a fringe. But - I know once or twice I went to school w
i
th a - all loose and my teacher said - you mustn't come to school with your hair like that Suzie, she said, because some of the children are not too clean, and she, said, I wouldn't like you to catch anything, like that. And poor Cissy Stag, she come to s
chool, she was - absolutely sent down to the cleansing station, it was a shame though. Because - I mean she was dirty. But there you are, you - you meet them don't you.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Inside the school did it form into little groups?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What three or four kids together? Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Was anybody ever left out on their own, you know, that nobody ever played with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
No, only little Cissy Buckingham 'til - because they - they said - she - she's never had a dad. She - she - of course she was illegitimate you see. A
nd - well those days that was terrible. She was absolutely crushed that girl, and yet - she was - one of the cleverest kids - she did the most remarkable drawing and painting. Oh we used to have painting lessons. Paint maps, draw maps and paint them diffe
r
ent colours. That was what we called science afternoon, sometimes we'd have - all sorts of test you know and - learn - we - physiology, learn about - that's when we got up in the higher classes, first aid, you - if anybody fainted and - what to do if - if
 - anybody fell, always pull their limbs out straight and never move them and - oh we - I used to love that too.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did your parents show much interest in your schoolwork?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh yes, of course they did. Had to - take a school report home, poor Cissy Bu
ckingham never took hers home. She always lost it. Oh she had a sad life that girl. Yet she was brilliant.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What happened to her afterwards?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 She went to work - she went to work at Bradley}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2359735\charrsid5646288 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 s - sewing, first of all she went there picking up pins an
d running errands and then - she was on the machine, working the machine. And the last that we heard of her, after the mother died and the granny died - she was - staying with some people, and - she was a dress designer. Yes. Yes, she finished up well. Bu
t oh she had a dog's life at school. I -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Were there many others like her there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
No, we had another little girl there, Ada Beller, she was a little - sick girl she was never well, but - she - wouldn't go out to play in case anybody punched her, an
d - I think she died when she was thirteen - with TB. That was another only child but she did have a - she did have a dad, only poor Cissy we knew never had any dad.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You say some girls had dirty hair?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You say some of the children were quite dirty in the school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh yes, my dear, the old nurse was there - in - and they used to put oil of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid281643\charrsid5646288 sassafras}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288  on your hair. I can see that - see them - now, the - poor kids, and you keep a mile away from them. Poor Cissy Stag always reeked of it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did the school tend to divide between those who were clean and those who were dirty?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Oh yes, yes, oh yes, you had to have that. And - we had to - when we got into school, we had to take our own duster, dust our seats and dust our desks 'cos 
you sat two in a desk, and - little inkwell each end. And - I suppose there was about - about thirty in a class then. But of course they were - as - as we got up into the higher class the - seventh and ex-seventh were mixed - we - oh I suppose about forty
.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Was it boys and girls altogether?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Pardon? No. Boys - school was right the other side. Then there was the infants school, that was separate, and then there was the big girls school, oh it was an enormous school. But of course it's all new - newl
y built now. It - it faces - you can see it from that road, up at the top. No, we never - going to school and - right until - we were - grown up we never went the other side of the station.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What did the teachers think about things like manners?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Pardon? Not - manners? You had to - had to get up and answer - open the door for your teacher as she came in and out, and - always say please and thank you. And always when we - in the morning we'd go in and sit on our desks and - as our teacher came in w
e all stand up and said good morning Miss Reid, and as we used to go home in the evening, good - good night.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid281643\charrsid5646288 hey expect you to speak the Quee}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 n's English and things like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh yes, of course - of course you did, you didn't have to say ain}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid281643\charrsid5646288 \rquote }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
t and all that sort of thing. And sound your aitches. No, it's - I speak worse now but of course of this impediment, that's - than what I did then, because I - I had a very good voice for singing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did your parents every visit the school very much?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Oh the - the - come to the school? On parents day? Oh yes. They'd come come in and see all the - all the - patchwork and needlework that we did but of course - we - we had to make patches at home, and darning. Darn our socks and stockings. Knit socks, w
e had to knit socks. Knit perhaps the heel of a sock and it would be on a card with your name on it and how many marks you had. OH yes, we all - we had all that to do, but I could never crochet. Knit, yes, I could knit everything.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you have things like school choirs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you have much music in the school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Much what? No - we only used to - oh yes, we used to have a - have a singing lessons - sing old English songs, and - there used to be - harmonizing we used to sing A bow to boat}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid281643\charrsid5646288 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
race in the ferry, and - we would harmonise, I was alto, and - Ada Beller, that little girl that was so delicate, she had a beautiful singing voice, and - she used to sing alone sometimes but - and then there was - about a dozen girls - other - you 
know, used to sing otherwise, tenor or whatever you call it, I don't remember. But - yes, we had our singing}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid281643\charrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
lessons. Piano lessons if you had a piano and you could pay sixpence a time but - that never came - and the funny thing - my boy was three years ol
d - and he'd been very ill - and - he came out of the hospital, he was in there about six months, had whooping cough, pneumonia - and - I think it was rheumatic fever, rheumatism, well he was in Kensington Infirmary there, he was in there a long long time
,
 and he was so think when he came out he couldn't walk, oh no, he was four, four or five - was just before he went to school, and - he was so thin - and his - well I - when I bought him some shoes - we could get them on and off without lacing - they were 
little boots with four holes, you could untie them and - and get them off without undoing them. Oh he went to a living skeleton. Enteritis he had. And - he went away}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid281643\charrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 down to - John Hall Edwards Convalescent Home, and while he was down there smallpox broke o
ut and I had to meet him and the nurse at - at - Edgeware Road Station - Marylebone Station, and - he - wasn't allowed to come home and he went down to - a Nurse Parks - down in Norfolk. Six of them went, and - she looked after them down there. And - then
 
I - my husband and I went to meet him. And we had to - no, we had to go to the hospital, that was right, they were taken back to the hospital and - it - me and my - my husband went to meet him, he wouldn't come to us. He said, I want my dear one. He would
n
't come to us. Well he was so thin, - we - I used to take him out in the push chair and he used to say, mummy, will you - will you take me down the back turnings don't - don't let - don't let the kids see me in this pram. 'Cos he couldn't walk. You ought 
t
o see him now, he's taller than me and - he's huge. And - it's only - of course since he's come home from Africa he's put on a lot of weight. Anyway - this - we had him home, well then I had to feed him on - I had to buy - fish heads, cods head - and stew
 
them - clean them and stew them and strain - the liquor off, and then I used to go to the butchers, Frosts that was down here, and I used to get - fish feet - chickens feet, I had to scrub them and - put them in boiling water and scrub them, and - then pu
t
 them in a stone jar and 'course we had a fire oven, not what we've got now, and - they used to be in there - stewing all day, then at night I'd strain that off, and I had to feed him with that to make a new coating to his guts. All the coating of his sto
m
ach came off. And - after that - he had pneumonia, and I was giving him cold liver oil and malt, and one day - I went to give him his milk, and I put the sugar in it with the cod liver oil spoon, and that child never stopped vomiting and to this day - 'co
u
rse he's had his tonsils out since, but - to this day - he could - he would - if you gave him - well I don't know now he's married but - even when he come home from Africa - he'd always smell that spoon. But - they were very very kind to him, but - he - h
e gradually got on. But it's a -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 When you were at school do you remember if there were any -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 He went to the school round here.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Were there any gangs as such in your school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Any what? Oh there used to be - what, boys and girls gangs tog
ether? OH yes, there would be - the naughty ones my mum used to call 'em. Yes, they used to go - go in Boots and Woolworth}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid281643\charrsid5646288 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 s and pinch things, like they do now. These kids upstairs - two children came here - waiting for that big boy, twelve, he's a little 
beast, and - that lady downstairs had just cleaned all her place out and she - she - cleans it and sweeps the dustbin and polished the lids and everything, she's cleaning mad, well they stole a pot of jam, and after she'd cleaned all down there, they smas
h
ed it on here and - dropped it all on her mat that was out there drying. So I saw them do it you see. So I went out to them. And - I told Mrs Lebbins, I said, it wasn't your kids, I said, it was that boy that comes for - for - for - this other boy, well h
e's twelve years old and - oh - he - if he dare he'd hit me. I spoke to him yesterday. I said, upstairs or out. I said, and don't look at me like that, I said, you're nothing, you're not important to me, I said to his father this morning. I said, no child
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid281643\charrsid5646288 re}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
n's important to me, I said, not eve my own, I said, until they go out and earn their own living, then, I said, I look up to them, but until then, I said, they're under my supervision, they've got to do as they're told, and I saw they did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 So you kept away from these groups at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon? Oh we never had a - chance to go with them.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Were there gangs inside the school itself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No, they were boys about - twelve or thirteen I suppose but - when they went out to - when they - they - whe
n they were about fourteen they were paperboys and - they'd got jobs with a milkman and that, it all seemed to fade away, we never had any trouble, not like there is now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you like school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon? Did I like school? Oh yes. Yes, I hated it be
ing away. But I was very unfortunate at school. I only had one medal but - it - if - if you were regular attendance for - for three years you got a bronze medal. I got two - well they weren't silver - silver plated medals, but I had a prize every - about 
f
ive prizes for regular attendance, but - I never filled the full year in. Because - I - only through illness. But apart from that I never - I - I never had any - reason to be home, only through illness, but - only when my daddy was in the hospital - I had
 to stay home and - look after my two little sisters while my mum went to the hospital with him in the van. That's the only -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 After you'd been in the ex-seventh you went to Southend Technical school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon? No, I went to - I went in - into the -
 I went down to - stay with my aunt. And I had to finish school down there - the end of the high street, the technical school, there - there wasn't any - schools like there are now. You had to - I went to Paddington Tech. First. And then when I was ill - 
I had this - this rheumatism, and - I went down - to stay with my aunt, then I came back again and - and - I did write it all down, the dates, when I had scarlet fever, rheumatism, scarlet fever, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid281643\charrsid5646288 diphtheria}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288  and - started with }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid281643\charrsid5646288 diphtheria}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 .
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 This was in your last year at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
A lot of children had that, and scarlet fever, and then it - of course it left me with all this rheumatism. No - nobody ever noticed about that hand, nobody - never remarked on it, but of course now the blood - won't run throu
gh the veins, that's why I'm getting - that's why I'm so afraid if I were to cut myself or anything you see, because it - the vein - of course I've got ever so much thinner. I've gone from eleven stone to eight stone six.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Just recently?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 In that 
photograph of me in the office I weighed - nearly eleven stone. But of course I was tall with it you see, it didn't show. But - during the time now since - since 1958 - until 1966 I was - been in the hospital - eight times. And if I call my doctor in with
 these legs as they are he'd send me in now, well I wouldn't go. I wouldn't - I wouldn't go in that hospital again if - unless I was - had - absolutely helpless.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Would you have wanted to have stayed on at school if you'd have had the opportunity?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon? What?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Could you have gone on to another school afterwards?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Could have gone back to school afterwards, no, I went in the - I went - in a - a Post Office Savings Bank and - and it was from there that I got this - illness because - the st
rangest thing was this, my eldest brother had six children. Oh he had four then. Well - I was taken - and I hadn't seen those children for weeks. I went into the hospital with this scarlet fever - and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid281643\charrsid5646288 diphtheria}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 , that was the first thing, and scarlet fever
 followed. I - and - I know they lanced my throat from the inside, they - it started with the - quinseys then and then it - they said it was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid281643\charrsid5646288 diphtheria}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 , then I was kept in a side ward, Western Fever Hospital, Fulham. And I'd only been in there two days and
 they bought - my brother's eldest girl in. Two days later, in the same ward, but I was in the side ward, they bought - two more in, a girl and a boy - and - about five days after that they bought my brother in. And he nearly died. And as they sent him to
 - convalescent home - I was in the hospital 'til they'd all gone home, before they sent me even convalescent, because I'd got - rheumatic fever.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did it cost money in those days to be in hospital?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No. No. Anyway - only for your doctor. And - used
 to be a shilling - if you were a - a child and one and six if you were grown up. And the - then the - doctor used to make your medicine up in the - doctor Rennie's daughter used to live in the top part of one of those houses, and she had a surgery - up h
e
re. But she was a - specialist in Charing Cross Hospital as well. But - she had a partner that used to be with her. But that was the funniest thing out, we all - how we were all taken there and I hadn't seen them for weeks and weeks. Because then he moved
 down to - down to - Wimbledon, and of course that's where he died, he's buried in Nelsons old churchyard, Wimbledon.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Was there a lot of illness around in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon? At that time, oh yes - scarlet feber and - that's when they first broug
ht out these injections. A lot of illness. And of course that - that left me ill for a long long time.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You definitely think you benefited from attending school anyway?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon? What in these hospital?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 In just the ordinary school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh y
es, yes. Yes, you - you had to be polite and never - never answer back and never - I - I know one - a - girl came in there one day, and she bought a goldfish, up in Golden Road and she bought it in and put it under her desk, and we were all standing looki
n
g at it. And the teacher came in and she said, sit down. But - none of us took any notice. So she banged on the table, on her desk. She used to sit on a high desk like - they had in these - tennis - places, tennis courts, you know where they sit up on tha
t high desk thing, and - she was a new teacher we had there, a temporary teacher, and - she said - what are you looking at? Anyway this girl brought this little - this little tiny goldfish in a jam jar, she bought it - I think it was three}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid281643\charrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 pence, anyway it died - just after it - she bought it for her little brother. They used to sell - bird food - seed and - bird seed and }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid281643\charrsid5646288 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288  carr}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid281643\charrsid5646288 y }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 away seeds and herbs and all up in Golbourne Road, goldfish - and - fishing rods and - fish bait. I know we used to see the worms 
wriggling - in a - in a tank, eeh. I know we were sitting one day - I never liked winkles and there's a - my - my sisters used to gorge them, we're sitting - they were sitting eating these winkles one day and it nearly made me sick, and I said to my siste
r, do you know what they are? I said, you know - you know what's up in Golbourne Road, up at Clarke}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid281643\charrsid5646288 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
s? So she said, yes. Well I said, that's them without any shells on. Sick. Oh dear. No, when I'm here alone, I live it all over again. I - we were poor - but
 we were never hungry, we never wanted - for anything, because we had no ambition to be rich - no ambition for - only to get on and to love our mum and dad.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You were talking about these rich women in Westbourne Park.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon? Westbourne Grove?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you ever have to curtsey and things like that to them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did what? No, only to a lady that used to come there, she was - a - whatever was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid281643\charrsid5646288 her}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288  name, Lady Montague. My mother went several times to her house, 29 Pembridge Gardens she had a house, a
nd then they moved into a big place somewhere else, and my - they were Jews, and - she - we - what - what - only just used to nod to them as they went by but we used to think they were all princesses - 'cos they all had - not exactly crinoline but bustles
 
you know, beautiful dresses, but - I never wanted to be dressed like that. No. All I - all I wanted to - all I wanted to wear was a - was - a - navy blue bloomers and - and a blouse. I - I - and to run about without a skirt. I always wanted that as a kid.
 
And of course those days you - that wasn't allowed. But then at school - suddenly I - I don't know why it was, we all had to take - take our slips off, and we had blouse and - - these navy blue bloomers, oh I was queen of the earth then my dear. When we w
ere allowed to do that. Yes, so -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 When people talk about life in Edwardian England they talk about a different?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Is what dear?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 They talk about the different groups that were in those days, different classes and things, did you ever think of 
yourself as belonging to one particular group or class at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 A group of what?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you ever think of yourself as belonging to a particular class?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No my dear, we were the rich and the poor, there were no between. The - the - most of 
the girls that - I went to school with - when they were fourteen they were packed off into - with a - with your little basket, two of everything and they went into gentleman's service. We never got that far. We never did that, we - my sister served in the
 
greengrocers, and - the other sister - oh she served in another shop or one or two shops and - well - I was just in the Post Office and - I - I worked - did writing for Madam Collier, I worked in - that - Savings Bank and then I went down to live with the
se - people, these Germans. And I got married from there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What kind of class did they come from, the Germans?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 He was a - a - tobacco merchant from Havana, and he'd got - children at Stuttgart - in - in a college there, and two younger children - 
in a - in Havana, and these two elder children - three elder children were brought up by their aunt, and - then they moved to England, they bought a big house called Clovelly on the Lees at Westcliffe, and through Madam Collier I was introduced to them, a
n
d - I went down there and - lived with them, and - taught them as - much about English as I could, you know the ways and - of - shopping, and - oh - and then my - of course my husband - he wasn't my husband then, he gave his job and he came down there, an
d
 he took a job as a milkman, much to his parents disgust, and - we got married then, from there. And I sent him home with the marriage lines, I didn't come home. And - he work - he worked down there and then of course the - we - came back to London when m
y
 daughter was two, and - 'course the war broke out, she was two years old and the war broke out and of course from then - I worked on munitions and - round at Clement Talbot's on their - aeronautical statistics I was - doing that. Sometime I was there and
 then -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What were you doing while you were at Clement Talbot's?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
What? Clement Talbot's? Oh it was all figure work, all - all - all sorts of work. I got shut in there one night. Over in the - bond - what they call the bond is where they kept all 
platinum - and - all different things and it was a - iron room, right over - on the railway, well on this Sunday, we were in there stocktaking - well a girl I worked with, Edie Liffingwell, I'll never forget that girl - we were working over there with - M
r
 Bond on the bond, and - he went off early, we had our lunch there, we didn't come out - of the building at all, you were searched when you went in, you were searched when you came out. 'Cos there was all platinum and all sorts of bits of stuff - over the
r
e in this iron room. Well - Mr Bond left us, he said, you two all be all right. So we said, yes. It was in the wintertime and it was half past five, so - as we went into the little slip room - of course the big iron room was all locked up, and there was t
h
e anti-room where you hung your clothes up, and a wash basin and that, well - I hung - my coat on the back of the door, Edie hung hers over a back of a chair. So she said, my Frank's coming up for - to meet me. I was living in Chesterton Road then, they w
e
re looking after my little girl. Of course my husband was abroad. And - with his father, in France, so - I said, oh well I'll be all right. Anyway - I heard the door shut, she thought I'd gone home, because - I heard the outer door shut - well - the momen
t
 that that was shut all the electricity was turned off - from the gate, and the - telephone was closed down, you see. And I was in there 'til half past eight at night, 'til the night watchman came on. With his dog. I said, I would have died of fright. Any
w
ay when - Mr Masters his name was, he come round with - his dog, old Nell, and - I called out. Well I frightened the life out of him I think, anyway he rang the man from the gate. And he phoned the police, and - from - Ladbroke Grove police - Nottingdale 
p
olice station two policemen came, and - got me out and I had to see - my boss - the next morning. He sent me home for a week, he said the shock. But of course poor Edie she thought I'd gone, she thought she was the last one out. But I would have been ther
e 'til the morning and - if it hadn't been for that dog. And of course my mother-in-law, she was having fifty fits, she wondered what had happened to me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 How did you get the original job with the Post Office, who got you that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon? Well I had 
to sit for an exam and - I - I can't remember now what I had to do I - I had to sit - sit for this exam and - I passed, the same as I did - up at the - Associated Cinemas, about twelve of us interviewed, I was fifty - and - he said, we'll let you know - }
{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid281643\charrsid5646288 we'll let you know withi}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
n - two or three days, he said, I've got a few more people to see. So he said, how long were you at the hospital? I said, twenty years. And - he said - why did you leave? Well I said, I - they offered me another job when they took me 
out of the laboratory I said, and - I wouldn't take it, I said, I didn't actually refuse, but I said I said that I would be examined - up at the - Westminster, I said - I'll - I - got an appointment up there with this Doctor Davis, so he said, the only wo
r
k that you can do Mrs Freeman, he said, will be - clerical work, because, he said you mustn't go in that laboratory again. There's something you're allergic to, 'cos I woke up in the morning and from there to there my arms were that colour. And it was all
 
swollen and I never knew what it was, I got some germ in me. Well he said, you could - go back in the sewing room. Well, I said, I can't go back in the sewing room, I said, because that comes under a Board of Trade. Well - between the times - the laundry 
w
as closed there, it was bombed. So - for about a fortnight or three weeks - I did all the book keeping for all the nurses laundry. Had to check it all in and check it all out. Well that was about three weeks I did that, and then I - was called up to Count
y
 Hall. I went and saw this Doctor Davis at County Hall and he said the only thing is, he said, will be - that - you'll have to go on the - clerical work. He said, you're a very good writer, he said, and you - you've done lots of work in there, I said, yes
,
 well - considering I kept all the records I said, we only had one technician then, they've got about twenty now, so - he said, what did you do there? I said, I - I said, I did centrafusion and - made capillary for pets and I said I did - all the book - a
ll the - book keeping, the results of post morte}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid281643\charrsid5646288 m}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
 tests and - all in the register. I said, I loved the work very much. But I said of course if I'm not allowed to go in there and touch the specimens and some of 'em are pretty rotten I can tell you - I couldn't do it now.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 That's after the first world war isn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon? 1923.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Before the first world war you did the post office job and then you did the job in Westcliffe?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 And then you did the munitions job in the war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 They're the only jobs you had before the end of the first world war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes, that's all. I went on - when I left the - Clement Talbot}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid281643\charrsid5646288 \rquote }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 s, and - and I moved into Chesterton Road, we - we both - we went on mum - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid281643\charrsid5646288 am}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 munit}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid281643\charrsid5646288 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 ons and then - I don't know ho
w it was, but I had a letter - and asked me if I would go for an interview at Gloucester Terrace, they took over a house and it was to do with diseased - soldiers and sailors - effects you know. And I could - and I was - I was there until my husband came 
h
ome from the war, and he made me leave because his - friends mother had this sweet shop and confectioners, a lovely shop, we did well there, and - I worked there until the shop was sold. The lease run out and the shop was sold, and we moved out of the hou
s
e in Portobello Road, up to this house up here, 297 Portobello Road, and I lived there twenty years. And - my daughter was ten - when my son was born. She was ten years olf when my son was born. And he was eighteen months old when I went to the hospital, 
in 1923 and I was there 'til 1943 January. And then - June - I left there and in June I went - they paid me up 'til June, and in June - I went up to - the Associated British Cinemas, and -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What kind of pay did you get with these jobs before 1918?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What kind of pay did you get and what kind of hours did you have to work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh well I went up to - at the hospital?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No, before the first world war, say the post office job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 About ten bob. And - up at the - when I went up to th
e Associated British Cinemas - the pay was three pound fifteen, and it was only five pound - five pound ten when I left.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 I'm thinking more of the jobs before 1918?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 I'm think more of the jobs before 1918, like when you worked for Mrs Collier?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 For the - for the - yes, I think I got ten bob there. And - and - I lived there lived in there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 With Mrs Collier?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 And the same with the German family in Westcliffe?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes, well it was a sort of a friendly job if you 
know what I mean, it's after I've been so ill you see. And then I went down to Westcliffe, through a friend of Mrs - Madam Collier, I went down to Westcliffe and - she introduced me to the Heikels there name were, Heimphiel, Heimphel, and they lived at St
u
ttgart, he was a very rich man, a very big man and very religious. Oh I was one of the family there my dear, they - and - as we were coming over the bridge - there used to be a butchers cart used to go round, a cart on two wheels, and - like a trap, they 
c
alled it a trap, and the old horse used to go flip-flop and the butchers were Doubles, I remember plainly. Well we saw this right up on the top of the bridge, as we're coming from Holland Park Avenue, I said to my brother, I bet you wouldn't get on that. 
H
e said, I bet I would. He said, I bet you wouldn't. So we both - we both got on that cart and we started it going. We got down to Elvin Crescent, and there used to be a cab rank there, we drove straight into the cab rank - and I was chucked over the - you
 
know, as you go over here there's gardens each side, well I was tossed over in the gardens - and my brother was - was still on the cart, he had a broken arm. I had a - I had a broken nose - I - I could remember having a splint on it. I had a broken nose a
nd a - a fractured knee. That was coming home. And my mother comes - they had me in the hospital. And -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What did she say to you then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 My poor mum, she thought - I don't know, she said, the two of you are - whatever shall I do with you. But - me 
and my Sammy - we - I was trying to find his photo yesterday to show you. But - it must be in the box with - perhaps in the other room somewhere.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 That was your younger brother was it, the younger of the two brothers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 That was one of my escapades.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 When your parents weren't doing any work how did they spend their time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 When your parents weren't working how did they spend their time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 When what?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 How did your parents spend their spare time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 They never had any.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did they ever go out together, in the evenings or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes, I told you yesterday they - they - very very seldom went out unless it was - unless my dad would - go with mum if she went up to Pic
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid281643\charrsid5646288 c}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 adilly where she used to do cooking and Berkele
y Square, or - Holland Park Avenue, and - Camden Hill Terrace - Camden Hill Gardens my mum used to cook - for up there, people that lived up there and Monte - Montefuries lived up there, their - their name was Franklin, and then - I know the elder man die
d
 and then there was Lord Montefury - the daughter was - was - Mrs Macato, and - mum - my mum used to cook there. And - if - mum had to go there for an interview, dad used to go with her, but not after his - not after he was at - accident, he didn't go - h
e - he didn't go hardly anywhere.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Before he had his accident what time did he come home in the evenings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Mm. Well apart from that - apart from that - I can never - I can never remember my dad ever going out unless he took us children. If he - if
 he'd come home - I suppose it was about half past five or six o'clock, I'd meet him at the station - and walk home with him and he'd buy his Evening News, tuck it under his arm and we'd walk home, he'd have a wash and have his dinner. And - sometimes he'
d
 sit and read the paper and - we'd go down in our little room to play, and - but we never - never in the wintertime, we were home from school, we never were allowed out. And it was - in the wintertime I was going down to meet my dad I said - to my mum, ca
n
 I go and meet - meet my dad and tell him what you said, because that was when I had carried me boots to school, so I thought I'd be the first to tell home. My dad put his arm round me, he never said anything. I - I said, mummy's very cross with me. So he
 
said, why? I said - he knew - I said, because, I said Mr Rogers mended my boots and I wouldn't wear them. I wanted new ones. He said, well, he said, you won't have new ones, you'll wear those boots or you'll go to school with no boots or shoes or stocking
s
 on at all. So that was the punishment. He wouldn't have bought me a pair of shoes if he was worth a hundred pounds. So - I had to wear them. But - anyway - when - when we had new - new ones bought - I had just the ones I wanted. I looked at my sister lik
e that. I said, you've got what mum chose for you and I've got mine.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Was that Kit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 I was always a winner.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did your father ever belong to any savings club do you know?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Have I got any savings? No. My - there was nothing - left - when my 
dad died. I don't even - know if he was insured. Oh no, no, when my father died I - I paid for his funeral, I've got the bill at - bill in there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 He didn't attend any clubs at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes, because I was - when my father died I - I was at the shop down in Portobello Road.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 When your father was ill, when he had the operation and your mother went out to cook?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 I can't hear you dear, it's no good.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 When your father had his operation and your mother went out cooking.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Was it the Cheethams who looked after you children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Nobody else came in at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
No, we never had anybody else, no, who - who'd come and look after kids those days? You want to read that little poem, that'll tell you what - we - no - nobody's
 come in and make us a cup of tea. Well, that was our fault. No, nobody - and I know that if we went out to a party my mother used to want to know where we were going - and - who the people were.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Can you remember your mother ever being ill at all when you were a little girl?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Pardon? No, only - I can remember - that - I can remember my mother fainting. And - I went in the room, it was in the evening and my dad was - was bathing her - bathing her head with a wet flannel. And I screamed, I thought s
he was dead. And - he said - the doctor's coming to - tomorrow to mummy, he said, you mustn't worry her. So he said - you children must wash up the breakfast things before you go to school. So - oh we made our beds and washed up the breakfast things and p
ut the knives and forks on the table for dinnertime, but - it was - mum fainted, it was her change of life they said. But - that's the only time - I never remember - never remember my mother - being in bed for a day's illness.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Can you remember when one of your little sisters was born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Can you remember what happened when one of your sisters was born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 I can re - I can - remember - my Kit being born, but - she was born - in Telford Road, 7 Telford Road. Yes, I know my mother had a 
- had the - I had the - the - we had the nurses in because - Doctor Redding came. He was a young doctor then. And his daughter took over. But I can never remember my mother being in bed. I know when - when my Kit was born I can remember looking over the c
o
t to see her, and - well - she was in a cradle, you know, wicker cradle thing what they had those days. And we said, we wonder how mummy got her. And looked down on her. And my May, my - middle sister, she was a lovely person, my Phyl was like her - she s
a
id, we didn't want her did we? She said I want - I wanted my mum and you wanted our dad didn't you? I said, yes, well I said, no, we didn't want her. And we never wanted her and we never wanted her to the end because she was a bitch, she turned out - the 
only quarrel - my mum and dad had was over her.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 When was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Oh - she was - that was a real - a real quarrel, I was married. And - I can remember my mother going and staying with - with my Kit and my dad was alone, and my husband went - and my
 dad came to our place to dinner on that Sunday. That was when I lived in Chesterton Road. But - of course and mum went down to - down to my - went down to - to my brother's - oh no, I was down at the shop I remember. It - it's - going over all these thin
g
s I - one thing comes up before the other. You see, when - when I write these things down - I can remember exactly. No, I can never - never remember see - never remember my - mum being in bed. But I know - I know the baby - was born there because we had a
 
Mrs - Archway - Archer, Archer, that came in - and - looked after - looked after my mum and did the washing, and I know - she - I can remember her saying to - somebody - when I do this washing - I always have half a quarter of gin. I can remember that now
. Yet I can never remember my mother being in - in bed with my sister, and I can remember - all the baby clothes and - handing on a little clothes horse.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did your parents have many friends coming in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did they have many friends? Not - nobody came 
to our house. Nobody came to our house, only - that lady from - who - came from - Brassey's, she was their nurse and then she was a lady's maid. She was with them for donkey's years. And she used to come occasionally to see us. But - no, we - we never had
 
any friends, only an old lady, Mrs Birch used to come from the work house, every - about once a month she used to come to Sunday dinner, and - then my mum used to give her a bag of cakes to take home and pay her fare back, was only tuppence each way, and 
- I can remember my dad seeing her on the bus. But - yes, poor old granny Birch, she used to come with a poke bonnet and a grey shawl. And I can remember her knitting my mum a tea cosy. It's a - a blue and white tea}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid281643\charrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 cosy, I can remember that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did your parents ever go out to visit friends at all?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did your parents ever go out to visit neighbours at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No, I told you that yesterday, no, they never went out anywhere, if - the only time that they ever went out together - was if - 
mum was working late, my dad would go and meet her, and - sometimes they - used to go out shopping together, but after my dad's - accident or whatever it was that caused it, he - we - I can never remember them going out together. We was always at home and
 - dad was always at - at home with us in the evenings when mum was out, and - and Mr and Mrs - Mr and Mrs Cheetham used to be in their room or sometimes they'd be in with us, it all depended.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Do you ever remember being told to call certain people sir?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Do you remember being told to call certain people sir or madam?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
No, only - only - old Mrs Hilbury, this lady up here, we call her - we called her - ma'am, that's all, yes ma'am and no ma'am, three bags full ma'am, we said when we come out.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Who was she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
That was a lady that - I was tossed over the wall - when - coming back from her house. When my brother and I were sent up to take a message.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What happened then, is that the horse thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 And - that's all I know, 
and when - and - when - when - and when - they had a ball - at - at Brassey's, I know I had a - I had a grey velvet frock with a white - coll - collar, and white - white shoes and socks. No, patent shoes and white socks. I can remember that, and a great b
ig bow on my hair, and - after the dinner was over or whatever it was there were dancing, and all round was like a theatre, and the servants were allowed all up there to watch the dancing. And I had a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid281643\charrsid5646288 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288  ice}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid281643\charrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
cream, oh, and a big silver spoon, I thought I was in - Buckingham Palace.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Is that where your mother worked?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 That was the only time - no, I never remember calling anybody sir or madam.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Who would be considered the most important people round here?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Round here?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 In those days, not now?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
No, only our doctor. Doctor Redding and - and - Doctor Hislop. They - they were - they were the only - only people, 'cos Doctor Redding was very very - aristocratic, used to war a top hat, and a - beautiful spoken, and - that's all - we never ha
d any occasion to - all - always at school we used to call our headmistress yes ma'am, and no ma'am, that's all. But Mrs Wilson, we used to say yes Mrs Wilson and no Mrs Wilson, she was the infants teacher, but - not, I don't remember - anybody around her
e.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What about the viar?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh the old Rev we used to call him. Yes, Father Dennison. Father Dennison, Father Tearks, Father Bright, Father George. Father -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did he belong to the reich class?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 They're - different because it followed on over 
there but Father Dennison was very old, he used to - walk with a stick. I must write and ask the vicar - how long that church has been built, I must write him a - a line, and - get Mrs - whats her name to leave it in the letterbox, unless I see him and ca
ll him over.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What about the shopkeepers, what kind of people were they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Oh, they used to be - now - when we lived in Portobello Road there was a row of shops. The corner - was the barbers, Mr Reid, next door to that was the ice cream - shop, and 
they had machines in there and - if my mother thought we went in there we'd get a broken neck. And - they used to put a penny in the slot and win money, and we used to stand looking in the window, and they sold ice cream and cakes, and - lemonade and that
 sort of thing, that was Charlie Rears, and he had a - he used to send out - all these men out with ice cream - barrows, you know, they were all Italians. Next door to that was Miss Drew. She sold second}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid281643\charrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 hand furniture. Next door to that was Sallow}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid281643\charrsid5646288 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 s the bakers. Next door to that was Mrs Hay - Hayward who had the paper shop, Miss Hayward who had the paper shop. Next door to that was Turn - Turni}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid281643\charrsid5646288 s}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 ses was the fish shop but that was opposite. Oh next door to that was - was - Cripps, Mrs Cripps and she had two d
aughters, Grace and Ivy, next door to that was - what was her name, Yonkins or Jonkins, and they - we used to laugh because they had a - lavatory pan in the window and a bath and we used to think that was ever so funny, we had - I always hoped I'd go in a
n
d sit on that and have - and sit on that and have - and they could see me through - through the window. And - they were - builders and decorators and they kept the barrow inside you know, and round into the mews they kept - trucks, you know, what they sen
t out the men}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid281643\charrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 with the ladders and things on, and then at the corner - was - a - a woman and she kept}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 - she sold tea and - cups of tea and sugar and cigarettes and - and - well sort of a cafe, no sit down but - you could go in there and buy a cup of tea, th
e - workmen used to go in there and buy cups of tea. Then there was the mews the other entrance to the mews, which is now all knocked down. And then on the opposite side was a greengrocers named Amsteds, well then - we lived next door but one to that. Llo
y
ds lived in their own house here and then we lived in the next house to that in Mrs Green's house. I can remember that as plain as could be and on the opposite side of the road - there was the - old Mr and Mrs Crump, they used to sell - stale biscuits - a
n
d stale bread, if we ever bought a loaf from them my mum would make you take it back, because we used to get a bit of iced cake for a - for a - a makeweight, and next door to that was the - Dukes Motto, a little - off license, next door to that was the fr
ied fish shop, and then there was a row of houses that led onto Murchison Road, and the rest part of that was Portobello Road that finished up - the next house we moved into. When Mr Green died Mrs Green went back to Wales.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Mrs Green was your landlady was she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
She was the landlady, yes. Only - he was an engine driver, old Mr Green, and he died, a great big fat man he was, and he died and Mrs Green went back to Wales, where she - with her grand daughter. And the house was sold, some people bought 
it named Lovelace, but they wanted the whole house, because she'd - she'd - got girls who used to work for her - doing needlework, you know, she used to have a work room there. Oh and - oh yes, there was one barbers there. There was - another - lady - lad
y
 barber there, ladies hairdresser. I can't remember their name. There was no more shops along there until you got - about three doors from the top of Portobello Road was this old man, Mr Tanner, and he had birds - I - he had pigeons and - goldfish and - w
hite mice.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 So it was nearly all shops and tradesmen round here?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
There was only - only three shops on this side of the road. And then there was the - Guild - I've forgotten the man's name, he had a - a Sunday school and it still is a Sunday school
. It - it was a house, but - there was rooms upstairs and - they had - singing up there and - women's meeting and all that - they were - not Church of England - they - they were - Protestant but - minis - ministers you know what I mean, could - they could
 have been Congregational, I don't know, but they weren't Roman Catholics and they weren't Church of England. Because sometimes the Salvation Army used to stand outside there and play. And that's when I followed them to Shepherds Bush.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did Mr and Mrs Green live at the same house as you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Oh yes, they had the - they - use - you see there was four floors. There was under the grating, there - there was - two rooms - and a big coal cellar under the grating, there was gratings you could look down and s
ee into their kitchen, and then they had a bedroom and their parlour was on the next floor. Well then up - one flight of stairs was the - the - this little anteroom, that could have been a kitchen, but that's where we used to play and the toilet was there
. And then - there was our five rooms upstairs.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Which house is this now, 373, Portobello Road?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon? I can't hear you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Is this the house at 373 Portobello?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No, 373 Portobello Road's where I was born, that was over the shop. I'm talking about - I - I - 407 was that number.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Portobello?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 How did you get on with the Greens, were they all right?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 And then - when - Mrs Green went away we moved up to the top - of Ladbroke Gore and Portobello Road you see, well then of
 course I was away - I was away from there then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you ever have any trouble with landlords?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Any what? Oh no, no, we never had any trouble. The only trouble we had was - Mrs Green if we made a noise in the passage and - he was on night work, y
ou know, sometimes kids go in and out and make a noise. But apart from that no, he was a dear old man, he used to - he used to buy us - he - every Thursday, he used to be paid on Thursday, and ev - every Thursday - he used to send up either a - a - bag of
 
apples that he bought of Amsted's, that was a shop next door but one, that was the only shop then until we got up to Mr - a barbers shop and then a few doors away was only three shops on this side of the road - from the continuation where the Eagle is I'm
 
talking about, and - then we used to - he used to either bring us up a - a bag of biscuits, and - Christmas he gave us a shilling each. Always used to give us a - a shilling each at Christmas, us - us three girls. And of course my Sammy was grown up then.
 And that's when he first went in the Army I think he was about sixteen.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Do you remember Mr Murphy the policeman?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes. Do I remember him? He was huge and he used to walk about at night with this lantern alight - lantern alight on his - hanging i
n his belt, they were - policeman those days, not rashers of bacon like they are now. He was huge. And - they never had any children. And at the top of the road there, that's all parted off, there used to be a police box. And - there was always a policema
n
 on duty there. And when old Murphy was on - night duty - I don't know if they used to make tea there or something, I couldn't tell you, but - we always knew when he was on night duty because he used to stand out - used to stand with his hands like this, 
watching us. He said, where do you think you're going this time of night? I'm just going to see my boyfriend. Get up those stairs before I call you father down.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 How did people get on with him, did they like him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh - he was a lovely man. Well - w
hen they used to lock old Long Neil up, Long Neil his name was, we used to call him Long Nell - about every other week he used to be wheeled up to the police station on this trolly. He was - he was - a nice man if you know what I mean but when he'd had a 
c
ouple of drinks he'd - he'd start sparring about you know. And there used to be a woman go in there - always had a long - skirt on and a white apron, I think she used to work in a laundry, she used to have her hair scraped back, and - her name was Polly s
omething, well - she - when she got boozed she'd fight like a man. She was a terror. But - there was never any - never anything rough - that I can remember up here, no more than there is now. But - everybody knew Long Neil.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Was there anybody in the area that people didn't like, and wanted to get rid of out of the area?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Only - only those Italians. But - in the mews - there was Tubbs the sweep, Hayes, Mr Hayes worked on the railway, then there was a shoeing forge there, we used to love to go in ther
e, Buns and they belonged to the - sins of - Sons of the Phoenix, and - we - we used to watch the band go out from there, carrying their banners. Next door to - next door to that was another sweep. Teddy Gray, and his son has only just retired carrying on
 
the business. He came to us the last time we had a - our fires here. Old Teddy Gray, he was a sweep. Next door to that was - Mr and Mrs Jewel, and - they had a - pony and a two wheeled trap. I don't know what they used to do for a living but they were ver
y posh. And underneath you see the horses were kept. We used to love to go in there and give them a carrot or a crust of bread. Because that was only - that backed onto our house.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You were saying about the Italians.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No, the Italians you see - th
ey had a - they used to make the ice cream, in - in the mews there, and fill the - fill their barrows up - fill their barrows up with the ice cream, but - Charlie Rear was the - name of the man, and - Rosie was his wife and then he had four or five childr
en, and - they were nice little kids, but - these Italian - men, well we used to think they were dreadful. My mother used to say don't - don't you let me know that you've been round that stable again. We only used to watch 'em - make the ice}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid281643\charrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 cream and keep 
turning it round like this, no machine. They used to make it and then they used to sell a - Hokey-Pokey, a ha'penny a lump. Used to - it was like a slice of margarine. But - I don't think they ever did anybody any harm, it was just that my mother knew tha
t they were foreigners and you know what it was those days, if you saw a foreigner. If you saw a foreigner or a black man or a sailor walking along and you didn't touch them, you wouldn't have any luck.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Were there never any sort of trave}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid281643\charrsid5646288 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 ling people in this area of London? Gipsies or people like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
The gipsies used to go by here sometimes with their caravans down to the Scrubs. But - no people came to the door not for anything only - the insurance man or - that's all I can remember coming to th
e door. The insurance man we - we bought all our stuff out - mum used to buy all the dry stuff, the tea and sugar - and coffee and - and - everything on a Friday or Saturday, and then - the butchers - and vegetables and that we used to get in the week. Th
at's all it was. We never had any callers.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Do you remember feeling in these times that your parents had a struggle?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Do I remember what?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Feeling that your parents had a struggle to make ends meet?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Well, yes, when my father was in hospit
al yes. I do remember. Only too much. But - we never went hungry, I know - I know one day - I can remember we had a boiled egg for our dinner, and some rice with treacle on it. And my little sister came - in the other room to us - to my May and me, and sh
e
 said, do you know what? We said, no. She said, we had our breakfast for our dinner didn't we? Because of it - because it was a boiled egg, I can always remember. But we were never hungry and we never wanted, and - what we had was good plain wholesome foo
d. You had suet puddings, dumplings, and if - mum'd make a - a - great - big dumpling and tie it up in a cloth and you had slices of it with treacle on or }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid281643\charrsid5646288 marmalade}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288  or jam, but it was good wholesome food, different to the stuff we get now. And when she used
 to roast a - roast a bit of beef or lamb - or mutton or whatever it was we had, you got basins of dripping out of it, and that's what we used to have in the winter, when we came home from school, a big dish in the fender - dripping toast. Oh we used to l
ove it. But we never - we never wanted for anything. We had clean clothes, they weren't - always elaborate but they were clean and we were kept clean. And we never owed anybody anything.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Do you remember there being a distinction between people who were craftsmen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Pardon? What, people who lived around, any distinction? No, the - either the men worked on the railway or they were dustmen or they served in shops. And there was a sweep - a greengrocers - and the butchers. Some lived over the shops and
 some didn't. Some had stalls and kept their barrows in the - in the mews, if they didn't have horses they kept all their stuff in the mews. And - no, there was nothing - nobody was any better than anybody else, that's that - that's why made us grow up as
 
we are. I mean I - I could - even as a - even as a child I could never understand - why - anybody was any better than anybody else. I mean right from a child I've been like that. I don't know what that was stuck into me but - as it's always said there are
 
always people - who - because of their position in life you're supposed to look up to. But there's nobody better than you, you are the child of the universe. And you have a perfect right to live like that, you're all God's children, and that was stuck int
o me and it is still now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Do you think your parents put that into you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
My parents were like that. There was never - my mother worked for some very very rich people, but there was never anything that they were any better. They were never snobs. Th
ere was the rich and the poor, those days. And most of the kids around - when we were children, as they left school, they were packed into good service - as kitchen maids and - and - and - the boys they - perhaps have a paper round or a milk round, then t
h
ey went to work in shops or - or - dustmen or - or - taking coal round or something, there was - that - that - that was this vicinity anyway. But there was never any - rows or quarrels, only what there is now, only at the pubs and we used to enjoy that. I
t's the frustration of this deafness that upsets me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Do you remember whether it was possible for somebody who was a poor family to get up to be part of the rich, could you move from poor into being rich? Were there people who did that do you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
No, I - I don't remember - I - I don't remember - any - anybody being any - any different from - anybody else, the - the - only man that - we can remember, and I still talk to his daughter because I went to school with then they live in Chesterton Ro
ad, was - when - their name was Butt - Butt, and there were - Mr Butt and his two sons - and - one boy went out into the Army and he lost his arm, he's only got one arm, that boy's still alive, they call him Sparrow, and he lives with his sister, round in
 
- in - Chesterton Road. And - I know my dad came in one day and he said I've just seen Mr Butt and he's been made overseer - in the - in the - Post Office, he's served so many years and he wears a peaked cap, otherwise postmen used to wear funny little sq
u
are hats you know, like a - this - this shape hat it used to be, like that - that - that shape hat you see, just like that. And with a - a peak at both ends, and then - after that of course they had the real peaked cap, but - they used to wear funny littl
e
 hats then. Like the policemen wear today, I think they're ugly with those capes, they used to look lovely in their uniform with all their buttons - still everything changes. Yes, and I - I know my dad came in this night and he said - so mum - my mum said
,
 oh I am glad, Mrs Butt's such a lovely person. She had a crowd of kids, about twelve I think, and - he said, I - I saw Mr Butt, he said, and I shook hands with him and he asked me if I would go in the Eagle and have a drink, but my dad didn't go. I can r
emember that too. As I look back on things those little incidents come up but you can't think of them all at once.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You've told me all about the different jobs you had?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon? Oh yes, I couldn't go all over that again.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 When you did the first job for the post office and the munitions job and the factory you worked at, I forget the name of it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Clement Talbot's.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you have holidays with pay with those jobs do you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 I didn't work at - I - I didn't work there - holidays
 with pay from Clement Talbot's? No, all they paid us for was the - was the - a Bank Holiday, we were paid for Bank Holiday and we got - if we went in stock taking - you got - extra five shillings and - and - a lovely dinner. Those days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you ever work on a Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
That's what I'm talking about on a Sunday when we used to go in there, that's when I was shut in. That was a - that was a - what - what we call now overtime, but - it was a motor works then. I can't rem - I can't remember the name o
f it now, you must know it, down in Barbary Road, great big place there. Pardon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Warwick?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
No, that's not the name, it's - oh - it's absolutely gone from me, in fact my husband's cousin is - is - is one of the - directors down there, I've never s
een him. My son's seen him. Whatever is the name of it. It - Clement Talbot's, they - were - they had a place at Hammersmith, that was the last job my husband had. Ten years after that he did nothing. Nothing at all. And he lost his pension.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What were you paid for the post office job when you first left school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh I can't remember.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Was it very much? Did you give any of the money that you earnt in these jobs before you got married, did you give any of the money that you earned to your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 I gave it all to her, she gave us back what we should have.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 How did you get on with the people you worked with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh, fine, this - this - blind person - is my daughter's - godmother, she - and - she's - nearly ninety, and she comes - they 
bring her to see me, 'cos she can't see and she's }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid281643\charrsid5646288 paralysed}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
, she did all this knitting. Last time I saw her - about - three weeks ago, in fact I had a letter from her - yesterday, and this is a letter from her son who's just joined the boats. He's in the m
erchant navy. He's just - off - I didn't know the name of that boat and - until I looked at it this morning. That's the - years - well over sixty years.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 When you worked for Madam Collier, Mrs Collier, did she pay you or did you just live with her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
I used to get ten shillings and all me food, that was a lot. Those days. I can always remember - it was my birthday while I was there and she said - she went out for the day somewhere, and Mary, that was the - her - head cook and bottle washer etc etc -
 we turned all the room out and cleaned all the pictures, she had - oh dozens of pictures, and when she came back everywhere was shining beautifully, and she bought us each a pair of shoes. Gave us the money to buy a pair of shoes, she was so pleased, we 
t
ook the cushion covers off and washed them, and - we washed and - ironed the table - little table cloth she had, and - oh she had dozens of pictures all hanging on the wall, and - I can remember - I had an old wash leather glove, chamois glove and we clea
n
ed all the pictures, and when she came in she was thrilled to bits, she'd been out for the day. I think that's when she met these Heimphel's, these people who - who - who I - I went away - to - see that - they moved right near to my aunt that they bought 
this beautiful house, Covelly on the Lees, it had three }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid281643\charrsid5646288 verandas}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
 round it. Beautiful house. And of course I - I - went there and I got money and - and - well I lived with them. And of course I got married from there.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did they give you money while you were working there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you get paid while you were there or just living in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Oh yes, I got pocket money while I was there, all I - all I wanted - I mean Christmas time - they bought - a - Christmas time they bought me a coat and - 
and - underclothes - I was like one of their own children. 'Course I had been very ill just before I went down there, then of course - my hus - husband came down, and - he stayed at - he stayed with my aunt and uncle, and he took a job as a milk roundsman
,
 to Suitors, and then we were married and we moved into Seaview Road, Southend. We lived there and - two years then my daughter was born, then the war broke out and of course we came back up here to - to - to my mum's, and - our furniture was bought up, w
hat there was left of it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did your husband stay on as a milkman when you got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Was your husband still a milkman when you got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh - he was - he - he was working for Suitors, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you ever do any evening classes or anything like that for any of these jobs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Did I - do any - no - the only evening classes that I - I ever went to - was - from - from the church - to - two nights a week, to - Tuesdays and Thursdays and sometimes on a Friday we used to go to
 the mission, and - Tuesdays and - was - needlework, knitting - and - Thur - Thursdays was games. And Fridays was - like a Band of Hope. And then sometimes on Wednesday about once a month we used to have missionaries come over there and we used to go ther
e for the evening, and my dad used to come and meet us. That's you - I never went to any evening classes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You never did any sort of apprenticeship or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon? No. No, I - I got in - on me own initiative in the - in the - with t
he marks from school, with - it wasn't O levels or A levels and all that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
You know when you went to Southend Technical School just for the last few months, did you take any exams there or were all the exams done over here?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh - that - that's wh
ere I - that was where I went when I left that school because there was no - places you could go if - if you won a scholarship, you had to go to these technical - places, well - I was only there a little while. And - I can't remember how long, funnily eno
ugh my daughter - grand daughter's living nearly opposite, in Saltram Crescent.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What kind of things did you do at Southend Technical, the same as here?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh I - I - I - arithmetic and - general knowledge and - I think only three months I was there because - I - I - you - you had to be fo}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid281643\charrsid5646288 u}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
rteen before you left, you see, and I - and - I was only about thirteen and a half when I went down there. No, I didn't do - I didn't do anything there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Were you ever a member of any trade union or professional organisation?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Never belonged to anything of that - nor did my father. My father was just a Liberal, we never belonged to anything. Nothing -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Your never father actually took part in any political organisation?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No. No, he was just a Liberal, that's all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you ever feel there were any division of interests amongst -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 As what?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you ever feel there were any division of interests amongst workers in those day, in the places where you worked?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No - what - what do you mean, they - they had a - tennis and that sort of thing, I never went in for anything of that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Do you think there was any difference between those who were skilled and those who were not skilled?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No. I went there as a sorter - and I went - everywhere
 I went I went as a clerk, a cost - costing clerk - at the ABC and - when I did - soldiers and sailors deceased - belongings, across the road, it was - it had been a - Embassy of some sort because it was a beautiful house, but all the - mantel - pieces an
d all the doors were covered with match}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid281643\charrsid5646288 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 boarding, beautiful. And the staircase was all covered.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 When did you do that job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 After I left Clement Talbot}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid281643\charrsid5646288 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 s and I was there 'til I - my husband come home from the war. Unfortunately I - had to leave to
 go down and manage that blooming shop. And that was the final until - I had my son. Then eighteen months when he - he was eighteen months old I went to work at the hospital, my husband - had had this operation, had a piece of his rib taken out.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Do you think that your full time work when you left school and started work changed your attitude to life in any way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon? No, I haven't, because I believe in - living today. And hoping for tomorrow. You see, there's no yesterdays.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You don't think there was any change when you left school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
No. Not - not - not in my way of living. I - I - I've got - I - I've got a - I'm not religious - I don't believe in going to church, I would go if I were well enough, but - I believe in prayer and I believe
 - in - reading Psalms - and - I love - watching the - religious programmes on here. But - I hate any - I hate - blasphemy and drink, the results thereof I - I - I hate that. And - I always have done.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did everybody go to church in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 We
ll most - most people did round here, there used to be the mothers meeting. But my mum never - never had time to go. Used to be the mothers meeting over the church, all the old people used to go. The mothers outing and all that. Only once - only once were
 
we allowed to go to a Sunday school outing and we went - in the brakes to Kew Garden, I think it was Kew Garden so I know the river was running by there somewhere. And - that's the only time that we were allowed to go. But of course as regards school jour
n}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid281643\charrsid5646288 ey}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 s or anything of that then - the only thing that - we went to was two years in succession we went to children}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid281643\charrsid5646288 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
s country holiday fund. That was the only holidays that we ever had. But - we were taken out, we - we weren't kept - we never run the streets, w
e were taken up to Kensington Gardens, in fact we knew all the - all the path there I think, and only - on one occasion - we went up there, there was a regatta or something up there as far as I remember and my dad took - took us, and mum as well, we went 
u
p to the Serpentine, and watched them - swimming and what have you, standing on the bridge, and - and - and we had - we - we had tea there, they - they made tea and - and - I can remember now - my - my mum was saying about how much it cost, only - in a wa
y she was saying - we couldn't always afford to do this or something of that. But we never wanted, we never had drink in our home. My dad used to smoke a pipe.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you still go to church after you left school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon? Do - did I still go to chur
ch? Yes, I tell you on one occasion I went to church. While I was living - with my aunt - we had a - friend come down and she stayed with the people next door, my auntie couldn't put her up. Because she had regular - people living with her, and - a family
 
- and we - there was a missionary that came over from Japan. And he - was at a church in Southend. Well - Gladys - came in on the Sunday morning and she said - will you come to church - with me tonight to see - I've forgotten the man's name now. I think i
t
 was Tomlinson. His - he's come - he - he's been to - Africa and Japan and Holland and - I don't know where he hadn't been, in a whole year, and he was coming back here to see - the Reverend somebody who was his brother or cousin, so she said, I heard tha
t
 we'll go and see him, we'll go to the church and talk, to him afterwards. Well - we're going along, it was beautiful sunshine. I've got a - lovely white frock and all done up to there. We're walking along, and suddenly there was a terrible storm. We were
 
- it was pelting with rain and fortunately - we were pass - just passing the church - on the way to Southend - between Westcliffe and Southend, so we hopped inside the church and the vicar was up in the pulpit - and he looked straight at us and he said, s
o
me people used the church as an umbrella, so we put a penny each in the box and ran out. But he didn't mean it for us. Some people use the church as an umbrella, well - we stood outside there in fits. When we got to the church of course the service was ov
e
r and we went - we went and - in the vestry and we were talking to this Reverend or whatever he was, so - missionary - preacher, so - we told him what had happened. So he said, did you know the meaning of that? So I said, yes. People - go to church - in m
y
 estimation I said to learn something - or to hear something - that - if something bad has happened that - you can protect yourself from it or - or get the help through - through faith. I said, I don't - that's - that's my philosophy, I said, that's all I
 know. Well, he said, it's a very good philosophy in any way. But we never forgot that, the fun we had, when we got back and told my aunt and uncle they were in fits. I was drowned, absolutely. But wasn't it a funny thing, to pop in like that? We -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Whereabouts did your auntie live?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
3 Finchley Road, Westcliffe, turning out of Valcarn Road, two minutes from West - from Westcliffe Station. Westcliffe Station - is here. Down there leads to the front and Colvelly, a house there, coming up here - there'
s Finchley Road - the top of Valcarny Road is London Road. That leads to Southend and that leads to Leigh.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Were you living at home still while you were doing this post office job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon? Oh yes. Yes, that's where I had me first bike and nearly broke me neck.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 When you came back with your husband from Westcliffe?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Oh yes, we lived down - down there for some time, I - I never saw my mother or father - oh - they were - they were - honest to say they were disgusted because - I got married,
 my father wasn't so bad but my mother was very very very upset. Of course I can realize it now but I didn't think I'd done any harm. I wanted him, I loved him and I married him. And I loved him more than - any - any other man. My - they always hoped that
 
I'd marry this Ernie, because his - his - his mother died - she was a widow and she used to go out to laundry work, and he was always in and out of our place, our home, and - he went to live at Bognor, and his uncle died and left him a coal - merchant bus
i
ness, and the next time I saw him I was married - living here - and - he came up to see my mum and he went up to the old house and they told him where I live - we lived, and of course mum had died. And dad. I never saw him any more. He spoke to my husband
 and - 'course they remembered each other from boys.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You say you'd known your husband since you were five?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Five years old.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 He just came from up the road,
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No, we used to sit - they used to live 333 Ladbroke Grove. He'd got a - one siste
r Annie, a brother Henry older than him, then there was my husband, Joseph - with his coat of many colours - he was the biggest devil out, and - that's why I liked him, and - Albert, that's the boy that was drowned, and Will was the youngest.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did he go to the same school as you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No, they went to the Catholic school. That was the trouble.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you save up money before getting married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No, we didn't save much money, we had a few pounds that's all. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Were you engaged before you got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Yes, I - I - I had a - I had a big - gold keeper - ring, plain gold ring. 'Cos this ring was my mother's, that's over a hundred years old. And that was my silver wedding ring, that platinum. All the rest of the stuff I had that was my moth
er's I've given away except that ring, and this brooch - was presented to my husband when he was out in France, with my birthstone in, that's a real topaz, that's all I've got, all the other stuff was stolen what I didn't give to my nieces and nephews.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you have things like eternity rings at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Did I ever have what? I can't - an eternity, ring, no, I had this keeper, and - oh I had a little - gold - I had a little gold - oh I had a signet ring with my initials in, but I bought - my husband 
bought for us both, and it had - his initials, J, on mine and on his - he had S, and inside was the inscription, during the war, 1914, and - while I was working he lost his, and while I was working up at the office I caught it in the - in the - they had -
 
a - to open the drawers - all the tables were green iron and very long and as I went to open this drawer I caught the - caught this ring, and it broke. Well I - I took it off, I left it off and I put it in the box. And - just before - my daughter died - n
o, since my daughter died, I had it mended, because my - Janette, this J - and it's still got the - the - the whole}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid281643\charrsid5646288  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
ring itself but they put a new shank on it, a man round the corner, and I've given it to Janette. Now she's going to save it, but her little 
girl is Joanne so she said, I don't know whether to save it for Joanne or to give it to John. You see? So I said, well if you give it to John - I said - possibly - I said, you've got two nice rings I said, you can save that for Janette. But the signet rin
g, I said, I would like you to give to John. I said when he's fourteen, but I said you please yourself what you do. Well then the last time my brother came up here, my John - I went out - we went out with him and he brought me a beautiful row of }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid281643\charrsid5646288 Ca}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 iro pearl
s in Reget Street. Well I wore them for a long time. And - while I was working up there - I had them restrung and they charged me three pound to restring them and put another gold catch on them. Well I gave those to Janette. In a - they were in a little y
ellow case, I gave them to here, after my daughter died. And - several different - things that I had, but that picture of me where I'd got that - that lovely - brooch on -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 How long were you engaged for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh I - I don't know, he - he bought me this ring I suppose - when he came - down to my aunt's and - about a couple of years I suppose.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Do you remember if your parents helped you in setting up a home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon? No, they didn't. No. No, they did not. My mother and - only - only - only - only
 my John, my eldest brother, he - he came up to see us once and it was on my birthday and he gave me a pound note, or gave me - yes, a pound note, that's all.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did your parents come to your wedding? Who was at the wedding then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Two people came a
 Mr and Mrs Finnimore. Two - the girl - was a - cook, and her husband - was a milkman. They came. I was married in a registry office because my husband was a Catholic and then when we - we were received in the church. And I never saw - I never saw my moth
e
r or anybody belonging to me, only my sister May came down to see us when we lived there. I never saw my mother until - 'til the - my Phyllis was born - in the September, the eleventh of September, and - I never got over that - properly over that confinem
ent, and - in the November - my father came down. And he bought me back to London. My mother-in-law had my baby, and I was three months and a fortnight in St Mary's hospital, was followed by a pupil }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid281643\charrsid5646288 septicaemia}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 , and I was three months and a fortnight in Vic
toria Ward, and they were so ill they baptized my baby in there. And my mother came to see me while I was in there. And she was working then, she was a cook - then for Mr and Mrs Macata who afterwards are - relation to the Franklins - Montefouries, and I 
w
as in their bed, over my bed was the inscription - Lord and Lady Montefouries that was the bed that I happened to be in, because when they knew that I was in the hospital they came in to see me, and my baby was - was baptized in there because they thought
 
I was going to die. And she was three months old then. That was in November. And I was in there - three months and - three months and three weeks. And when I had my son, he was born in St Mary's hospital, I was in St Mary's hospital, and it was during the
 
time that I was in St Mary's hospital - when my - daughter was a baby that my husband moved the furniture up here. Of course then we were all friends naturally. And - and after that - I came out - I - came out from the - I came out from the hospital - and
 - my husband went to work - when I was able to - carry - carry - carry on you see the - the - the war broke out.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 When the war broke out did you go and live with your parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No, we moved - we moved up here to Chesterton Road.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Wasn't there a time when you lived with your parents again?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
I never lived with my parents after I was married. No, there was none of that. You were out and you were out, if you wanted any help or - if you if any - they could do anything, well then - my son was born when my daughter }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid281643\charrsid5646288 was ten, and I was in that press}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
ing shop at that time. I came out of the house one morning to go shopping. And I was knocked down by a bicycle. I was hit full pelt in the stomach as I' - went across the road. Well I had a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid281643\charrsid5646288 
haemorrhage}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288  an
d I went to the hospital. They examined me, Doctor Wilfred Harris was the man, a big - professional - man he was, and he said, would - he asked my mother's advice, if they should take the baby. So - my mother said, no, because the baby was alive. Well - I
 
had to - I had to go backwards and forwards to that hospital every other day - for treatment. With injections and I don't know what else. Well - on the eleventh of August - twenty-fifth of August - my other granddaughter's the eleventh of August, on the t
w
enty-fifth of August, my - son was born. Well - he was born with a broken arm, that was done - he - his arm was - was like that, and I had a terrible confinement. I was put up in the top ward - and - I was in there three weeks - before they left me come o
u
t. Another person who lived in Wharf Road - the back of Paddington Station, her husband was a dustman, and she - was having her second child. She was coming in the hospital to have this baby, and her - other child had whooping cough, so - she sent round w
h
en she was in labour, she sent round to the hospital for the doctors to come out to her. You see? She had her mother to look after. During the time that she was in labour, I mean - I mean this is natural if - you can listen if you like, she was in labour,
 
her husband was at work and her mother was pottering about the place, waiting for the doctor to come. And she penetrated the babies head with a glove stretcher. Well - I'm in the hospital then, I didn't know the woman - well they - bought the woman in and
 
the baby. And I was going out on the following Wednesday. I was - sitting up on the Sunday evening, my husband came in, and - he bought me a big - bunch of grapes, and some sweets, and I said - oh I'll share them round I said, and - there was only four of
 
us in the ward, and - this person that was bought in, she was put in a side ward with her baby, you see, because of the infection, the - her child had had whooping cough, so she was in there, there was a - white sheet over the door, and before the doctors
 
went in and out there, being as it was a maternity ward, Zoonz - Zoons ward it was the name of the ward, in St Mary's hospital, Paddington, look out right onto Prade Street, the balcony did, and - you got - anyway, I - was so excited that I was going home
 
on the Wed - on the Wednesday, my husband bought my clothes and the baby clothes, he went home on the Sunday - evening, and - we were allowed Sunday evening visiting then, and - the - a little nurse that was on, sister was off duty, and we'd all fed our b
a
bies, I breast fed my babies, both of them, and - the - there was a little charge - a little staff charge nurse on there, so she came round to me, and she said, oh Mrs Freeman, she said, will you give - Sandy's mother - has been taken down for a X-ray, so
 
she said, will you give him his bottle? So she put the baby into my arms, and I gave the baby his bottle. She came and took him away - and - I - they bought the supper round, and - she - or the milk rather, and - she - she - took him away and put him back
 
in his cot. In the night I was terribly sick, they called the specialist in. Called the doctor in, they sent for the specialist, I'd got pubertal septicaemia, that I'd caught from that child. I was in there four months - four months and a half then. And -
 
I was - I - I was unconscious for ten days. I don't remember being taken out of that ward, my husband nearly went mad. Well I was taken into the isolation block that looked right out onto the Paddington station, right the other side of the hospital, and i
t
 was all isolation, I was in a little private ward and next door was a doctor that was awarded, he'd had the measles. He used to run up and down the corridor with a - a ty train you know, and - oh we were really isolated there. Well we had the time of our
 
lives when I did become conscious because I had champagne and - the middle of the night when after - night sister had been round, we used to have - sandwiches and what have you and - what haven't you, but they kept my son in there all that time - so I sai
d
 to this doctor one days I said, do you think my baby - I can be taken down to see my baby? So he said, no. So I said, well can you bring my baby up here? No, certainly not. So he said, I will go down and see your son. He said - he wasn't baptized here, h
e
 was baptized over the road, he said, I will go down and see your son, and - I will bring a message back from him. Next morning he came up and he asked me how I was and I said I was very much better. When I became conscious my sister was sitting the side 
o
f me and I thought it was the devil, and I said oh don't - don't sit there looking at me. So - my sister went and this doctor came up to me, no, he said, I want you to sit quiet - quietly, he said and I want you to talk to me, he said, and I want you to a
n
swer my questions, but he said, I want you to think. So - he said I've brought a message from your baby, he is the only boy baby with twelve ladies and he won't have anything to do with them whatsoever. So we had a laugh about that. So he said, now, I wan
t
 you to tell me exactly how you felt, he said - after you'd vomited. Well I said, I just felt - that I'd fallen in the water. But I said, I - I tried to get out and I couldn't because my arms wouldn't move. I said, and - and I said, I could feel myself si
n
king, but I said, the water only come up to here. He wrote it all down. And - I said I could hear the roaring of water but - it never came near me. It was in the distance. - He wrote that all down. And he said - did you have - did you see any vision, any 
f
ace? So I said, no, I said, I looked up, I said, and I thought it was the moon but it was an electric light. And then I said I saw my sister sitting by the side of me. He said, that's when you became conscious. He said, I'll tell you something now, if tha
t
 water - in - your unconsciousness had come up over your mouth you would have died. So he said I've written this all down and it was all printed in the Lancet. So - of course when I came out of the hospital there's me baby all dressed beautifully, and - s
i
ster from the - isolation came down to the cab. And - they all came and saw me off, so - the next day - they said - would you - if you feel well enough, of course I was well because I hadn't been able to get up after that for about another three weeks, so
 
- but they kept me still upstairs, they said, will you - can you come back tomorrow or the next day? So I said, well I must have a day at home, I said, to get - settled. He said, well - can I make an appointment for you to see me on Thursday. And that was
 
his day at the hospital. Doctor Wilfred Harris, a lovely man he was. Jewish but a fine man. So he said, I want to see you, he said, before the hospital committee. When I went in the room they asked me and my husband if I wanted to make any claim because -
 I caught that infection in there. So I said, no, nothing at all, I said, I am only too grateful that I'm able to go home with my son is perfect, I'm feeling well, I said, and my husband had got a job and - I said, I don't want to hear any more about it.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 How did your husband manage while you were in hospital?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh he was round at his mother's in Action Road, that's where she lived. He was round there, backwards and forwards.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What about the time you were in hospital with Phyllis for three and a half months?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
I wasn't in hospital with Phyllis, I - that's what I say, I had her at home that's how I got this blood poisoning, from this dirty old woman. She - I wasn't washed clean and I didn't know anything about it. What could - that's when Phyl
lis was born. And that's ten years after I had Bernard. But - Bernard was born in the hospital. But it was nothing to do with the accident, that was - I mean he was born perfectly - in - in - sight and hearing and everything, only that he'd got this twist
e
d arm. 'Cos that was done through the accident you see. But if my mother and father had consented - they would have take - taken him at the seven months, because they - they didn't know whether he - he'd be born paralyzed or anything, but I knew he was al
ive. So - that's how - how he was born.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You say you breast fed both the babies?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 So - I never wanted any more babies after that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You say you breast fed both Phyllis and Bernard?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 I started to breast feed Bernard but of course when - when - I came out of the hospital - he was put on Glaxo.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What about Phyllis?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Oh yes, I - I - well Phyllis was ten years old. No, I fed her - and I had a - a Jewish doctor, Doctor Midgeley Reeves he was, and - he - he came in and - at the confinement
 and Mrs Glews, that was the landlady of the house, and it was her mother or mother-in-law, she used to go round look - looking after people who had babies. But - she was - oh she was a horrible dirty old woman.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you enjoy feeding Phyllis?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Well - it was natural, I mean there wasn't anything - to - to go against it, it came to me as a natural thing.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 But apparently quite a lot of people used a bottle even in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh no, I never - my Phyllis never - never had a bottle, I - I fe
d her until she was nearly nine months old. And my boy walked at nine months, my husband had had this operation, they'd taken a piece of his - piece of the rib out, he had it in a matchbox for ages, and - that's where they found the cancer when he died ye
ars after.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you ever have any difficulties in breast feeding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon? Diffi - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You didn't get advice off anybody?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Never had - any trouble at all, and - of course this poor little nurse, she was reprimanded but it wasn't her fault
. I mean she was only sent up there to help with the suppers. But - of course we could have made a lot of fuss but I was only too thankful to - to be there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 If Phyllis was asleep would you wake her for a feed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What when she - when she was a baby? I - I can't remember.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 If she cried before the normal time would you feed her then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
I - she - was a baby - that was born - I fed her - at certain times, she was a baby that hardly ever cried, and she was a lovely person until she died, she neve
r caused me a moment's anxiety, only when she was ill. I never had any worry at all with her. And a person who came in here yesterday morning was talking about her. She said, I'll never forget the day of her funeral. They all used to joke together, Mary P
e
arce and this Gill - they're married women, live along here, they always used to joke together, and - she said, it was the greatest surprise in my life, she said, when Phyll died. I said, it was to a good many people. I never had any trouble with her and 
I
 don't think in all the years - I had her she ever answered me back. If I told her to do a thing, she would use her own discretion, she - if she asked me anything I would tell her, to the best of my ability, and apart from that - she used her own discreti
on and she - as she did with her own children. I -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 When you had Phyllis, you had her at home, that was in Westcliffe?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 And you had a nurse?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Yes. And the doctor. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 And this old woman?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Well, this was - it was this woman
 who came - came in and her daughter, Mrs Glews used to come up and - and cook the food although my husband used to - do that, he - and - the old girl used to do the washing. And - the baby's nappies and that, but - of course I only had the doctor to the 
confinement. I - didn't - didn't go in hospital those days. 'Cos they had the nurses all round here, the same as they did, but I had my boy in St Mary's hospital, because of the accident.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You got this disease and you had to go into St Mary's hospital?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Pardon? When I went up to - after - for three months I was ill down at - down at Westcliffe, and - and I saw the doctor down there, and he just gave me tablets and that, but - and - medicine because I was sick, I've forgotten his name now, Doctor Reg
 or somebody, and - my father came down and my father bought me back - home, and the next day I went to - St Mary's hospital, and they kept me in.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Where did Phyllis go?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 My other-in-law had her, I told you, she had her all the time. She had all t
he time that I was in there, when - when I went in there she was four months old. September, October, November - no, November I went in, August, September, October, November, three months old she was and my mother-in-law had her all the time, and my husba
nd used to go there for all his food.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Wouldn't it be dangerous to breast feed the baby?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
Pardon? I didn't - I didn't feed her after that, I only - only fed her for the first three months. But - it didn't affect her in - in - any way. Because my mo
ther in law put her on cows milk and barley water, that's what she was brought up on. But my son had Glaxo. Milk and - and - and - cows milk - milk and barley water and - groats and - that sort of thing she was fed on. She wasn't fed on the stuff they giv
e kids now, cheese and all that stuff.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 When did you wean her, how old would she be then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Four month.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 To go right back to the wedding when you first got married, you say that your parents didn't go to the wedding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No, we went - we - we
 - we bought the - we bought this - this - furniture that we wanted, it wasn't much, it was - we had two rooms, one was a - we had a kitchen table and some chairs and - in the front room we had two armchairs and - and a bed and wardrobe and a chest of dra
wers and - that's all we started with, but we done - we didn't owe anybody anything, we bought those.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 What about his parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No, they never came near, never saw him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 How did you get on with his parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh I got on very well with them because I'd spent so much time with them when I was a child.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You'd been going round there since you were about five?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Oh yes, right - we - I was always in their place, he never - he never came in our house, not for - not until - oh, we was grown
 up. My father liked him and - my mother didn't dislike him but - it was - it was the difference in the religion. And his people used to drink and - and - that was the only difference between us, we - we didn't - the parents didn't agree. But it was a -

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Who were the Finnimores?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Finnimores were the two people at our wedding.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 How did you meet them, were they people in Westcliffe?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No, they lived in Southend, she was a cook and he was a milkman. That's how we met them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 How old was your husband when you got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 We were both twenty.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Your husband's job was a milkman when you got married? What did he do before he became a milkman, what did he start off as?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Before he got married, he was a painter and decorator, and - m
aking loose curtains and covers, upholstery and - he was an art decorator entirely. He made loose covers and curtains and - and - moulding of - that lovely over - mantel I've got in the other room he made. Like - what I want - my grand daughter to have wh
e
n I can get it over there. But with my - grandson with - with my daughter's husband - granddaughter's husband my dear - God help her. I wouldn't - I've asked him to come over and get it, no, I'll have to pay for it to go over there, they won't - come and 
fetch it. Still I'm not worried about that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 He carried on this art decorator work all his life really?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon? Yes. Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 He loved that work did he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 He didn't - he - he didn't start work for - for Sir Edwin Lutchensuntil - we came
 back here - and lived in Chesterton Road, before we went down to the shop. Before that he worked for - different big firms in London. For - I can't remember who he worked for now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did you ever punish Phyllis when she was naughty?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did I ever what?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 You say you never had any trouble with her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 No. I can't remember ever slapping her.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 How much did your husband have to do with the children when they were very little?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon? Oh don't talk about it, God Almighty, the grandchildren 
and all. We never got a look in. With - my two grandchildren, especially that - eldest one. He - he made a god almighty of her, he used to take her to school and bring her home and - while the war was on. And - we left her down at Cambridge, with my - son
-
in-law's - cousins, and - he was missing all one day, and he - went down and brought her back, she went to school down there and he went and brought her back. He said, your father - your father's in France he said, and - you should be here with your mothe
r and your grandmother so that what - that's what happened.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did he ever help feed or bath Phyllis?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Only the boy. My son, not the girls naturally.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did he ever help get them to sleep or anything like that?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Did he ever to help to get them to go to sleep or sort of lullabies and things like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
No, I mean they - they lived in their upstairs - they had the flat upstairs and we had a - the flat - below, he - he - didn't have anything to do with them only to meet them fro
m school. And all the time they lived here, when my son-in-law come home from the war, I never went up in their flat, only when I was invited.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 I'm thinking more of your actual children.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 Pardon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16392069 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 I'm thinking of your children before they grew
 up, Bernard and Phyllis as children, did your husband have much to do with them in the way of -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11557774 SF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15806095\charrsid5646288 
No, he - no, I - I don't know quite what you mean, I - I mean - I always - I always bathed them and fed them, he used to bath the boy and - cut his hair and all that, but - apart from that I always looked after them.
\par }}