{\rtf1\adeflang1025\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\adeff0\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang2057\deflangfe2057{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}{\f38\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f39\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f41\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f42\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f43\fbidi \froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}
{\f44\fbidi \froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f45\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f46\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f48\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}
{\f49\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f51\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f52\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f53\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f54\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}
{\f55\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f56\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden 
Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs20 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}}
{\*\latentstyles\lsdstimax156\lsdlockeddef0}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid673232\rsid2709823\rsid5717842\rsid6824658\rsid8277702\rsid13064017\rsid15680758\rsid16406559}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 11.0.0000;}{\info{\title Information about interviewee}{\author SEENU}
{\operator lhorto}{\creatim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min9}{\revtim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min9}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords11217}{\nofchars63937}{\nofcharsws75004}{\vern24613}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 http://schemas.microsoft
.com/office/word/2003/wordml}}\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1800\margr1800\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0\ltrsect 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\donotembedsysfont0\donotembedlingdata0\grfdocevents0\validatexml1\showplaceholdtext0\ignoremixedcontent0\saveinvalidxml0\showxmlerrors1\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace180
\dgvspace180\dghorigin1800\dgvorigin1440\dghshow1\dgvshow1\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\splytwnine\ftnlytwnine\htmautsp\nolnhtadjtbl\useltbaln\alntblind\lytcalctblwd\lyttblrtgr\lnbrkrule\nojkernpunct\rsidroot8277702 \fet0
{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}\ilfomacatclnup0\ltrpar \sectd \ltrsect\linex0\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ltrpar
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid673232 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\ul\insrsid673232\charrsid16072257 Information about interviewee}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid673232 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid673232\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tx2057\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid673232 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid673232\charrsid16072257 Date of birth}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid673232    
\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid673232\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid673232  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6824658 1898}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid673232\charrsid16072257 
\par Gender}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid673232           \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid673232\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid673232  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6824658 M}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid673232 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid673232\charrsid16072257 Marital status}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid673232 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid673232\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid673232  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6824658 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid673232\charrsid16544153 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid673232\charrsid16072257 Occupation}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid673232 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid673232\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid673232  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6824658 Farmer}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid673232\charrsid16072257 
\par Geographic region}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid673232 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid673232\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid673232  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6824658 Kelvedon, Essex}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid673232\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\qj \fi-490\li518\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin518\itap0\pararsid673232 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 We were - it was early morning, eight o'clock. What - no, it was a little later than that in
 the day, anyway the schoolmaster came - you - you are playing this again? And - why didn't you tell me you was going to leave school Hugh? I said, I didn't know, I thought I was coming back. Well, he said, you can't - play ducks and drakes and come and d
o
 as you like - with school, you either come to school or you leave. So father says, well you've left then boy. And the first job he gave me after - coming back - put a fork, manure fork in me hand and there was a bullock yard where - the bullocks were out
 to grass, he told me he said, throw that up - into a - a big pile. And that's as I've said before, it broke my heart, then any job after that it didn't matter. Now then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 What did you go on to do then after that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 It - it was seasonal work all the
 time. We had - one man with us at the time. Which he was getting - nine shillings a week. And he lived in the cottage - adjacent to the farm, and he used to plough and - harrow and everything else that was attached to the farm. And I used to help my fath
er - to - generally feeding stock and looking after a few chickens. And then a few - few years time after that - we had a horse, and I used to go to Braintree market, once a week which I've been doing now for - fifty odd years I suppose.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Did you go with your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
No. No, he - I had to go on me own, take pigs and - seven or eight. When you get there - go and see the butcher Mr - so and so. I said, all right. Tell him where - where you are and where the pigs are and - all about 'em. And of course
 pigs at that time of day were - very low price, in the region of - eighty four or eighty-five shillings, eighty-seven shillings each. And if we got nin}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8277702\charrsid5717842 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 ty, we - we thought we were doing well. Then we - had to take - the corn off the farm to the miller and
 have it milled and - go and fetch it when it was ready and take another load. That's how we kept on and on and on you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Where would you take the corn to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Appleford's Mill at - Little Coggeshall or else to - Richardson and Preece at Witham - 
they were - they used to mill it for us, and mix it. We used to buy wheatings to go with it of course.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 It was just you and your father and this one man?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Yes. We had sixty acres then. Yes. Well sixty-three, father would always have it sixty-three
. And - 1913, when - Lord Weston - he run through all his money as we understand - the estate was put up - for auction - and - Smiths Farms Limited, which is a neighbour of ours - bought - a lot of the estate, including Allshots Farm. And - Mr Smith came 
to see my father, so he said, Mr Smith, he said, you'll have to buy your farm 'cos I can't pay for the - other unless you buy yours. So he - he did buy it - about one thousand - five hundred pounds - sixty-three acres.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 He would be one of the first farmers round here to buy his own land then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
One of the first. Yes. Yes. And of course we've been in here, my father bought it and I've been here - I'm seventy-four, and I was - born here and I'm here still, at the moment.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Did you have any brothers and sisters?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
I had four sisters. One - two, three - three alive, and youngest one of all - she died, she lives at Lowestoft, and we lost our mother in 1908. Father had - several housekeepers. And - until one of the girls got - left school and they -
 did their best for us. That's how we carried on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Did they help on the farm?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No. Nothing - nothing at all, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Not feeding poultry or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No. Nothing whatever, no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8277702\charrsid5717842 Were you keeping c}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 ows?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No, we were only keeping pigs and poultry at the time. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 So what did they do as they came of age, the oldest one became the sort of housekeeper?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No, the eldest one - she didn't - stay with us. She went off - when the time came - for her to leave school she w
ent off - in the - Women's Army. She's never been back here since. That's not quite the truth but - that's near enough for - anybody else. Then the - second one - she was taken over by an uncle, lived at - in Surrey. And the third one she lives at Kelvedo
n now, she looked after me father all the time with us. Father went to Kelvedon - and lived there and - she's there now. Well - now - this old boy that lives over there, you - you'd like to have a work with him. Very Essex, he -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 So your father was here, was his father on this farm?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
No. No, my father was a Scotsman. And he came down in - 18 - 96 I should imagine. And - took over this farm. At that time of day - he was the only farmer round here for - several miles. This one over here, two hundred 
acres nobody - one at - over there, what we call Strips is nobody. All this }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8277702\charrsid5717842 land here all the way round thes}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
e woods was all - dormant and - and - brambles, and thousands and thousands and thousands of rabbits, and as I said, Lord Weston - had to sell up be
cause he got short of money. And - five or six farms that I could tell you of were absolutely empty, nobody in 'em at all. Nothing - no farming whatever. 'Cos then they had the - well they had the corn - the corner we have - 1898 or something.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 How do you think your father managed to make it pay where the other people couldn't then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
Worked like hell mate. He went into all sorts of things, I've known him to - he thought he'd grow some seeds, because he was in a seed business in Belfast, when he - a
pprenticeship. Thought he'd go in for growing - seeds for Mapleseeds. At that time I had an uncle living at - Marks Tey. And my father used to - walk down to Kelvedon station, which is three miles here - that's across the fields, pick these mangold pla}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8277702\charrsid5717842 nts up and went back and bring th}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
em home and plant 'em the next day. That's how he managed to make a start. He paid half a crown an acre after three years, so - he charged no rent at all for three years. Then charged him half a crown an acre.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Was he married when he came down here?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
No. He married a - Suffolk lady from - farm in - near Woodbridge. A little short woman - he paid her - take - took after her. But - she was one of a - large family, and her people were farmers. And my father's people were -
 being Scots they went in for milk.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 But he didn't try that here?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No. No. He used to do the early morning milk round but - with his father.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Did your mother ever do a job do you know?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Before she married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 She thought she would and then they - they went broke, it was \{BLANK\}
 you see, he lost everything. The men turned up on Monday and - Friday he said, can't pay you, I've got no more money, the bank won't let me have any more. And - he sold up everything, had a - far
m sale you see - but I don't think father belonged to them, 'cos I don't - I never knew. Anyway they - managed to scrap along by - don't know what they did do.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 It must have been a real struggle then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Do you remember feeling as a child though that they were having any difficulty or was it past the worst?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
I - was sent to Parham when my - first sister was born. And I thought everything - down there was absolutely - wonderful. They all had plenty of milk which we never had here. And 
- eggs and - bacon to eat, which we didn't get here. And - 'course I - I - being young I didn't understand - the next thing you see there' was a farm sale and - everything went. Gone west. Yes. I don't think there's much else, we used to go from year to y
e
ar, of course the 19-28, 29, 30, that was bad, we thought we'd finished here too. We got down very low. But father - buying the farm, we used to pay him the rent. And I got so as I couldn't pay that. So - he didn't make any fuss about it, but - you see, 1
9
14 - 1914, yes, 1913 - '14 - we sold our barleys at - thirty-four shillings a hundredweight. And the next year we sold it for two hundred and thirty-four. And beer was no dearer. And nothing else was much dearer. But - and then - and then the - of course 
we all got - shy don't - why wasn't they give us two hundred and thirty-four a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8277702\charrsid5717842 nd no extra on the beer and etc}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 etera, e}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8277702\charrsid5717842 t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
cetera, because - but of course that wasn't long - in 1914, 1915, '61, we were getting low of food. And - if you - thrashed - twenty, thirt
y, forty, fifty, sixty and a hundred or two hundred quarter of corn - you mustn't touch it. It had to go - of course that's before your time. Just a little.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 When did you take over the farm then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 1919. Mm. So my dad's not hardly - applicable. It 
should have been - 1919/1920. That's when things began to improve. No, 1914, that'd be '15 and '16 when we sold our barleys - at the two difference prices. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 What did you grow on the farm then at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Oats. Beans. Wheat. Barley. And we u
sed to also used to grown some mangolds if we thought we could. And potatoes, we've always grown potatoes }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8277702\charrsid5717842 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 ver since.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Would you get any help in for harvesting?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Oh I had - my wife's - father was - on the retirement list and - he had a friend - oh
 we used to get an awful lot of help. Mm. Harvest time.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 From friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Yes. Yes. Yes. But of course we had to pay one or two extras harvest time, certainly.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Where would you get the ones that you paid from, where would they come from?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Well - to be exact - you see it was a long time ago - they would probably have come from Coggeshall anyway.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Local anyway?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Yes, that's - that's where we used to tap our labour when we wanted some. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 You were talking about how you went to t
he market for your father, would you talk to the other farmers there and find out how things were going with them and so on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Well - being a bit of a boy - when I first started - I didn't know much about markets at all, I had to find my way all the wa
y through. There's one gentleman there - name of Wright - oy boy, come here. So I went over to him and he said, what's this? You know, on the side of my face, I hadn't shaved then, and he - he went like that. Oh, I said. He peeled the - hair off the side 
o
f my face. He said, don't you come here next week, he said, 'til you have a shave. So I - I - that time of day they used to have the stalls - anyway I bought - a safety razor and six blades for half a crown, which I thought - you know, I can't afford half
 
a crown, but anyway I had to afford it and - and went upstairs and - on the quiet and shaved. On the quiet. Mm. But - we didn't grow - anything, that time of day - the quantities that we grow today. Nothing in - oh about half. And we had to thrash of cour
se you know by - a thrashing machine which we made stacks and - stack it and - thrash it by the machine.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Would you employ people form elsewhere to do that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Yes, they used to bring the people with 'em chiefly. Yes. Send seven or eight. Mm. Used to
 take us about - five days. To thrash - thrash it all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 The people who owned the machines employed the men?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 What about thatching the ricks?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Sometimes - we managed to get over it, but we very often thrashed in - October - whic
h was one - one of the best months that we could think of and we'd got the money to use. If not, if we thought we'd use - leave it until the spring it - employ a thatcher. Mm. Of course, being - thrashed - we used our own straw. And - was no difficulty wi
th straw but today you can you have the thatch but you can't get straw from anywhere.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 And there was a regular man you used for that was there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Oh he used to travel from farm to farm. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 What about ditches?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Oh we used to do one 
a year. Thrash off the - sides of the ditch and - clean one a year and - see that them old drains were all - running. Father was a great big drainer, he - he liked to - get the water off. But - since then - since the war's been here this time - the airfie
l
d has been here we've - blocked the drains that - pole through and - they filled in the ditches, they cut all the trees down. And - acres and acres of concrete. So that some of the draining has got a little bit out of - order, but we have had some - more 
done since this war. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
Do you think at that time before the first war that farmers were proud of the way that their farms looked? Like the hedges and so on, or did they just let them grown?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Let them grow, chiefly. But you - you - if you go back
 to - 19 - 'course I don't know much about thirteen, but - if you go back to - in the first world war, there was no money - no money at all. I know I used to have other boys - clothes on that they'd - run out of but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Did you never get a new suit then as a boy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
I had - one new suit when I was - thirteen. And I went to a - to the Kelvedon tailor - and - he was looking for me anyway. He said, you know, you're young Smith? Yes. They tell me you want a new suit? Yes. Well I had this suit measured and
 - that's when I was thirteen, I don't know what it cost. He made the suit and I - felt big as a - the biggest lord. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 But before then you just had these hand-me-downs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Yes. Oh, anything that - been made up of - something lese.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Did your mother make clothes then for you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No, she died in 1908, I wasn't very old was I? Mm.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Who would make them - then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 I suppose she did, but - I never knew.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 After she died though would it be the housekeeper or your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 After - t
he housekeeper was no - needlewoman. That's my wife other side and that's her sister. And they had some people in Kelvedon. Two lots had an only son each. And - they used to pass these things on to us, very very nice that had - that acted very nicely. \{
BLANK\} One was a - a builder. The other one was a - blacksmith. And - we had our clothes like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 You felt they were better off than you then at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Oh - we were not in the same street. No. Others helped us a lot with - improved a lot but 
- you get talking Geoffrey and see what he knows and I daresay what you are. We're not - anywhere like it yet. I'm all right, I've got the old age pension and - and - we live here, I intend to live here. My father passed the farm on to me when he died and
 - I shall do the same for the two boys.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Was there anyone else who helped in the house besides the housekeeper when you were a boy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No. She did - well we only had this room, that room, two upstairs, we only had four rooms. All she did was cleaned and cooked, that's all.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 The other room was a kitchen at that time was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
There was no room there. That was blank. And this one here was - was an outside place nearly and truly. This room was - had got - that window there got slats in. Which - 
years and years ago they made this into the diary. We used to have a bench - went right along there, we used to keep - the eggs on it and - odds and ends on it. And this house now is half. The other half - during the depression in the '80's was allowed to
 
go to pieces you see, and - when father came here - the - the estate agent said, what - what do you want Smith? Says, what we want to do is pull half of it down and see if we can make the other half so you can - have a room to sleep in and somewhere to ea
t and drink. So actually that's what they did do.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 So they just had two bedrooms upstairs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 You used this dairy room not as a living room at all?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 In the summertime they used it as a living room. And in the wintertime when it was cold we had to go in there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 So you just really had one room in the winter to live in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Mm. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 It must have been a bit crowded for the sleeping arrangements then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 See the four girls were all right weren't they? But - no, because - you se
e - father and I had the same bedroom. And then there was the - the other - sister - all sisters, I ain't got any brothers, so they - they slept in that room, and the housekeeper.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 She never had a day girl or anything like that in to help?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No. Sh
e would - we used to go outside this - this was - this was the - kitchen door, the end of the house, used to walk along here and outside the hedge was the road, we went down - seventy, eighty yards turned left we'd another - hundred and twenty yards, turn
ed right and went another - two hundred yards before we got off the farm. Was all road you see. Mm. We had to keep this road up, and main - maintain it as best we could.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 The housekeeper would do all the washing for instance would she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No, she - no, she didn't do it all, she - we had an old lady come from - next farm used to come once a fortnight - and wash. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 You had well water too I suppose?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 We had a well. Yes. The first - the first - go off - elm - an elm pipe, you know, down - one 
on top of the other. And then we had, after - they couldn't keep the water in it so they - said well you'll have to have a - a well, so we - put a - cage on the top, and we had a chain and a bucket. Go and get a bucketful when they wanted it. Very handy, 
right close. Send away and - milk we had to go - we had to have skimmed milk, and - we used to go to the next farm for that. But he was in that farm before we came here, the next one.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 You would have to do that before you left school would you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Oh yes, when we came home from school had to pass the farm you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Were you expected to do other things before you left school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Oh yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 What sort of jobs did you have to do then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Well, if you - know, if you've got a yard - of bullocks
 - you'll always get one that wouldn't come and feed. Or perhaps two. Well, if they didn't feed - they didn't do much good did they? Well any rate - it was my job to - see that - master bully didn't turn - turn them off and they don't feed, that was one o
f the jobs I did. But - keep the boots and shoes and cleaned, get the - getting me breakfast, we had to be away from here at eight o'clock, ten to eight. To walk there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 You walked all the way to Coggeshall?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No, Kelvedon. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Would the girls have had things to do in the house too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
Oh they all had to help. But - get the children - get the child out of bed and get their breakfast into 'em and all out. All out for ten minutes to eight.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 You had to help look after your sisters then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
Oh had to - muck in all the way round as well. But I was outside mainly. Let them - when I came home at night I used to - collect the eggs all round the farm buildings. I had rabbits on the sideline. Which I never would make very good at all. 'Course I'd
 been through 'em all with ferrets and - one thing an another.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 You kept ferrets yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
Yes. Oh we used to go rabbitting quite a bit. Get sixpence for a rabbit. Yes. Then pay commission if you took 'em to the market. Oh there were hundreds and
 hundreds and hundreds and there were thousands and thousands of rabbits. This wood now has been - practically taken out and they've just left a little bit like that and a - little bit like that, a piece - say like that, to hide out their - so the Conserv
ancy Board wouldn't - make a noise, not quite so much. Farm labourers bit in the middle, you can see it from here. That was all wood. All right close.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 That's where you got the rabbits?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 They used to come out at night you see, you used to grumble a
nd complain to the - well we had - once upon a time we had four gamekeepers, and we used to complain to these gamekeepers what you - can't you get some of these rabbits? When the rabbits come over out onto your place they're your rabbits, they're not our 
rabbits. There - therefore what could you do, I mean you couldn't - you'd hustle 'em back they'd be their rabbits again but they - they'd come out again before morning.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Did you use nets to get them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Nets and ferrets, you know, put the ferret in 
- into the holes and - if you didn't miss any - any holes you'd caught a rabbit. Perhaps two or three, perhaps four time - sometimes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Did you do that by yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No, I used to have some mates - was better man than I was at the job and - we used to get out - Sundays and - nights.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Where would you have met them, at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
Yes, from the next farm there were - when I went to school most of the time were - eight children. And then we used to pick them up from this farm where I was telling 
you that chap was in, used to pick them up from there, and down the cottage just down at the bottom here were three families there, and - three or four houses towards Kelvedon, used to pick us all up and by the time we got to Kelvedon we were a muster of 
about thirty or forty. Now - I don't think there' more than three.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Is that boys and girls?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 You didn't mind the girls joining in then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Oh Did all sorts of things, go scrumping - picking violets and - and - you know, on and off
 with each other and - one lot were - from the church and the other one was the chapel and - snow time - that was terrible.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 They used to fight each other, the church and chapel?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Yes. Used to fight like mad. Mm. I remember one night they were com
ing home and - we were getting the best of it anyway that night and - the old road man busy away scraping away the snow. All I was going to say was that - these Scotchmen came down when - when - the corn prices were so poor, that they had - they couldn't 
pay their wages and this Scotchman came round at time and took over - milk, and preserved with milk - for a long time, and beef. And eventually the - corn came back and - he got onto corn.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 That first one of Mascots was your father's brother wasn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 My uncle. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 He tried the dairying?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Yes. Too dry.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Did he come down before your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Yes. Several years. But - my father lived here alone for - you know, for or five years. Lived on his own and - catered for himself. And - 
he went to - Mascots and saw my mother there and - made a job of it there. She was only a little woman, that high, she was as big as - Janny here. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 It's James Drummond.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 James Drummond, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 He was a cousin of the family was he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Cousin of our family, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 From Ayrshire?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Yes. Yes, come from Ayrshire, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 1897?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 1897, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 And it says reaching All shots Farm I found my cousin Mrs James Smith, whom I have not seen for years, in good health and spirits, having 
married a wife shortly I could see that the honeymoon was hardly over. Mr James Smith's farm - farms in much - much the same style as his brother, but does not go in for seeding to such an extent. Some of his land was much in need of draining and no end o
f
 games such as rabbits, pheasants and worst of all, gamekeepers, but his crops were looking well. He had also some grand steers grazing. Mrs Smith went in for beekeeping for he had no less than twenty hives of bees. A very pleasant drive home by way of Co
ggeshall, another nice country town. And so on. Did he have a lot of trouble with gamekeepers then?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Well - well we had six here.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Why was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Why they - you see the farms were all empty, there was nobody farming in them at all. And - the 
- Westerns were the - lord of the manor and he did a lot of shooting. And got these pheasants and - shot them towards the fall of the year of course. And - these keepers were everywhere. You - if you wanted a - a keeper you - you went outside - let off a 
gun and - waited a few minutes, there'd be a keeper come asking you want you wanted. It's as easy as that. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 What sort of a man was Western then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Oh it's Lord Western he - he went bankrupt. Went - went through it all. We've got - I've got
 title deeds of - the farm - in the safe in there - oh - hideous amount of work - was put into it. Pages and pages and pages - all written out you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Was he the most important man around here at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Yes. One of them of course. And then
 - that original place, it's - behind the wood there was a place called Rivenhall Place, and - he had that but - he had - somebody - rented that, and - way - the gentry all round about of course they get together and have a booze up and - a ladidadido the
re every so often you know and that was that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Did they mix much with the farmers at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
No. There was no farmers. No. I didn't - you didn't read it in here but - from Easthorpe - it was still the same landlords then as it is today, and he 
had this farm, the first year for nothing. The next year, ten shillings an acre. The next year twelve shillings so long as he was in the farm. And that was his rent, and the landlord was very pleased to let the land - let this farm. Like it then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 So he was eighty-eight when he died?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Yes. That was 1953.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 And he died in 1950?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Three.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 He died in 1962 did you say?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 '53 I think Janny said. Didn't you say '53?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 He died in 1953?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Yes. And - he was - you say he was eighty-eight. 'Til - til January.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Do you know how old your mother was when she died?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 She was thirty-five. When she died in 19 - 08. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 You all went away then did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Jenny went away for - best part of her life, and - sister went to another on
e, she's dead and gone and - other - other sister - went away in the first world war. She's never been back since.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 So how many of you were left in the home after your mother died then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Three.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Which ones went away immediately?
\par <subject2>Jenny: Well I went, I was - six I think and - my sister Vi was only a baby, be about - only about a fortnight wouldn't she be?</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 What happened to her then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 She went to my mother's sister, she had quite a nice life though. She went - got a house of their own you see now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 And then there was another sister?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 The other one, yes, Rosa, she's -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 She stayed here though?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No. Oh yes she did didn't she, yes. She kept house for us. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 So really there was just you and your one sister?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 That - that's myself - there was - Rosa and Katie was left behind here. Yes. Three.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Katie was the baby you mean?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 The youngest - one at the time. At home. Violet was the small - the youngest.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 There were four sisters, I was thinking there were three.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
You were saying that your father was not at all talkative, was that not like him, was he not like that before she died, do you think he changed in that way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Well - yes, he - he got - the Scots don't say a
 lot you know, they say what the - mean and that. They don't do what - what we call - a lot of nattering. No. But if you do get 'em nattering, stoke them up they're a nuisance. He is. What's that underneath there? Oh yes, I know, but never mind about that
.
 He was - we've got one in there - in here name of - I suppose I hadn't better say the name. But he - it was a - he's another cousin of ours, and somebody was going to Scotland with him and - he started speaking when he got out of - Euston or - whatever s
t
ation they went from, he said he never left of talking - he said, and I left him talking and went to sleep, he said, and he was still talking when I woke up. Yes. Oh they're getting - they're getting more - civilized now. We can - this - this is - some of
 
the work in, this isn't a record at all. Mr Dearman who was a - was a very big beekeeper, and - Mr Dearman and myself, we went off on our - holiday and we went to Scotland, we went right up - through Edinburgh, right up - oh quite a bit further, and - we 
c
ame to a river. We could see the salmon, playing about and jumping up. Chap came over - and spoke. I said, how long have you been in Scotland? I said, you don't speak Scotch at all you're all English. I said, I've never been away from this village before 
a
nd - never in my life, I said, where - where do you get your intonation from? He said, we're the only pure English speaking people - in the British Isles. I - I never heard anything like him, he wasn't that - bit of Scotch in his - lingo at all, it was ma
rvellous. Very very beautiful English. No Scotch brogue whatever. Nothing at all. 'Cos I said to him, however long you been up here, I said, you talk English, you don't talk Scotch. And he just said it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 When you were young did you think of yourself as Scottish though?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
Well I - my Scot - my school nickname was Scottie. Scottie. Yes. I - I used to go to school with a - one of those little - Glengarry ha - hats, yes. I've had that thrown over the wall, I've had that tramped on, I've had all sorts of 
things - happen to that. But that took some pluck to go to first - to put that on to go to school first day. I used to get on - very well with the local people but - he didn't - there was not very - friendly, really and truly.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 He didn't mix with them you mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
Not very much, no. He'd like to go - into Colchester, the market on the Saturday Go away from here and catch the twelve twenty, the twelve twenty is the name - number that - I shall never forget. Yes. And he'd come back again - somewhere ab
out seven, no bikes, no horses, no - no nothing at all, he had to walk backwards and forwards. And - there's an old lane over here - which leads - it doesn't lead to the station but very close to it, and that's the way he used to go up and down.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Did he ever have people in here, friends visiting?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Hardly ever.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Who would they be if they came, would they be other farmers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 I - I - to tell you the truth I can't remember - ever having - anybody to stay here.
\par <subject2>Jenny: We had Auntie Kate, when we were born didn't she - come then?</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 I don't remember - I - I don't remember anybody coming here, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 She would come and help when the children were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Jenny? Oh I think so. 'Cos I can remember having a pennyworth of sweets - to go to school with. Remember - can you remember that?
\par <subject2>No.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 But there weren't people who would call in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 We - we had one lady - and by the name of Nicholls which is - a local farming name - for - a hundred - hundred
 years I suppose, previous - and - she come - periodically and - father used to keep all these hedges nice and trimmed and - somebody's coming. Mum, somebody's coming. We would, say, mum, somebody's coming. She would take off her dirty apron, put a clean 
one on, and we used to go stand round the side of the corner you know, see who it was, and then run away. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 She was a farmer's wife?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 She was a farmer's wife from Kelvedon, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 She'd have a cup of tea or something you mean - and a chat and so on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
She'd chat to mum, what they used to talk about goodness only knows. But in - when we had our crisis in 1908 - oh they all - they all came round. From everywhere. - Helping.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 So they would help?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Oh yes, mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 This would be farmers again?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 And of course you had all these relations nearby so that they could help too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Yes. Yes. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 You relied more on relations though would you think at that sort of time than on neighbours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Well - yes, I suppose you would, but - our neighbours about here were extraordinarily good, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 What would they do then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
Well when I - of course I didn't know anything about it and - and a gentleman from the next farm - he walked to meet me at - coming out of s
chool. And then he told me you see what had happened. That was one thing and then - we had a - a gentleman in Kelvedon who was name of - what was old - people's name that lived in the Wilderness, next to Nicholls? Anyway they - yes, Peacock, yes. And she 
came and - come on, she says, you come home with me. And - she - took me away and - 'til it was all over, and - stopped with her, and you went to Mrs Nicholls. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 So when you were saying about your father, before he came down here you said that he worked as a milk boy I think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 When he was a boy, and then he - he took up - - the seed business and he was in Dublin for - during - for apprenticeship, and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 As a sort of warehouseman?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 He was behind the - a counter I should imagine but 
I don't know anyway he was in a warehouse - with the seed business, and - being a Scotsman he - he went out into the - gardens - and all his gardens were - the - the local name and they would also have the - prefix of - Latin names for them. He could tell
 you within a little of - anything that we had here - he'd tell you the Latin name for 'em as well as the - local name. But what - what good it ever did him I don't know, but he - he was very proud of that. Mm.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 He wouldn't do any other work besides farming, he didn't go in for carting and things like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
No. No. He said, if there's anything wants doing I can find - always find a job on the farm. He did grow - start to grow seeds but - he did no good at it. Ground wasn't - good enough. No. Anoth
er chap came from - came from - Easthorope again. I think his name was Fairlie, it's in the - and - Drummonds says he's one of the first men - to use artificial manure. Well - that wasn't quite true because - my - grandfather - he - he - lived at Aran in 
-
 near Woodbridge, and - things were - nearly over the top, finished - and they used some phosphates on a field with - with the beans, which was a marvellous crop, it was as high as a horse is - tall and - if father had only come - another - four or five o
r six years previous - I think probably he would have - made that farm into a good farm, instead of that - that all went.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Would he do anything to help in the house, your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Very little. After he got married I don't think he did much. Not in the house.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 What about decorating jobs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Oh blimey mate, I can't tell you anything about that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Do you think lighting a fire?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Oh he always lighted the fire first thing in the morning and put the kettle on. But - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 He wouldn't do cooking for instance?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 After your mother died he would do a bit of cooking would he?
\par <subject2>Jenny: I don't think so because - father had a housekeeper. I don't know what - how long after mother's death she came, do you remember?</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Mr. S. No I don't, no.
\par <subject2>Jenny: Miss Pather came later didn't she?</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Mr S. Yes.
\par <subject2>Jenny: How long was she here, about eight or nine years wasn't she?</subject2>
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Mr S. Yes, she must have been. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Did she sort of play the part of a mother do you think a bit?
\par <subject2>Jenny: Oh I think she was very good because - after she was here she - she went as a housekeeper and she married her boss didn't she.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 You remember her quite well do you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Oh 
yes, yes, yes. Yes. She didn't like me much. No, I was a boy. Come in and have me meals and go to bed and I used to go out and play and do - anything liked, as long as she wasn't - concerned.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 So you wouldn't talk to her much then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No. I don't think I - was respectable or anything like that but - I don't think there was much love lost between us that's all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 If you were worried about something when you were a boy was there anybody you could talk to really?
\par <subject2>Jenny: No, it's a lot of - 
psychology in that isn't there I mean - if you lose your parent - one parent who you depend on - and care for very much - any child's mind is disrupted and you're scarred throughout your life isn't it. I should think some of the youngsters - tiny ones tod
ay, look how - heading up for trouble.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
So you would say that, you used to be able to talk to your mother and then there was nobody after that? Because sometimes a housekeeper can really be like a sort of mother?
\par <subject2>Jenny: Oh I - oh I 
don't think so, I shouldn't have thought so, being a stranger coming into a household - took her a long time for to pick up the atmosphere, well she - perhaps she liked the girls and - didn't like men, I don't know, in fact I didn't see much of her, 'til 
after - went to live away. I only came back - very - not very often. The school holidays and that.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Would your father sort of help - with the children, like .....
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Oh yes, I've seen him - comb out the children's hair before they go to sc
hool many a time. Oh yes. Yes, they all had long hair of course. He'd come their hair out. Yes. I mean he'd - he'd send me to the tailor and have me - have a - suit measured and made for me he would. He wouldn't have a - two or three different articles, s
ee, make a suit.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 What about in the evening, would he be around when you were going to bed?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Always at work.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 He'd be out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Yes. We were always - I'd been - mucking about with rabbits or - hunting up the eggs that we used to - the chicken
s used to you know run about anywhere and I had my work to do. Chop the long wood, make the fire in the morning to boil the kettle and - all those sorts of jobs, there was nobody else to do it, only me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Did you have a sort of fixed time you went to bed at night?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 You went to bed when you got mighty tired as a rule.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 That's more like Scotland I think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Would he help or would you just put yourself to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Ah, you put yourself to bed, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Did he tell you stories at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Never, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 What about reading?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Oh he was a great reader.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Would he read to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No. Good - a great reader. Yes. Yes.
\par <subject2>Jenny: Because he was - he was very good at shorthand. He was - very good, he'd have - what was 
the - shorthand book. Pitmans, yes, Pitmans. And he'd read all of the stories in shorthand. And also teach it very well. He taught - taught the family, didn't he?</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Mr. S. I think so. Tried to teach me but I'm a bit dull.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Did he read aloud at all then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
Yes. He - he'd - after we'd all gone to bed and they'd gone to bed we could often here him, telling away down here, reading out aloud - out aloud.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 But he wouldn't read to you though?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Did he take a newspaper?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
Every day had a newspaper - that was a - that was a humbug nuisance to me. I used to walk to school - and we had an hour and three quarters for dinner but I got to go right down - walk down the street about a mile and - mile there and back, to get th
is - paper every day, every day. Oh that was a nuisance to me, I couldn't play you see 'cos I'd got to go and fetch this old paper.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 What was the paper then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 East Anglian. Yes. 'Cos the post used to walk from Kelvedon you see, and - he happened t
o twig one of them one day - walking along the road and he - he looked at this letter, well it was a postcard, and he looked at it and he looked at it and he looked at it, turned it over and read the - chucked it in the ditch. Father said to him, if you e
ver do that, he said, to my postcards or letters, he says, I'll - I'll have a penny paper every day. Oh don't Mr Smith, I'll never do it to you. That was - oh a long time ago.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Can I ask you about shoes, how did you manage to get shoes in that time, or did you wear boots?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
Well I always had a heavy pair of boots. And that was another bugbear for me. They used to have hobnails you see. Father - look at these boots, turn 'em up, you down to Mr Wilson and have some - some more nails put in. So I had to
 go setting off down, he might give me a time for getting them, getting these hobnails put in and - and I was all right again for a fortnight. I had to sit down, he used to do 'em while you waited you know. And they were heavy. But that - that sufficed I 
suppose. 'Cos you - you won't - I had one pair of boots that's all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 How did you manage about baths at that time, you didn't have a bathroom did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No, we used to - used to have - we had a copper. And - used to make a fire up, during the afterno
on and get this water right and - boiling and - and then we used to go - a long bath - we used to have in front of the fire. And - they - we had each other's water of course, and - father used to have his last of all, about midnight or one or two o'clock 
in the morning.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 That was once a week was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
Yes. Yes. And - there was always the admonition, don't you pee in that water. Yes, never forget that. But that - that would smell in that water you know wouldn't it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Your wife was saying that you didn't have any carpets on the floor there either?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 You had sacks or something?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Mm. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Plenty of meat.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 When you were at home as a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Oh we had plenty of - plenty of chickens and - chickens and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 What would be a typical day's meals, what would you have for breakfast?
\par <subject2>Jenny: Oh we had pork, we had our own - pigs didn't we, and - pork meat. But I suppose, as far as I - my memory goes back, it would be just beans, potatoes - ordinary - dinner I suppose what people
 have now wouldn't it, I - I remember rice puddings. Boiled puddings.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 That's all midday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
Father was very fond of apple pie and he never had too many. But - but what we used to have for breakfast goodness only know, boiled eggs I think
 - mostly. And then used to - we used to have bread and jam for - for dinner, for school dinner. And we - and nearly always had a hot meal when we got home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 But your father had his main meal midday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Yes. We used to keep -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 What would he have in the evening then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
Oh well - you know, that's a perplexing question, I can't - answer it, I don't know. I think we used to have ours on a plate - put in the oven.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Would you all have breakfast together in the morning?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Yes, if you - if you wanted it, you know, if you could eat it, yes. But we had to be a - away by eight o'clock you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Your father was in then, he didn't go out for work and come back later when you'd gone off to school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Oh yes, he used to get up in the morning 
and make a cup of tea. Out he'd go. He hadn't got many pigs there, not like we've got today, but - used to feed then and come in after he'd had his - been and fed the pigs. And he had bullocks and them - they have to be fed as well.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Did your mother bake bread?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
No. No. No. We used to have an old - used to have an old baker call twice a week. Hammond. No, well - we used to - used to be an old - yes - he used to come once in - once a fortnight, fill us up with paraffin. His name was Snow. Mm. He ha
d an old horse and - he used to have a stick in his hand. Gawd he used to - be labour that old horse. He carried everything nearly. But - we've always had - a travelling - shop, because since I can remember one way or another, there might have been a brea
k for a year and - nobody - would start up. So - but - today - we have - one come twice a week now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Did you have any other fruit besides oranges?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Apples. Father grew everything, pears, apples, pears and plums. Never used to buy any. Strawberries.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 He grew his own potatoes I suppose?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Oh we always grew our own potatoes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 You never had any tinned fruit, or food, not even corned beef?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Yes, we had corned beef in the house, I remember some of that, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 What about jam?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Make our own, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Did they bottle any fruit or vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
Yes, gooseberries. Not - no - never bottled any vegetables, no. Used to bottle some fruit. That - that was - the last - oh - within the last twenty years we used to bottle fruit, before th
at they knew nothing about it. Mm. No, I - quince. Yes, yes. That was father's plant. That was father's planting.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Did they make pickles here?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 I don't know if they did, they don't -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 You don't remember that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No. He - he'd never eat a sauce. No, he didn't - he liked a bit of mustard, but not sauces of any sort, he liked - things straightforward.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 What about wines or beer?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Oh he'd make - he could make mead. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 He didn't make beer though in your time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No. No, he'd buy it some - sometimes, harvest time, when - when they were - when the weather was really hot that time of day.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 How often would you - say that you had meat, would you have it every day really?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Oh more or less, yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Was there special food on Sundays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
Mm. Oh that - no more than a - perhaps we had - cake on Sunday, we didn't always have cake to eat. Yes, we always had cake on Sunday I think, well I remembered so. Yes. We used to - sell honey at sixpence a pound that time of day and th
en you couldn't sell it. Sixpence a pound.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Did your mother make any medicines do you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 You always had plenty of food anyway? Could you tell me about table manners at that time, were you allowed to talk at the table?
\par <subject2>Jenny: Bee seen and not heard that's all I know.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
Mr. S. That was an axiom of - of - of the Scotch people, you were seen and not heard. You started to make a lot of fuss at the table you're out the door you would. No nonsense. Look back t
o this book, Ascots Farm, we used to go there fairly often. That was a - something ever so nice. But - you went to the table you - you're not allowed to speak a word at all. Not one word, well you just were given - eat what you were given, and - you had t
o say grace before meals and after meals and - that was a - that was nothing against it but - that was different from what here - a little bit rough here I'm afraid.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 What was it like here then really? You didn't have grace at meals then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No. No. Only - only at school when you had to sing for your - sing for it, whatever you got to eat.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 You could talk provided you weren't too noisy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Yes, if you were spoken to of course.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 When would you go to Mascots then?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Christmas time especially.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 But when you were here you didn't have to eat everything you were given?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Yes, if you didn't eat it you - you didn't get anything else. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 You said something about when you were there you couldn't ask for something that you wanted
, if you wanted the salt or something like that you could ask for it could you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Oh yes, yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Were they strict about the way you sat here?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Oh yes. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 What would he do if you disobeyed him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Oh you didn't disobey much. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Never?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Oh, he was - he knew what - he knew what he could do.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Did he use a strap or something like that?
\par <subject2>Jenny: I can't remember him being very severe but he would - give you a couple of - we just didn't misbehave as far as I can remember, you came in, you had your meals and you went to school and - played and you went to bed.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Are you saying that he wouldn't actually sort of beat you?
\par <subject2>Jenny: Oh no he wasn't a cruel man, no.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 You always obeyed him without needing to be punished?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Jenny? Oh I expect we did. I think we got up to usual mischief as far as I can remember.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Would he do things like send you up to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 You don't remember that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Were you served in a particular order when you had meals do you remember?
\par <subject2>Jenny: Well, father would - no, I suppose you - I don't ever - just put the - put the food all on the plates and I think we had dishes for - I think we had potatoes didn't you? You had your own vegetables separate.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Mr. S. No, I don't know. I don't remember anything about that - at all.
\par <subject2>Jenny: I don't know, I can't remember. I should imagine it was - I don't know. Can't - can't - remember. I should think - imagine t
hat the - meat and potatoes and vegetables be put on the plate then as some people do now, wouldn't you? 'Cos I mean time was precious in those days. Can't help you over that, can't remember.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 If another child hurt you did they say you ought to hit back or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
No, I - we didn't come home with tales. No. We always - told to look after our own selves you know. He wouldn't go to the school and complain to the school master or anything like that. No, no, no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 What sort of people do you feel that he wanted you to be when you grew up, do you think he gave you some idea?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
I think that - really and truly - I think really and truly he was disappointed in us - as a family. Yes, he - he - he - yes. I wasn't very - bright and never hav
e been, but - that isn't - that isn't the point. The point is that the - he - he lived in an elevated plane of his own and - rather - we were not - anything - not - educated like he was. 'Cos they went to school and after he went to school they had to go 
t
o school at night. And - he had an opportunity to - go round with the milk cart and buy himself some books, well - I never handled money at all until I was about seventeen or eighteen, didn't know hardly what money would do. Only what I could pinch it or 
-
 they didn't always find out. You see - when - when he was - going around the milk cart, things were not so bad. Then things went worse and worse and worse and worse, and they went - downhill to - until the 14/18 war came along and we all bucked up again.
 And then after the 14/18 war we all went down - to muck again. See, and then - we had this last war, we come all the way up again.
\par <subject2>Jenny: Now it's very much pulled up - a credit to you all isn't it. Because my brother's worked very very hard you 
know. Because I was up here - a bit during the war and - really we had - you know, his - worked extremely hard. Now the boys carry on but they -</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Mr. S. Yes, there's two of them. Yes, I got - got a - I can - find you a bob or two now - wher
e I could have done with that bob or two when I was - right - started farming.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Did you get pocket money as children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No. Never.
\par <subject2>Jenny: Oh I had a penny.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Mr. S. Do - did dad used to give you a penny?
\par <subject2>Jenny: M
y - father used to come along in the cart - and - with his best clothes on - and he - when I was at - went to the school, the local school - and I was what - was only five was I, six - and he used to get out of the cart with his hand in his pocket - pitch
 over a penny. You ever have that?</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Mr. S. No. The only person who used -
\par <subject2>Jenny: Whenever he saw me he gave me a penny, now - I - of course I used to trade on that, see when we were in the playground I used to keep my eye on the ro
ad, I thought well - he'll be along again and give me another penny. And of course all the kids would rush for this penny hoping you know they'd be there first. Not that they kept it I don't think.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 What would you spend it on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 I can remember that time, I wouldn't know - sweets I suppose.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Why do you think he didn't give you a penny then?
\par <subject2>Jenny: Oh he was at another school you see, another - didn't you ever know he did that?</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Mr. S. No. He - we were talk - g
oing back to Mascots - my Uncle John was married twice. And he had a son by his first wife - and he was an ardent engineer. And - he - he had two - thrashing kettles, it was two engines, two - thrasing drums and two elevators, and also a portable engine. 
W
ell things - when things got worse there and they had to sell them off. Then he went - used to work - in - this cousin of mine, in the - brickyards in Collingham. And he had this steam engine, take an engine you know, he used to - take this load of bricks
 
out to everywhere, everywhere, everywhere, he worked for Collier that time. And that was - that's in there, that's in the Mascot's farm, yes. That time of day, they used to - go traipsing off up to the chapel. He helps them down and he - thought there was
 rather - out of the ordinary.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Do what at the chapel did you say?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
The - the womenfolk always went to the - this - they had a - a chapel up - not - on the edge of the farm, and - this Mr Drummond, he - thought that was rather out of the ordinary 
you see for them to go off and - leave the men-folk at home, well - you see they didn't go -
\par <subject2>Jenny: What would they have, just ordinary women\rquote s meetings then?</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Mr. S. There was Aunt Julia and Aunt Nellie and - no, I always was car
ted off there when they - when I - we went there. Mm. Folkens. Do you remember the Folkens. Yes. And - the - the - the Martins, they used to come there. And Aunt Nellie's husband, they were there. Yes, every Sunday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Is this Church of England?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No. Chapel.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 What sort of chapel?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 I don't know. I don't know if you're - I don't know whether that's still there or not.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 What was a Sunday like in those days when you were children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Only stopped at home and - there was no other - no other - just like an ordinary day only we stopped at home instead of going to school.

\par <subject2>Jenny: Oh but we went to church.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Mr. S. We didn't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 You didn't go to Sunday school either?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Were you allowed to work and play then on a Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Do what we liked.
\par <subject2>Jenny: But I think you're talking about when you were very young. I think -</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Mr. S. I've never - I've never been to Sunday school in my life, never. Oh you - you used to go when we got older. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 You went to chapel when you were older but not Sunday school?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No, we - we were all Church of England. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 You went to Church of England church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 But none of you went to the Sunday school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 It was too far was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 I don't see why you went to the chapel sometimes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 When we went - we'd to stay at Marks Tey at Mascots. With my Uncle. Yes, they supported the chapel you see, very much so.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Would you have family prayers at all ever here?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 You never joined a Band of Hope?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 There weren't any sort of social activities to do with the church that you joined in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 We - we were never in - in anything as far as I know. We didn't - there wasn't any young farmers clubs or wasn't - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 You didn't have an outing to the seaside then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No, the choir - choirboys did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Do you remember any day outings though?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Until we - we used to go to Lowestoft once a year, three of us. But - we were - we used to 
go down by ourselves you know but - we were not babies. But we used to go to Lowestoft every year or Kesingham or - somewhere - near Lowestoft. Stop with my aunt.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Your father didn't come up then, he stayed behind?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No, he didn't come, no. The on
ly thing he used to go down - once or twice a year to the Yar - Yarmouth races, but he never went to the races, he went to see aunt. But - that was about the only thing he did, but - if he went out we didn't always know where he was going, what he was goi
ng to do.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 He wouldn't ever go to the races then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 He wouldn't go to the races, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Did he ever take you out by yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No. Not that I know of. I never went to market with him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Was there anything special happened on a birthday at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
We had carrot pudding, remember that. Carrot pudding. We had - we always had one. Oh there was nothing in it, just - put a grated carrot in to make some colour that's all, that was only a plum pudding. That's all. With grated - carrot in t
o get it - colour it, that was all, the colouring. Oh yes, plum pudding. Carrot pudding we used to call it. That was only just for the colouring, that's all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Did you get any presents on a birthday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Sometimes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Anything special?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Th
e - he bought me a steam engine once. Father did, yes. I kept that for years and years and years, I don't know whether I've still got it, I believe I have somewhere. I believe that's about here somewhere, I don't know now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 And Christmas you'd usually go to Mascots?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Yes. Yes. Used to look forward to that wonderfully.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Was that the only time of the year that you'd get sort of party games and so on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 But you wouldn't ever have that back here, no other days of the year?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Did you ever have music at home, playing at the piano or anything?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Father could - play a little on the - violin but not much. He tried to teach himself and - tonic }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16406559\charrsid5717842 sulpha}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 , he wouldn't use notes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Did you have a sort of sing-song ever?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 The rest of you didn't sing then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 What sort of games did you play as children?
\par <subject2>Jenny: Oh I used to play hopscotch didn't I. Played hopscotch and - you had an iron ho}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16406559\charrsid5717842 o}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 p didn't you.</subject2>

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Mr. S. We had hoop
s and - marbles and - things like that - that had, you - know, they had their - season of the year - to play with everywhere. Always had marbles when the - mud began to dry up.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 That's why you did it then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 That's why, they used to run along the - cart - where the carts went you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Were the boys games different really from the girls games?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
Well - what did they play, hopscotch you know, but - I don't think boys did that much do you. I shouldn't - we didn't - remember much, I know we had
 - these marbles and we had hoops. And then we had cigarette cards, and - leapfrog and one or two more games like that you know. The same as what - you had.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Did they mind if you got dirty playing, was there a fuss about that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Oh you always had -
 when we came home from school we always had to change. Oh yes. Never would do not to get your coat school - school clothes on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Were you free to play with anybody that you pleased?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No. No. They used to - people down the cottages, the children do
wn there and the children over here - no.. You stop at home - your place. Let them stop at home. They didn't like it - mix up with - other people at all like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Why do you think that was then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Oh I suppose - they - they worked - for other peo
ple, and we were supposed to be farmers children you see, made all the - just that little bit of difference.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Was there a big division then between the farmers and the labourers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Yes, there was quite a - quite a division, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 When you were a boy did you go fishing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
Only in the old pond up here. Oh used to - do a lot of fishing down there and we used to - oh yes, we used to fish just when we thought we would. Bent pin. Little bit of string and a - stick out the hedge.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 What about bicycling?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No, never had a bicycle until I left school. Nobody.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Did you have any hobbies, collecting things? You mentioned the cigarette cards, anything else?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Well I had quite a lot of cigarette cards in time, but marbles was my - great ass
et, I got - hundreds before I left school. I'm afraid I could win with them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Were there any sort of sports like cricket, football and so on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Only with the county school in the - playground. That's where most of my hobnails went.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Were there any clubs at that time that you could join?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No. No, none whatever. Not that I ever knew of anyway, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Did you ever manage to go to the town to go to the theatre, music halls or concerts or the cinema? Nothing at all, not even a cinema?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 We
ll you - if you go back - when I left school I used to - I had this bicycle you see and I used to to go into Braintree. And I'll tell you this as I think I told you before, the first time I went to the cinema, you went in, you paid your sixpence and they 
s
at you in the front. Sat you at the back, away from the picture then. The next time I went they sat you in the front. You see, they thought that - they thought that - that's in the ordinary con - concert hall you used to - the - the - the highest prices w
ere in the front if you remember, nearest the - nearest the people, and they thought the same thing was in the cinema but that - that didn't act that way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 The first time they'd shown the film you mean?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Yes. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 So you never got to a music hall either?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Did your father disapprove of going to the pub, would he have ever gone to the pub?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 He - he wouldn't - we were not allowed to drink anything. No. Though I did make me sister drunk once. We get hold - got hold of some 
- honey made - mead, that was an old pot stood in the place, so I had a - tiny little }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16406559\charrsid5717842 p}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
otful. I said, look, you're six - or something like, and I - I'm eight or nine, and you've got to have six little pot - glasses and I've got to have nine. Well I had one
, that - I thought that was enough for me, and my sister, she kept - kept on with her six. Well - it was when we had a housekeeper, and - I don't know whether we had a housekeeper or whether it was mother, I've forgotten, anyway - there was - my sister Ro
s
a, rolling about the floor. They put her to bed, or on the case in there. They went and got father, he came home from the field and - looked at her and - he couldn't see what was the matter with her at all. Couldn't see at all. Presently he said - she's d
runk. That's what's the matter with her. You been giving her - where you been getting this stuff from? I said - of course I - I'm afraid I was - called over the coals there pretty serious. She didn't get drunk no more.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 But he wouldn't go into the pub even when he went to market?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
No, I can't tell you, we - as I told you before we didn't know what he did when he went out. No. He wouldn't - wouldn't - you would surmise so but you don't know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 But when you grew up yourself you didn't mind?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 N
o, I - I've always - shied off drink. Yes, I've had - on my mother's side - two or three of them have - well two of them have - fell fouled. And my grandfather like it and - yes. Yes. And - he was - My grandmother was a little person, much smaller than Je
n
ny. And she - she would have grandfather Precious. And he was a great big tall fellow about - six foot. Must have been the most peculiar marriage there ever was. She married him, he didn't marry her. Well how old was she when she died now, 'cos - grandfat
her's - I never knew - I don't know, I never knew her at all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Do you remember anything about your father's views on politics, or did he have no interest?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 He was a Liberal. Staunch Liberal.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Do you know why he would be a Liberal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Did he take any part in politics, did he work for the Liberal party at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 He just voted?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Did he not talk about it in the home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Not to us. No. Oh he used to talk to neighbouring farmers.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 You were saying that there was this distance between farmers and labourers and the gentry and farmers and so on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Were you brought up to treat people in different groups like that differently?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Yes, oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 In what sort of way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Must understand, we 
had - the Impirics Hall, that's a big place, we had a - then the Queen - the King's equerry was - was at - Ewart, and - the girls had to - mm mm - bob and - we had to take our caps off whenever we saw any of 'em. Yes. And - same as - cottage people, we we
re not allowed to - go in their cottages and mix up with them and eat their food, that was altogether taboo. And they were not supposed to come here. And we certainly never went to Felix Hall. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Would the cottage people sort of raise their hat to your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No. No. Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Would you say that within the cottage people there were some who were more respectable than others?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Oh yes. There - there was - there was -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Were there some families among those who were sort of rough and some who were respectable or do you not remember that kind of distinction?

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
Oh - oh yes, yes, yes. Yes. We - there - there were some in the next farm over here - were quite respectable. When I - if I go to Chelmsford market now they'll come up and say - h
ello Mr Smith. Of course they're retired and - I'm there and they come up and have a word and - talk about - sometimes talk about old times and that was that, that's all there is in it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Do you think there was a difference between craftsmen and labourers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
I don't - difficult one that is. I mean you - you either had that hoe in your hand or you had a horse at - to that end, and that was all there was to it. You see, when - when these Scotch people came down here to - to farm, they worked. The - but
 previous to that the farmer never worked. That was - that was - oh no, you mustn't work. And that's where they went wrong you see, that used to be their - lost - everything went, they paid their money to the men and had nothing for themselves.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Was it difficult for the Scots farmers to work like that, were they looked down on by the Essex farmers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
Yes. Yes. Well Scotsman you all work. My grandfather - grandfather Precious never worked a hand, never in his life. Yes. Scots farmers always worked. Oh - they all did. Don't matter how - far back you go.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Did people feel at that time that you could move from one social group to another or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 I wouldn't say so.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Do you remember anyone who was called a real gentleman at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No
. Only - Lady - Ewart and her husband. I don't know anybody other - even the - the clergyman was looked up with great respect. And the village policeman was a man that we all feared, yes. The gamekeeper, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Did you see anything of the policeman?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Ay? Oh he used to be - very often round here at night time, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 The policeman?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Why was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 I don't know if you know any police do this but - you had your - you had your starting point which was a - to the police station.
 And - he'd walk there, and there, you walked there and there. I'll meet you there on that point. Half past one - tomorrow morning. And you just walked that bit, the policeman did, and - they had a meeting point up against this next farm very very often. 
T
hey'd stop and have a smoke and - chat and - and of course they'd go back on, perhaps a different way. I don't know if they ever come across anything, but - they were there. Well I've got a son as you know now, he does just the same of thing only he goes 
round in a car. They met at a point at certain - certain time. Perhaps six of 'em now instead of one.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
Did you ever hear, in some districts when a person's sort of disapproved of they used what's called rough music against them, or tinning, when}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16406559\charrsid5717842  they go along with a lot of sa}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 ucepans and bang outside the house, I wondered if you you ever remembered hearing of that happening here?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No, that's previous, no, that's previous, must be.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Did you have trade unions before the first world war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 You were talking to Mr Ruggles about it, not round here?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
He - he - he was - he talked to you about trade unions and - was about six of 'em wasn't it tried to make a union? That didn't get - it fell through. No, that was - no, this was out - 
no, this was out at - at - Finchingfield and Tottlesfield and that way. And - one of these books that I've been reading - was that they - they came up in the morning to the farm and - the farmer said, well, get on with it. We want more money for work we d
o. You take the money I give you or you can go home. I'm not - I'm not giving you any more. They all turned round and went back to work. So he said.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 The farmers didn't form a union in that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No. There were farmers unions - about, but not in this locality at all. No.
\par <subject2>Jenny: Well the poor things only had ten shillings a week didn't they?</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Well you could go and buy - twelve boxes of matches for three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16406559\charrsid5717842  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 ha'pence. Packet of - packet of ten cigarettes for }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16406559\charrsid5717842 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842  five}
{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16406559\charrsid5717842  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 pence. Yes. Sugar penny a - penny a pound.
\par <subject2>Jenny: Still your - your ten shillings was soon gone.</subject2>
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
It was. That was, especially if they had a lot of children. Potatoes and turnips and - meat once a week. But he - Ruggles was telling us he - th
ey used to go - he used to get - go by train to some place - a Saturday night and bring home - three or - quids worth of meat, more than he could carry.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Did you feel at that time that the farmers and the farm workers had the same interests or did you knot feel that, looking back on it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
Well, actually I couldn't answer that question, I know - my father - and one man he had, they worked very very well together, before I came into - being and - they as I say, they worked very well together. Apart fr
om that I - I - I don't think I can answer the question much better than that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Were you working yourself before you left school on the farm?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 You were doing odd job on the farm?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Yes. Yes. I used to - hunt up the stray eggs. I u
sed to take a basket and away I'd - have you hunted the eggs up? No. Well go on then. Soon as you had - soon as you had your tea. Yes. And - and - I always used to help to - clean out the pig sties every Saturday. And I hated that, oh I did hate that.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 You never did a job sort of off the farm?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Like errands or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Would you have preferred to have another job do you think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 I - did think about it once upon a time I thought about - doing something else, I 
did think about trying to - go to - night school, and - I remember one day I started to plough - I made the resolution then, I said - this is my life. Never thought about anything any more after that. I said - I've got a farm, a farm I've got to farm. The
re it is. Never thought no more about anything else after that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 How old would you have been then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Seventeen or eighteen I suppose. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Do you feel you got much out of going to school really or not?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Oh yes. Yes. I never had enoug
h - education really. We had a smattering of - of shorthand that Jenny was talking about, had a smattering of - profit and loss. I've learnt a lot since I left school. Yes. But you see - you can't tell today.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 It was the Kelvedon Board School you went to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No, it's a church school. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 That was boys and girls wasn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Boys one side and girls the other. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 What did you think about the teachers there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Oh they - they were all respected, especially in the - elderly ones.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 They were very able?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 
They seemed so to us anyway. Yes, the eldest one, the - one day he went to school the boys were playing him up. He never came after a month. He finished. He couldn't keep control of boys and - and he said he - that was no good -
 he was no good to the boys. Then - who did Brian have, 'cos he went to the same school? Fairbrother. Yes. He kept 'em - within a little. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 They used the cane to keep them in order did they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Oh we always had - they all had canes, yes. Mr Thorn
e - Mrs Thorne wanted eve - wanted Violet you know. After school he called me over - after the boys had gone he said, I want to speak to you Smith. Do you know - do you know Smith - what your father and mother are doing with - your little sister? Mrs Thor
n
e - I said, I don't know sir. And that was all was ever said. But that's what she wanted. She never had any children - she never had children of her own. He used to walk up there and see father. And - the parson used to come up in his - he used to hire a 
g
ig and - they'd come smashing up this road here. Oh dear, oh dear. All a waste of time. If we were in the middle of a field, if he was in the middle of a field or I was with him or anybody else with him, he'd - come smashing down the field. He was a great
 big fat man, I should think he weighted - forteen or fifteen stone but he'd come down there. Natter away. Whatever they talked about goodness only knows.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Your father didn't go up to the school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Did he ask you what you were doing there or did he just leave you to get on?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 What?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Did he ask you what you were doing at school, how you were getting on and so on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Not that I remember. No. We - we had - slight exams that time of day, not very much, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Do you remember the teachers emphasizing things like tidiness and manners and this kind of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Just teaching you the subjects really?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 What about punctuality?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Very - very \{BLANK\} yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 I think you said there were these various groups in the school used to fight each other?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 I don't know whether they did or not I'm sure.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Last time you were telling me a story about how they were throwing things at each other.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Yes, that - that was only snowball and - the - the - church boys and the - chapel boys, we got - snowballing and - on the way from church.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Was there a chapel school there as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Yes. And the church - the church beat 'em and kept 'em in so they never went home to dinner. Remember that. Schoolmaster
 came - schoolmaster came out and - spoke to the boys and he went - that he was going to tell Mr Thorne which was our master that - we wouldn't let them come in. Bang, bang, bang, bang, bang went the snowballs again. Off he went indoors. And sent a note u
p to Mr Thorne all - and Mr Thorne put it in the fire directly, he never said - he never said a word to us. That pleased him. But that never happened no more.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Who were the people who went to the chapel?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Oh - what - who went to chapel, well - well
 the builder. A builder. A blacksmith Carriers. That was the type of people that went up to chapel, nearly all - more or less one family - that ran this chapel. That was quite a big - chapel for Kelvedon, and - it's like other people - places now, they do
n't get filled of course.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Did the girls get caned at school too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No, it's not - we had the cane - I've had it across my behind several times.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 What would you get that for then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Talking chiefly. Yes. He'd get you out there mate and he'd
 get hold of your braces and you'd be across his knee and bonk, bonk, bonk, bonk. But - you never cried. No, no, you never cried.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Did you ever manage to rag the masters back though?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 No, we never - as I told you we ragged him - yes, I wasn't in t
hat act - I was left school then, and they ragged him. And as I told you Mr William Lamont, he said, if I can't control the boys I'm no good. And he left.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid673232 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 Did you go in for things yourself like running along and knocking on peoples doors?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6824658 HS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 I'm af
raid I didn't, I hadn't got pluck enough. Scrumping apples was about as hard as I got ever. No, I'm - I'm talking about when we were at the school. Yes. But - didn't get you - get you very far did it. But - I think I told - I think I told you last time ab
o
ut the - the worst hiding I ever had was - we had water laid on to the school, and - that was my high delight, I'd put my finger underneath there and I squirted everybody in the whole porch. That part of the school was inundated with water. Mr Thorne - ca
m
e to me, he said - he dressed me down, talking to me, and I cried like a madman, I couldn't help it mate. He never hit me. He just talked to me and - that - that hurt me terribly. Mm. Water. Finger under the tap and squirted it, as the boys kept putting t
heir heads round - yes, yes. Well that made such a blinking mess mate, every - all the coats }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16406559\charrsid5717842 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842  children}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16406559\charrsid5717842 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15680758\charrsid5717842 s clothes were all wet - in the cloakroom.
\par }}