{\rtf1\adeflang1025\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\adeff0\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang2057\deflangfe2057{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}{\f38\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f39\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f41\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f42\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f43\fbidi \froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}
{\f44\fbidi \froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f45\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f46\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f48\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}
{\f49\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f51\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f52\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f53\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f54\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}
{\f55\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f56\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden 
Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs20 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{
\s15\qj \li0\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext15 Body Text;}}
{\*\latentstyles\lsdstimax156\lsdlockeddef0}{\*\revtbl {Unknown;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid921314\rsid1604703\rsid4664297\rsid4745747\rsid4858831\rsid5847124\rsid7291225\rsid7605709\rsid8206157\rsid8411621\rsid9768143\rsid10710664\rsid11432060\rsid11692283\rsid13396319\rsid14568195
\rsid14711763}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 11.0.0000;}{\info{\title Information about interviewee}{\author SEENU}{\operator lhorto}{\creatim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min9}{\revtim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min9}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords37778}
{\nofchars215337}{\nofcharsws252610}{\vern24613}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 http://schemas.microsoft.com/office/word/2003/wordml}}\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1800\margr1800\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0\ltrsect 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\donotembedsysfont0\donotembedlingdata0\grfdocevents0\validatexml1\showplaceholdtext0\ignoremixedcontent0\saveinvalidxml0\showxmlerrors1\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace180
\dgvspace180\dghorigin1800\dgvorigin1440\dghshow1\dgvshow1\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\splytwnine\ftnlytwnine\htmautsp\nolnhtadjtbl\useltbaln\alntblind\lytcalctblwd\lyttblrtgr\lnbrkrule\nojkernpunct\rsidroot8411621 \fet0
{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}\ilfomacatclnup0\ltrpar \sectd \ltrsect\linex0\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ltrpar
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid8206157 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\ul\insrsid8206157\charrsid16072257 Information about interviewee}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid8206157 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid8206157\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tx2057\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid8206157 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8206157\charrsid16072257 Date of birth}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8206157    
\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8206157\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8206157  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1604703 1900}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8206157\charrsid16072257 
\par Gender}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8206157           \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8206157\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8206157  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1604703 F}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8206157 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8206157\charrsid16072257 Marital status}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8206157 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8206157\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8206157  
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1604703 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8206157\charrsid16544153 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8206157\charrsid16072257 Occupation}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8206157 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8206157\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8206157  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1604703 Housework}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8206157\charrsid16072257 
\par Geographic region}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8206157 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8206157\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8206157  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1604703 Dumfries}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8206157\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\qj \fi-490\li518\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin518\itap0\pararsid8206157 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Can you tell me about the house in Burns Street, what sort of house was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh aye, aye, it was up a stair. And - oh quite, ye ken, nice enough house then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Was it a common stair that you had?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Well, there were - a neighbour, and were just the two like, there were a wee landing you know, and the toilet was here for - between the two.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You shared the toilet?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 They shared the toilet.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 How many rooms were there in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 There were three and the - kitchen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh that was quite good.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh it was a - in fact needed it for the - crowd of us you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 How about the bathroom?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh no, no, nothing. That's what I often the young ones and they'll say what you - I says, it used to be - the big bath. And - and down in Kirkcady street were nea bathroom, but generally you ken the big shaped tins like the zinc, but i
t's much kettle and filling up and that but it wasnae that - on Burns Street, it was just a wee washing - as we say, aye, and you got into that and - there it was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did you get a bath every week, or how often did you get one?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh just whenever we 
took the notion or not, we never - the house was clear and that we'd - ken like, one would say I'm having tomorrow night and another one would be in it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 How about when you did have a bath, did you get a change of clothes then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh no - was just -
 it was just merely - getting washed down and - you ken what I mean. You ken what an ordinary - well you've never seen - ken, the baths, just a wee washing zinc bath like, a big one. But that's what you'd to get into.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 How did you get hot water for it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Well you - there were - of course there werenae - the electric kettles or - it was a big iron kettles. And filling pots and that, that's how it was - and it was all thingymjigged in the fire. There werenae - see it was fire, an ordinary coal fire.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Was it like a range?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 No, just an open fire. Aye. Uh huh.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 And that's what your mother had to cook for the lot of you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 And - cook on there, bake, girdles and that on the fire, and - and she'd to go through all that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Was she a baker, did she make a lot of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh she's good baker. Oh aye. Of course they had all to do it in them days, you ken what I mean, because - bob's mother was the same at Noble Hill. Oh, I never - baker, wished you'd seen you woman. And there was such a f
amily of them, they were all boys, about eight - or nine boys and two lasses.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 That's your mother-in-law?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Yes. And many a time we used to ken when - in the mill as I was telling Dot, if you got off just about dinnertime you'd a chance of getting 
the afternoon. But it was only once in a blue moon you see, because - if they could get a word in to you before you got out, you had to go in. But I - I used to go over to Noble Hill ken to see her like - that was during the week. No when I went down on a
 
Sunday she wasna baking then. But my if you'd seen it, she'd have her white apron on, and the plain white wooden table with white cloth, and near the girdle, and nae bother ken. She'd be talking away to you and that and there was - and all them scones. Ev
e
ry kind. And then when all they - they'd come in at teatime - and for a joke - my brother-in-law like's over there, at the top of the Avenue, many a time when I see him I - I - I - I have a laugh, and there was - oh a - dozen - more plates, with all the d
i
fferent scones. And if you'd seen them - cleared. And I'll never forget, she'd have a nice white apron and that. But she had to - she baked a lot because I mind when Bob and me were married you see, and - he says to me - oh I says, mind you Jen I'll tell 
y
ou this much, he says, I like me scone. Yes. I says, aye, and you'll get your scone all right, you ken, just in a laugh. I says, you'll get your scone, but I had to bake. I had to bake every day for him, he wouldna eat bread. But I never minded to do it, 
I never minded - doing it. And I had the - the coal fire just with the big girdle, I don't ken where my girdle went. It was in the house for years but I don't know where it went. And I had to bake - with the girdle.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 How did your mother do, did she have an oven at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
She - she just had this wee oven in the fireplace. And if she's got - and - but a wee fire, ken, down here. I can, I can picture it like and a - a wee fire and it was just a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7291225\charrsid9768143 wea}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 ken, oven like this. Just a wee thing. And that's where she did her - baking tarts or - cakes or wot in that, that's where it was in.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did she ever make jam and things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh ah, oh she was - oh ah, she was one to - of course it was the cheapest and that - I mean it was cheap then, I'm not saying nowada
ys making jam, I don't know whether - but oh you ken it was cheaper then and that but she had to bake - make her own jam. I mind we used to go for the jar covers you ken and - we - cello or whatever it is, fitting them on and we used to - stick the - the 
- covers on for her and write ken what - gooseberry or strawberry or owt like that, but oh the fruit it was cheap then. But she'd a big braw stewing pot. And that's what it was made in.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 All made on the fire?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 On the fire.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 How about the washing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Well - just -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Was there a wash house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Were no wash house, just the big pot for washing in too.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Done in the kitchen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 In the kitchen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 How about drying, did you have a back green to dry them on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 And - well, there were
 - there were a big wooden partition ken up along here, like - for the other side of the - ken the houses like you know. And I mind my father-in-law, that's what he did really dear, he went and he put pulleys, and the rope and my mother just turned the ro
p
e ken like that, and - the clothes went along. That place then it was not - or she wouldnae go in, but - when the steam - at - Burns Street, it opened, there were a place, they called it the Mulhoe then, it opened for ken going with your washing like what
 
they do - the launderette or something now. Well it was just you ken and paid so much an hour for to do, and old Jessie used to be doing it, and you got them dried too, you ken, pay so much and just in a drier. And that was handier yes, for her and that, 
but it was a big - iron pot, and I can mind three legs, and there it used to go in that fire.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 How about your clothes, did your mother make any of your clothes or were they all bought?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Well to tell you the truth I think they were just all handed d
own. That's what it were - ken like, although I never - I - I - I just - wasnae very guilty and I didnae - although you ken and that in them days I was more temporary, I didna fancy ken and that, but our Jessie, my oldest sister and that, and she would - 
wear - jumble sale - clothes and get them shortened or - oh Jessie would have had - 'cos Jenny - always known for that. Oh just didna care about their skin, wearing other folks clothes, or even our Jessie's. I was the only one like that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 With a big family like that they would have to be handed down.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Aye. And - well, and they the likes - mother's sisters had they been the same, well - it would just have been a case of it you ken. But I'll say that much even we ken for your - for yourself like, I'm
 not talking about the young ones now, but - I mean even they'll talk about their short skirts and things and that. Oh I can mind - I never wore long clothes. I didna wear long clothes then, and I could mind when the hobbles - come into go. And I used to 
-
 away Georgetown, I used to walk there, this Miss Kane was a tailoress, and I used to go away - out there to get my clothes made. And this wee costume. And - of course Miss Kane says, what do you ken? Oh well, I says, I want a hobble. And it was only you 
k
en what they - what they call them - whether the mini is or no now they call them I don't know, but you just strided in them. I've - I've skirts in there and that and that's the - I don't in case I fall like that so I have to wear this one for - for - but
 hob - we called them hobbles.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 How old would you be then? Was that when you were earning money yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 That - oh when I was - started working. Oh aye. Oh it wasna afore - never - like afore}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7291225\charrsid9768143 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 hand. In fact I'm going - in Plainstones you ken, thei
r clothe, are - you ken, wee frocks and things was cheap but in my more mature life - I didna ken but - you know like to get - ken I didna fancy other folk and wearing them - or cut down to me or owt like that, I just be ken - you know, just to ken if I s
t
arted working or not, and it wasnae the - as I tell you the money we'd to hand it in. But a half crown maybe. And it took me a bit of saving up a half crown a week, to get what I wanted. Of course I'd get the material in the mill. And then I had to have i
t - aye, it was cheaper and that, and - then - I would save up again - for - to pay for - for the making of it. Oh never - ken like waste it or owt like that for another.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 How about shoes, did your father mend your shoes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Yes. He could - aye, he d
id it for a while. And then he just - because - I can mind and that that he - he called them last - a last. And there were three sizes of the feet like, you ken, what I would take and that. And he used to and that, and then he stopped. Of course he could 
have got a wee pair of shoes at one and eleven}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7291225\charrsid9768143  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
pence ha'penny then and - fancy ken like I mean but then leather he could have went away and got three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7291225\charrsid9768143 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 pence}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7291225\charrsid9768143 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 worth of leather, up in Bailiffs in Queensbury Street. He went up there and he got a bit you ken. Wel
l, it was cheaper and that right enough. But - ken he just come to that stage day, he wouldna do owt like that, he wouldna be bothered.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did you always get new shoes or were they handed down sometimes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Well no, never - I never mind - I never - o
h no, I - I - I never mind wearing ken - handed down shoes or owt because I mean even for your feet and that - just the same as them, I've had them for years and still as I say - they've come in handy because they're that comfortable on my feet, and that 
t
hat - that's what I said to the doctor, and I called - I call them my hunting shoes. But I put them on but I put the slippers on for a wee change, but oh no, the - ken what I mean even - shoes or owt like that or even what we called sand shoes, what - at 
the school used to say gym shoes. Well all - just called them sand shoes, you got them for sixpence a pair, depending on your size.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 But you never had to go without shoes then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh no, no. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7291225\charrsid9768143 No, barring if the sun was shin}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 ing and taking your shoes off to run -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 If you wanted to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did your father help much in the house at all, even in the earlier days? Would he do much to help your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh I - I - I don't - think - I mind her always saying like about - the first 10 year of h
er married life - was - ken - happy. But he used to get out and get a drink. No drunk like I mean. That - that's the way she put it once to me, ken, when I started once, ken, when I was - saying one day and says - Help me, I don't know what kind of man he
 
is. I says, oh he - he would - oh really, and you ken poor soul, that's what she turned round and said. Well she said, the first ten year of my married life was happy. And then he stopped the drink. Went off this. Wouldn't - wouldn't spend a ha'penny. He 
wouldn't spend a ha'penny. It was all him saving.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Do you think he would help with decorating the house and doing that sort of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh, no, I don't think he - didna think he did anything like that and - my oldest sister like and that, was when s
he got an age she was paperer. Ken, she was a great one. Even she'd have done it if you'd said to her, come on - she loved papering. She used to do all mine and that, she - never was asked either, she just, you ken, even when Bob was ill and that and she 
w
ould say, oh well, she said, I'll do it, and ken I used to say, oh I'll try and do it myself Jess. But - you ken, you're not trying it, I - I'll do it. But she loved paper - she was a great one for decorating. But I canna say that I can mind my father, I 
canna mind.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did he ever take much to do with you children when you were small? Would he ever take you out without your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Dinna think he took us out at all. It was just a case of - go - his work. Getting his tea, ye ken, cleaning himself, w
ashing himself, I'm no going to say dressing himself, and away a walk, back again, got his supper, into bed. Up and out at six in the morning again just like what we were. And the same thing, that's what went on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 He never helped with the wee ones?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Never, oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Bathing them or dressing them and that sort of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
He never - no - that - that's what I really say, I don't understand ken men and that who - ken like - oh well, Bob wasna like ken, I mean wouldn't have said he was a Jessie o
r owt - owt and that but - ye ken, help ye. And I could have telled him anything. And got his advice, but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did you have any jobs to do in the house when you were young?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh we had our work to on Friday night and - well - oh well, maybe running a
ll - use to be the message hand and Jessie was one, she was the nurse, ken, nursing weans or taking them out, you ken, the - the younger ones I mean. But I was the message - lassie, I run all the messages. But on a Friday night, we'd all our own bit, like
 
all had to do this room and our Jess another you know, and Lily the other one, but we had to do that afore - even if we were going out we had to do our room before we gout out. But then werena ken, say at a dance or owt like that. Oh no, you'd to be in at
 
a certain time. Ten o'clock through the week. Nine on a Sunday night. That - I mean you didna get, ken, I - I could enjoy myself when I was out like that that, but it was just a case of - you had to be in because the fear was on you, he always made - you 
k
now, he - ken - you'd get locked out, you'll get - well that always used to fear good, and I can mind one Sunday night, sitting at the top of the Craigs, that was and I's - favourite walk, and we used to sit there, oh it was lovely, ken, and - he would be
 
telling me this place and all you ken, and where they were and that, and I can mind this Sunday night and I happened to say, what's the time Bob? And of course it was a packet watch, I have it - I it's in the drawer yet, and he - just going on to nine o'c
lock. Oh and I just got up. Oh, I said, and I can mind we run from the top of the Craigs to that house in Burn's Street. And we hadna time even you ken - no - no time to say goodnight and up them stairs and got into the house.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did you make it in time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
I got in anyway. I got in, aye, I can mind of that, that's what I often say - you ken, I'll say to Nessie - now young ones and that, heavens they're only - some of them's only going out at ten o'clock at night. And I says your old mother had to be i
n. In at nine, a Sabbath night you had to be in.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did your younger brothers and sisters have to do any jobs in the house, or was it just the older ones that got it to do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh just the old - just - the same with every family, it was the older ones 
that got it. The younger ones got, ken, that was - time was going on, the wee bit things better than one thing and another and then getting married and then they were away out, but the old fellow you know what I mean - he was left up there, on his own. Li
ke they all got married, he was left up there. And then we - we - Johnnie and Bessie, ken, running about and so forth, that's how. But I never bothered, no, I never - I cannae - I mean it's an awful thing to say but no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You just didn't get on with him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You say you had to be in at a certain time, were you expected to go to your bed at a certain time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh well of course at the school we were away bedded early because I mean he was - himself. Nine o'clock. And you had to be, you ken.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 How old would you be when you started to put yourself to bed? Would you be quite young do you think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh I think we would be all young I think, it was a case of just all helping each other and all but - oh I think and that - oh just - aye, yes, for to -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did you have to sleep with somebody when you were young?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
I sleep - them days as I tell our ones, they'd not believe it, there were maybe two at - the top of the bed and two at the bottom. And there were two small rooms and there were a 
big room and there were beds in it. And of course - my father never slept, you ken, my ma was left in the kitchen. And it was iron beds. He never slept with my ma, not that I can mind of. He got away into the room and he had to have that bed by himself, k
en, a single bed. He had to, and then my brothers, there would be - maybe about four of them in that bed. And then there were the four of us in this other bed, as well, and it was top and bottom.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did you always slept the same way, did you and your sister always sleep in the same bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh aye, the -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Or did you swap round, did you change the place you were sleeping?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh no, just you ken, the two of us at the top. And then - likes of well, our Lily and me, we liked at the top of the bed, an
d Jessie and Maisie, well they rather - they had to take the bottom like or not. And the boys were the same, I mean the - the families and that they were alike. They were the same then. Maybe that's the reason why I cannae sleep myself, I don't know. But 
I you were younger then and that that - you just didnae think about it ken. Been different ken, sleeping with brothers or owt like that, they wouldn't have liked, ken, the likes of that. Oh no, there were none of that, no, there were none of that -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Not even when you were quite small?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 How about eating, where did you eat, in the kitchen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Just in the kitchen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You must have needed a big table if you were all going to sit down at once?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Aye, I'm telling - a big - oh yes,
 I mind Bob - made me once - it - it went out too I think. Just a big kitchen plain table ken, white wood plain, but Bob and that and - and the four legs and that, that's - ken maybe - when we were married first like and he just, you ken, he wasnae - hadn
ae the - doings then, and - and the four legs I mind he - he had a wee - machine and kind of thingummyjigged them, and I had that table for years, and that's where I baked and everything on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did you ever eat in any of the other rooms?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Not for special occasions?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 No. No, we'd all - just in - everything ken was in - done in the kitchen. Your sink and everything was in there.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Can you tell me about breakfast? Your father would be up first and have his breakfast before you were up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Just - that's - we were out at six I'm telling you and - ken when we were younger of course he carried on. Six o'clock, he'd be away by maybe half past - a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7291225\charrsid9768143 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 ways - he was always early - going to his work. He'd always, and that's what - he used to rub 
into us. Always be in time for your work. Always be there on the dot you know. But then he just had that routine of working and that, and - as I say, at the end of Suspension Bridge, meeting and they would have a wee blether and then away to their work. T
hen - home. Got his breakfast, away back again, dinner time night away his walk and then bed. That's all. He never - he never, I mean -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 When you were at the school what time would you get up for your breakfast then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh I wouldnae say I was ken a 
- I was much of a riser and that. Our Jessie ken, she was the one, she was a grand riser, she - I always tell Irene that, I says, you're like your Aunt Jessie, ken, rising. But she was a good riser like, but then when I got, well maybe when I was about te
n, as I think I told you before and that, I started and that - Wyllie the baker, running messages.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did you do that before you went to school in the morning?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Afore I went to school. Delivered rolls, and that was away down the Middle Road, this Ard
weiler the hairdresser and I had to be out that door at seven I got told off - she wasnae a German, she was an Englishwoman, but she married a German, this Ardweiler, and if I wasn't at the door I got told off. And I had - I - I got the rear then, I had t
o
 be there. And Johnny Marshall, he was manager of Mc George's factory, in fact Lizzie Marshall and that like, his daughter - married Mr James, and she lives about Cardoness Street Lizze. She married the boss's son. But Mr - Johnny Marshall, like we're jus
t
 used to calling him that, because ken they were in the Territorial Band and - you ken, the old ones and they were all, ken and this is the way they talked. But I went and - then - here, the next thing was the - Reid the baker. And that was just - it was 
a
 shop, I don't know whether it's still there or no, they tell me half of the buildings are down, I wouldnae ken you ken, I'll say, so and so. Well there's no such a building there now. Oh well it was there you ken when - but it was just across from Brooms
 
Road. And of course here Reid the baker. Of course - I says, oh certainly. Well Reid the baker, it wasnae that I'd that much to do there. I had more for Wyllie the baker ken, I mean - going away along yon Middle Street with two - baskets of rolls and - th
e
n pay on the dot, cash, credit and everything, I had my wee book, to write everything down you know. But Reid wasnae so bad, it was just wee messages. And I went to this Miss Fenwick. She's a high class confectioner and - and her shop was just across from
 
Loreburn Street. Aye, whether it's there or no either. I just crossed over there so - here I used to for Reids - yeast like. Wyllie the baker used to get bags, but Reid the baker, ken, he was just a wee - smaller. And - you ken maybe going for four ounces
 
or wot like that. So here Miss Fenwick - this day she says to me - would I - would I mind, ken, like - just, ken, an odd message or two. Silly me again. I says, certainly. Now I had them three shops. I done it then. I can hardly think myself and that, I s
i
t here and often wonder how I did it, and I - I don't know. I used to call into Reid the bakers first. Coming out of school, like, St Michael Street school I went to. I'd call in and see if there were any messages. Well, maybe there were nothing. Then fro
m
 there to Miss Fenwick. I used to go up there, I would leave Wyllie the baker to the last because - I kenned always there'd be - some kind of job I'd have to do, even they would have me scrubbing the - the floor, and it was bare wood, and they'd have it w
hite. After I left the school and that, I got that job to do. And it was to be - Mrs Wyllie - let me see how to go by the grain by the scrubber. And it had to be white. But only -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You started doing this when you were ten?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Well - I - no, well - n
o, but I did - had - I had washed the shop out you ken and that many a time but after I left the school, of course I started with Wyllie the baker, and that was two and six a week. I had only half a crown, working there from - early morning to yon time at
 night.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 What did you get for going messages?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Well - Reid the baker - sixpence. Wyllie the baker sixpence.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 For a day or a week?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 A week. Miss Fenwick - I got sixpence. I got like the sixpence, sixpence - she - this is what she said to me
, sixpence for your mother, and that penny's for yourself. And any tips that I got - and that, you know what I did? I bought a wee sixpenny bank, I don't know whether you can get them now, but it like held the forty sixpences. Well, I went away at Wyllie 
t
he bakers, and - and I left my wee bank there. And whenever I got maybe - six pennies, I used to say to Mrs Wyllie, could I have a sixpence - for them coppers like, and in it went. And the first time I filled that wee bank, and you ken it - burst open, I 
mind, on the counter, it burst open. I kenned how many I had in, in fact the wee pin gave you an idea..
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 And I give my ma the - nine and six. 'Cos I bought the wee coat and I give my ma the nine and six.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 There must have been a bit of your father in you too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Ay? Oh aye, but it didna get on my - oh no, no, it was just that I was anxious if I - I wanted a thing, even all my married life, if it was only threepence putting by and that - I would thingummyjig, but I must have that money before I got
 the thing. I couldnae like get a thing and then paying and paying and paying, I must have the money. If it took me years to save for it. It - yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 What kind of breakfast would you get when you were at the school? Would you get a cooked breakfast?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh heavens no. We'd just a bit - you just had to have what you got. Maybe a bit toast or something I think.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You didn't get porridge?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Well, some of them did and that. But that was just one thing my father, my ma had to make him porridge every
 - like at breakfast time, not at six, when he come home like, he - loved his porridge, and I think one or two of my brothers and that, they liked them. But no me, I never liked - I wouldnae take them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You were never keen on it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 No, I never fancied porridge.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
What was your mother's attitude about that sort of thing, did you get to eat what you wanted? If you didn't like something could you leave it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Well, tell the truth, and I often say when I tell our ones about it, I say, that was the
 mistake. I was very saucy all my days. And when I came from my work like and there my father would be sitting, and whenever I opened that kitchen door, and you ken of course your eyes went to the table, mine did, went to the table. Oh, and I just used to
 
turn my head away like that. Say it was broth - or anything, I'd and of course my mother right enough she's say - what's wrong? Well, my father then - I don't know whether I was a favourite of his - or no, I don't know but it didnae - it didnae - it didna
e
 fancy me, I wouldn't have went with him anyway, anyway - I can always mind he used to turn round and say to my ma, what's wrong with you? She said, did you not see her making a face when she came in? No, he says, I did not, and he says, and the lassie's 
n
o saying a word. Leave her alone. And you ken I've to sit and - I used to - the vegetables, and - kind of - I'd just get the stock of it. But I don't know, oh it used to make me fair ill, and lots of things and that and still I often say, I didna blame my
 ma, it was my father, it was him that made this mistake because it was a case of - oh, ken what I mean. No - and you see - and I often say that's one thing I must thank that infirmary for.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You'd take anything now?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 And I can take - and I - it's a
 God's blessing because the simple reason is, if Irene and me and now ken, I like to study her, and I'm thankful and that because the simple reason it would just cost money, money, money, you ken what I mean and down there and it was just a case, many a t
i
me, ken, many a time it used to turn my heart, ken and I - and I can mind this day, propped up, oh it was broth. When the wee nurse, ken, like you know, although - although you ken what I mean - if I'd asked for something else I would have got it. But I j
u
st took it like. You ken, you're sitting and - sitting. And oh I was fair - and then - I didna ken, something just - said to me inside get it over you woman. It over you. And here heavens I thingummyjig the plate of broth. I took the lot. I ken, I just ha
d that for - can - cannae - so here my n}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7291225\charrsid9768143 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
ece and that - she's - a nurse like, just part time like, she's married now and like she's part time, so here - Betty come down this day and they were - you ken, three older women as myself, I used to like sitting wi
th them like and that blethering, and here Betty come down and wanted to ken how I was keeping and that, and so here, I says to her, Betty, you ken - what your auntie had today? She said no. And I - I was shispering, I says a - I says a plate of broth. We
l
l I have to get - of course Nessie and her was great pals, ken and she was often in the house and she's often and that in my house down there like and then - they lived - down the first opening you ken like, Here, I says, but - oh, she says, I just - ken 
a
nd that. Oh well, she says, auntie you shouldn't have took it, she says, mercy me, she says you would have got something else. Well I said look here Betty, I just thought you ken, I just didna like refusing. Ken I mean you do many a thing your own house m
a
ybe you didna like - that's one thing about me, if I was going to anybody's house and I got something - I'd put it over me, rather than say, oh I didna like it and one thing and another because it's - it's - it's - horrible and that you ken when you say c
a
nna take this and I canna take that you ken, and - and mind it's just as you're brought up. Because the simple reason is I'm telling you, if I'd been made to take the thing at the time, and I says I don't blame your granny, I said, it was your grandfather
 
because it was a case of - he couldnae see any wrong in me. Oh if I'd have kept - I knew I maybe would have ken but, no, my mother come first. I - I - I maybe would have got all his money and everything - if it's - but, it was him that did it, no so much 
my ma.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 What did you get to eat then if you didn't like the broth?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh I would have to get a wee bit something else, maybe a wee bit of meat or - or anything like that, I would get - ken like, say - say tripe too, that was another thing. Tripe. We
ll my ma - although - it would maybe just be a quarter of mince but I didna get it all to myself. Ken like I mean I go some, maybe a quarter of mince. And that's what I used to - and he couldna get me to take, ken when - ken - with the tripe I'll certain 
s
ay, oh I couldn't - oh no, I couldnae - oh I couldnae face yon. Just couldnae fancy it, do you know. Well - aye, well, I don't know, I was telled what the trips I was like and that and - what - oh the very thought was enough and that, and there used to be
 
- this - just kenned as Dan, I didna ken what the man's other name - was, and iron barrow ken like they used to have long ago, and I'm telling you, them two big baths as I'm talking about, when I bathed myself in, the rest of the folk too if they did, and
 
there were - one bath with - what you called the reeds, yon ourly - dark tripe, and the other ones was white bags. And of course he used to come round so often. And of course my mother would say to me - go down and get ken - a red and a white bag, and it 
was only three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7291225\charrsid9768143  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
pence. But then she'd the cleaning, and - boil it all night almost, you ken, and that, oh I wouldna have bothered doing, I mean - I certainly got it, but I - it was cooked tripe you ken you like but Bob and that I got it every Wednesday for h
im. But it was his stomach, the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7291225\charrsid9768143 ulcer}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
ated stomach, and I used to get it and still, you ken, I never ate it myself then. But all the same always got him - maybe - half a pound, it was just half a pound, but I always got him his - tripe on a Wednesday.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 When you were at school would the family as a whole get meat every day or was it just sometimes you got meat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh, think it was just sometimes, in fact I tell you - the God's truth and that - unless - ken - I'm talk - liver like. Now there, ken what 
I mean, you could have went - and a penny's worth of liver. That was the way it was selled like, our ones say, hope to goodness you didna tell folk things like that woman. I says, I'm only telling the truth. And I says - I'm no heeding, I says, that's the
 
way it was sold, I says, Davie Milligan at the bottom of Ninth Place, every Monday night the tripe come from Loreburn Street, the market where - I don't know whether there's a market there or no now, but the market and that and tripe come every Monday nig
h
t - the liver. Now - the lassie at home, of course I tell you about her and she had some blood injections, it wasna that she wouldna be alive, well I kenned well enough always they said liver was good and even anybody bloodless, liver was a good thing - t
o
 take. So I said to Irene one week ken, I says - I says, look here Irene, I says, get half a pound of liver - for yourself and that and I says, you ken. Oh she wouldn't - she wasna fussy like queue you ken for all the ones and - apparently Ethel Murphy an
d
 that, their mother's had big families and that, so anyway, here - it come to my turn. And I went to the counter and - I had the two pennies like and I says to Mr Milligan, I says - penny's worth of liver Mr Milligan please. Ken, young still. And I got it
.
 I says, I want another penny's worth Mr - Milligan please. And here - when I went up home, and I said - my mother says, what you got? I says, well, I just - you ken what I did ma? I went in and I asked Mr Milligan for a penny's worth and then I asked him
 
for another. And she couldn't - in fact she'd a good laugh at - ken me doing that, and - she says, oh mercy me, she says, in fact for a penny - she says, you've got as much for a penny there as what Jessie got for tuppence. She asked for tuppence worth yo
u
 see. Of course this was the shops and that - Wyllie the baker, it was rubbed into me, this and that and - do you ken, of forth that I had a wee bit off. So - here I did myself. I had that job to do every Monday night. Ma gave me the two pennies and down 
to Davie Milligan's I had to go for my liver.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Would your mother get bones for stock or something to make soup?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh aye, there were just - oh aye, there werenae so much - boiling meat or anything in them days you ken, although, you ken seen her ha
ve maybe half a pound of boiling beef and a marrow bone. But that was making a big pot of soup to - to do two days with a crowd, you ken what I mean.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You got a dinner at dinnertime?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh aye, aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 What would you get at night?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 I dinna think we got that much at night either.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Would it just be pieces again?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Piece of maybe - what - maybe - the - what do you call - oh, I dinna think there's such a thin now, polony. Well the - the - is there polony yet, a big red like sausage? Well, 
sixpence a pound - it used to be, I can mind of that, and it was very nice. And we'd get a piece with that and - and a cup of tea and that was -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 And maybe a scone if your mother was baking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 If she was - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 How often did you get cake?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Just on special occasions was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Yes, special - I sometimes often sit and think and that when I go back and I see - you can - hardly ken credit - ken them things and that. But then it - it's - I'm no meaning that it was - you ken, we had
 to - that - things and that, it was - they were selled like that you ken what I mean, as I say - I said to Nessie - no disgrace a penny's worth of liver, I says, that's the way it was sold, it - just cut a bit off. Oh, she says, dinna tell folk and that'
s
 what you ken, I say's I've nothing to hide, and Nessie I says, I don't care, I said, I'm telling the truth. And then there were - used to go to the butchers, that same man, Davie Milligan, and it was like meat cutting. You ken. And now - of course I'm no
t
 shopping and that but Nessie's telled me and that, she's went even for cooked ham, this shop especially, and when you get home, big lumps of fat stuck in and lumps of this stuck in like. Well wait the now. We called them meat cuttings. There used to ham 
c
uttings. When I was wee, and I - I had to stand at the widow and watch ken when there were kind of wee lean bits. Then whenever I noticed there were lean bits, in I used to run, you ken, and get them like. Well, Davie Milligan was the same, it was meat cu
ttings. Sixpence a pound. Three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7291225\charrsid9768143  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 pence }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7291225\charrsid9768143 
for the half pound. And you ken}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143  I used to stand at the window, ken and - so as he wouldna see me and that and - ken how they cut a wee bit off a st}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7605709\charrsid9768143 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 ak and laying down - they laid it down then and that and so forth, and 
oh dear whenever I ken I seen the lean, away in. Well my ma there she could make soup, she could make stew or anything out of the meat cuttings.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 It was a bit fat for making stew with was it not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Aye, no, wee bits of st}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7605709\charrsid9768143 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 ak, she would pick them o
ut. Oh she was like that, she'd pick them out. I - IIrene and that - the other week, she says to me - I've an awful notion of tattie soup. Well, I says, what about it? I says, get a bit of nice lean - boiling meat and - and I says - you can have your tatt
i
e soup, and it's a thing I - I'm no - you ken what I mean, I didna ken when I last tasted - but anyway I says - get it then. So of course you ken - and - and here it was - how many pence was - forty - forty odds or fifty - forty odds. Forty odds - odd pen
c
e To make a wee plate of soup for her, like I took it myself too but for her. And here of course when she give me the line, and I says to her - what's this Irene, I says. Oh she says, that's for the meat. And I just went down the line with the pen and awa
y
 in there to see what kind of meat it was. And here, it - it was a wee bit rolled meat right enough. But then you see she doesna take meat, she's not to take meat like and that. And - I'm left with that - ken, I would have to - either that or - throw it o
u
t and I grudge of that, and I dinnae - I don't like waste. And I says, Oh, so I've warned her now and that. And I telled her like, I says, look here Irene, all that you want to ask for is half a pound of lean boiling beef, and just say that's what you wer
e
 told to get. Because I said I've got to eat it. So I says, it's no good paying all that money when you're no - and I said, I'm not going to chew it all week and one thing and another, so, I says, get - so here she's got it and the - what - oh it was eigh
t
 or nine pence and a nice bit, ken, the right boiling beef, what you'd make the soup with and that. That other stuff's all right if you're cutting it up in - for a teatime or anything like that but then - but she'll no eat it. So anyway she's thingyummyji
g
ged now and that. And last Saturday and that so she says, I just told her straight, and she says, it's only half a pound I want. It - it's only half a pound she wants. I said, no say it's for your own mother. I says - you tell - just tell the - the woman 
or whoever it is that serves you - that - I'm awfully ken - ken this and and that for messages and that, I says - just tell them the truth. I says, I'll no head. So she says, last - where was she - last Saturday - and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 How about Sundays when you were school age, did you get different food on Sundays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
No, just be the same. Just the same. Went to Sunday school, come back and got your dinner and went away for a walk, come back again and get your tea and all the tea ken it didna take long to - all that was there for you.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 What did you drink when you were wee, did you get milk to drink or was it tea?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh just tea. Oh, you dinna - ken, milk and that, you didna get in them days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did your mother not buy any milk at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 She had to buy
 it for tea and my father's porridge. But - he had to have his porridge and the milk right enough and that, but - I think Billy was the only one that for - I don't know what it was but - or whether he was fond of milk, many a time he got a wee glass of mi
lk.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Was he maybe needing building up or something?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Aye, well he once - he was knocked down - with this - it was an old bicycle wheel and this lassie - and of course he got a cut, in fact he went to his - grave with - ken just like a - just a cros
s across here. Oh we had an awful time with it, oh - terrible. And I dinna think after that he was - that he was just too you ken and I think my mother thought he really needed -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Maybe needed a wee bit extra?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 And the likes of me I wasnae so bad,
 when I - ken, even Wyllie the baker, I was always getting a wee bite there. And what - I used to be telled and that - if - I, ken, wanted, if I was hungry, just to - but I - ken, I wouldn't even take a bun without ken going into the back shop and saying.
 
Ken, I would go and ask but - Mrs Wyllie used to say, if you just feel hungry Jennie, take a bit of whatever you like like, but I - I asked always first. I couldn't - aye, oh I just didna like lifting the - or doing anything like that. So I wasnae so bad,
 you ken, with that, I was always -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You never felt really hungry?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh no, I couldna say.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 How about vegetables, you wouldn't have anywhere to grow your own vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 No. You just went to the - stalls for them. And - up at the Steeple t
hey were then, and then just across from Burn's Street, Kennedy used to have a store. Just across like and that. And - you ken like - them with the nursery and all the vegetables, and we used to get three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7605709\charrsid9768143 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 pence}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7605709\charrsid9768143 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
worth of vegetables for broth, and you got away from the parsley away down to - ken, all the vegetables, a bag full. Three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7605709\charrsid9768143  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 pence.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 It must have been quite a stand by for the likes of your mother when she couldn't give you all meat every day.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Aye well, I mean, with - with the soup and that,
 say that and - one thing and another, ken, the strength was - in it, and had everything you ken likes of now with vegetables, look at sometimes the price and one thing and another. They're -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 And then they're sorry looking things sometimes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 And 
then - aye, aye, a lot of rubbish, I can tell that with Irene bringing it in, I'll say - that's just rubbish, that's terrible, paid that - so - oh it's no worth oh - really and honestly.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did you ever get tins of meat or tins of vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 No, no. Well the - the - corned beef of course, it was - cut like. It was, you ken, big - a big tin like, no a wee tin.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 It was cut up in the grocers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Aye - like - with the weight like and that. IT WAS CUT Up in the grocers. But there were never - no 
wee tins, I cannae mind - bar - I'll you what I can always mind, the John West's salmon.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You got tins of salmon did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh I - and it used to be ten}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7605709\charrsid9768143  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 pence you ken just I don't know what they'll run about now you ken. No, no, a wee wee tin I ken - I canna - about that depth you ken. And it was ten}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7605709\charrsid9768143  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 pence, the old many, it was ten}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7605709\charrsid9768143  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
pence that. And I mean when it was opened, and - we got it on a slice of bread and that - we were - it was a treat.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did you ever get fresh salmon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 No poachers amongst your friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Well I was just saying to a gentleman that was in here yesterday about - a cutting. Amongst my valuables ken, all them paper cuttings I have. And this - in Burns's Street - and this }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7605709\charrsid9768143 \endash }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143  Morley}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7605709\charrsid9768143 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 s, I don't think you'll
 - well, we always used to call them Moley. But I don't know whether Smalley and Morley's the right name. But I don't know whether - he would - in fact I dinna ken, there were Joe and Jim Morley. And Steward, Alec and Tommy. I couldna tell you where they 
a
re, I think Irene telled me like Joe - is it the - kind of - oh in Burns's Street - a - a - a kind of ken - lodging house or something ken, men like and that. I think what you - board - a - oh well, Joe was supposed to be in there, but whether he - that's
 
the truth or no, I don't know, you ken what I mean as I say, if I read in the paper or anything, I see a thing in there I can - I ken it's the truth or not. But for taking in stories - I dinnae - I didna listen to them and that. Well as I was going to tel
l
 you - and here - their father like - salmon - oh mercy, and they just all - in fact, tell you what - ken they used to - nickname him, the father like, Auld Pishy Moley. Now I can always mind of that, ken, the - the older ones and that, they - ken, they u
sed to say, well there's old - sitting at his door again. And the salmon, and oh my God, oh right enough he was a great - and that aee Hutton -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Was it poached?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh he didna poach - no, he wasnae a poacher, no he was a fisherman right enough. Oh h
e was a - aye, oh aye. Oh aye, he wasnae a - well could have known maybe though to - could have poached, I never was thinking about that, he could have poached in them days. But anyway, the photo, and - here - I sit here and I looked at it and as sure as 
death it was just him, ken, sitting at that door, and I'll guarantee he made pounds. From Americans, you ken, with Burns. They come - and coming along Burn's Street, in fact I needn't talk, we used to be standing ourselves.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Was the Burns's house near where you lived?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Now wait, aye, yes, there were - we lived there and Morley down the stair, and then there were - the Industrial school, ken, for the boys like and that, and then Burn's house. And Bobby's statue was on the wall. And I can always mind,
 ken, trips or suchlike in, and we used to stand, and many - many a copper I made myself. And it was a case of, please do you want to see Burns's house? Oh I can just picture myself you ken. Please do you want to see Burns's house? And there used to go al
o
ng, and then it was case - that's his statue on the wall. All when he died you ken and - and so forth, and Jimmy Morley, ken, like - no every day I mean, I'm no saying he was sitting there with his salmon every day but he would be sitting and all them sal
mon, and his cap was sitting and they used to throw money in - to his cap. Although many a - good penny ken we made ourself like, we just took them down, but then when this - Mr and Mrs McLean took it over - oh you wouldna have k}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7605709\charrsid9768143 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 nned it like, they'd - love
ly flowerboxes out, oh and all tulips, wallflower, everything. Well I believe now - I - I've often thought you ken, if I just could get round to see old Burns's house again, I believe that they've - took all them down, and it's just the old house. That Bo
bby, aye - likes of - Mr McLean and that, oh it was beautiful, ken the flowers and that, but then it wasna becoming because it should have just been a wee humble - cottage. Aye, that's what I say.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did you learn about Burns when you were wee?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh 
- oh, aye, I - I had the - had the clatter off then too but I canna - you ken, what I mean, I often say I cannae - and what - I had a - a book too, I think it was the - the - the Express I got it, Burns's - works like. And somebody got a lend of it and I 
h
ave not got it back and I cannae mind who that was. Would you believe it? And I fair - oh many a time I sit and say, ken, if I just ken I would - ask for it, because I wouldna be, you ken, I - I couldna do anything like that if - if a body's good enough t
o
 give me a lend of it, I'll get the thing read and hand it back. That's me. But I - that Burns's - works and that, I don't know - and I cannae bring myself - to mind who that body was that got it. I was just a case of, oh Jennie, will you - could you lend
 me it just you ken. And I never have got it back.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Was the house open to the public in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh - oh yes, oh aye, just, aye, yes. Go up in that and then there were a stair up, you k}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7605709\charrsid9768143 now}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 , the rooms at the top, aye. Like you'd - pay admission 
like and that. Well, you always put something in like and that. And then from that we waited 'til they come out. We wait, you ken, our own clients like, and - they liked the Mausoleum. And just - and - away up to the Mausoleum. And there was another maybe
 three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7605709\charrsid9768143  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 pence you got. And three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7605709\charrsid9768143  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 pence was something in them days for -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You would do quite well in the summer with visitors?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh it was - you've no idea what it was like.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7605709\charrsid9768143 Was there a lot of bar}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 ns round about Burns's Street there then doing this?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh - I'm telling you when there were a - crowd like us, there were all crowd - they're all big families in them days, you ken what I mean, it was just a case of - you had to be there first, you ken. But many a time I - I - I can picture myself goi
ng along the street, please do you want to see Burns's house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 And you put on your best accent?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 And used to - aye, tried to - kid yourself on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 If you got odd money like that what would you do with it? Would you take it to your mother or woul
d you have an ice cream or something yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh no, never - we never bought sweeties or anything you know. Just always you ken like my ma and that, oh here are two - she wouldnae - like - she wouldnae you ken like - take the money off - like the ol
d fellow, if you'd - ken, went in to him of course he would tell you off doing - ken, going about like that and he'd be saying you ken thingummyjigging for money. But he would have took it. But my ma wasnae like that. She's like - ken, she'd a wee bit ind
ependence too, she didna like you ken and that, so - ken, I - I - I would say and that, look ma, what' I've made. Just showing them to Burns's house you ken. Look what I made. And she used to tell me to save it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 And you did did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 And I did, b
ut then it was to buy clothes for myself. I didnae - oh it was always put to a good use like. It was always something I bought for my back.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 What sort of family did your mother come from, did she belong to Dumfries?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh aye, my ma - oh she was - o
h she was well enough brought up and everything and that. There were only the - the boy and lassie like, like my Uncle Bob in fact. Jardine the joiner, you've heard about Jardine the joiner? Tommy Jardine. Well the - Tommy - yes, ah well, he's married a c
o
usin of mine. And there were just the boy and lassie like. There was my ma and my Uncle Bob. My granny had no more. And - I'm no saying they were brought up in luxury or anything like that, but my ma - but - then the old fellow, I dinna ken, he must have 
been - something too, like his - his own bringing up must have been - I don't know, he must have been -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did he come from a bigger family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 No, no, there were only the boy and lassie with him. His sister, I was called for you see and that was the n
ame I never liked. Oh when I ken, I - and Jennet. Oh - the only - thingummyjig at the Sunday school every Sunday I got Nettie. And then when I went to school on the Monday morning, it was Jenny. And it was funny that, you ken like and that and there's tha
t
 - nephew of mine over there, and - even his wife - and even yet it's always Aunt Nettie. Never you ken, of course Bessie said that at the time you ken like what - what - just the same with my ma. They called my ma - the - two boys like, instead of granny
,
 it was ma. And the old fellow was Ap. Ap. Grandpa, Ap. That's - aye, this - aye, and - I got the name - Aunt Nettie. And them two are - men now, and still they call me that yet. But then I was called - and I often when I - my father like, whether he idol
i
zed this sister, ken, she was in Glasgow, but he idolised this - sister of his, and - whether it was me being called for her, in fact the first Janet that died - she was called for her and then when I was - on the go, I got the name. So whether it was tha
t, that he - I - I - I couldna say and that, but he was - they werenae brought up in big families.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 And yet yours was a big enough one?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 And my ma and that, there you are and that. And still my Aunt Mairn like - oh - my Aunt Mairn I think, she had 
about - six, or either six or seven lassies, and one boy. My cousin like, Bob Kennedy, but he went away - he emigrated years ago you ken like and that. But - she - look at, she had a - my Aunt Mairn had a big family.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You were sayin}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7605709\charrsid9768143 g }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
that you had to sit beside your father at the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Uh huh.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did everybody have their own place that they always sat at?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Ah well I think you just got to that kind of - stage that you ken you just - your old chair was sitting and you went but - I always had
 to sit beside him, and I did not ken who used to sit on the other side because - it just was a case of - I had like - my ma never got sat down to the table, that's one thing. My ma, like you would sit down with your man, you would you ken like and that. 
I wouldna like to sit down - and mine no sitting with me, but my ma never because - she was always busy - attending to us. Aye, dishing out and one thing and another, she was - never - never hardly got a rest I think and that. Never got -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 So you reckon sometimes your mother had to go short?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh I - aye. Aye, I think that often. More tatties and that. Many a time and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 When you're small you don't realise it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You - you don't, but we you ken, I - I likes - I've come to this maybe - if I
'd been ken in a - put out about and that, I wouldnae get as much, but I sit here many and afternoon and just - you ken, picture it all, and getting time to - ken, and - it makes me - it positively makes me ill. And then as I say, that was one thing about
 my man and that, ken after the old fellow}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7605709\charrsid9768143 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
, he got rid of my ma, I should say that's what he did, he was kind of the castle. And - I give Bob his due, that was one thing, ken, he was good to my mad. And it wouldnae matter what I have give her he wasnae a m
an for to turn round and say, ken, like some men you ken what they're like, you're no this and you're no carting this and that to your mother. He was just the same as me, and I think I'd - ken she'd had happier days - after. But all them years of misery.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 To go back to mealtimes, were you allowed to speak at the table, or did you have to be quiet and eat your food?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Talk - you wouldna hear you speaking. You wouldna need to talk, you ken what I mean, you can talk to the young ones nowadays, it doesn
ae matter and that what but in that - oh no, we never - I mean they didna say the creed or anything and that, you just sat down and got your meat, but that was the lot. And there were nae talk - 'til - he was away to his - aye, whenever he went away for h
i
s work and then we'd all squabble ken and talking about this and talking about that, whenever we got him - no there. We never - you ken - he - he wouldnae - he wouldna listen. He was a man that wouldna ken listen. Even ken at the school or - or maybe comi
n
g home and - and maybe saying about the exam or anything like that you see - he wasnae even so - you had to wait 'til he went out, likes of my ma and that you say to her, oh ken I had an exam or - what happened at the school or even if we got the strap - 
you ken, we always - we always said. In fact, I - I - I only }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7605709\charrsid9768143 once got it and by J}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
ove I - I never wanted it again, and I never - and Mr Henry - he was headmaster and I have his photo in the - in there too, and - and got the - they nicknamed him Old Henry, bu
t he was awfully firm, you ken, and was again but still not that's no to do with it, but when I went from the infant class into the first - first class as we call it, so here of course he came in, and good morning, and then there was something, and he ask
ed me and I answered him.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Was it the wrong answer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Come out. Come out. And I go into the middle of the floor. And here, his wee pinkie - I can always mind - ken it was stuck like it thingummyjigged out like that - aye, it stuck out. And here Mis
s Bell, you ken, the teacher and that, he asked her for the strap. And he caught me like this. Oh I can see him yet. I - I - I never thought any the less of him though for I liked him you ken, but I was that day, I was fair took. And he - just - oh took h
im as long to get it over his shoulder.. And it come down, oh I neverly broke my heart. I - oh I - I was - I was ill.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Was it the fact that he'd hurt you a lot or was it your feelings that were hurt?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh - oh I felt it. I felt it and that but I jus
t - I don't know what it was and that, I - I don't know and that that strap, and him doing it. Ken like getting it from the headmaster, I don't know and I just went into the first class like I was -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You would only be about six?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 I - oh - yes, wel
l here - after he went out - so Miss - Bell says to me - like I seen him like, he was talking to her, like before he went out like, what they mostly did, so it was after - he went out, she says - Janet, come here, and she - ken, to the table. She says, yo
u
 don't know what you got that for - that - strap for? I quite innocently said - no - no Miss Bell, no, and I'm holding my hand like this, no Miss Bell. Oh I was broken hearted right enough. She says, well, she says, I'll tell you what it was. He says - sh
e says, you answered quite correctly. But he's deaf in the left ear. And he didn't -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 And he didn't hear what you said?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh and I - the - oh that - I said, and that but I says, oh my goodness, and I said, that's what I got. So here - when he come 
back the next morning - she just - ken she was talking but I didna ken what they were - about and that but anyway, he come forward. And here - well he didna come forward, I was in the second row like, he come up - and anyway - very sorry. Sorry it happene
d. Well I mean the likes of today if he'd done it I'd have said, aye, it's all right you talking, but anyway then you couldn't have turned - and still - I thought there were nobody like that old man.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 I suppose it would take something for a headmaster to go and apologise to somebody in the first class.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Well - I have his - I just was telling ours downstairs and they say, who's old Henry? Who are you talking - that's what I get from - ken, who are you talking about? Oh, I says, I wished I could meet 
somebody that - kens you ken or - or was at the school and we could talk about them old times and one thing and another but I says - he was and that and I says, anyway - what was it Nessie said, something to - I says, aye well, I says, we had to respect t
e
achers. Wepd to respect everybody, in our days we had to, and she makes out, she says, oh aye, but she says, buy you dinnae thingummyjig, the folk'll tramp over you. You know just ken. I says, oh no, I says, nobody'll tramp? I says, we were like that in t
h
em days. Had respect for our leaders. And another thing, I says, talking, I says, it's - it was always - children should be seen, not - but then - you see it's different than that, now. I mean - oh no, no that I've anything to say, because I could get on 
w
ith the young ones just as well, you ken what I mean, but I mean, I wouldnae - when - I'm talking to you like this, when I tell Nessie she'll say, and did she listen to you? That - now this is what I - yes, more than what you'll do. And then it's a case o
f, she must have no other option. Oh dinna be}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7605709\charrsid9768143  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 funny, dinna be cheeky.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did you start the school when you were five?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 St Michaels would be the primary school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 That's - yes. Yes. Then - at twelve went to the - aye, after we're through
 to the ex sixth - George Street, what you call the Technical school now, well George Street. Oh aye, went there and I went in for - domestic, you ken, that's where learnt I - what, cooking and everything, see or to - ken, some of them be clerical work or
 
anything like that, well I kenned well enough it was nae ken much use to me, although I mean - I could have done it and that, but anyway I took the other and laundry and washing and things so - I had it - to my advantage at the finish and then left the sc
hool. Whenever you were fourteen, your job was - you had your job before you left the school. I was away with the baker then.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Was it twelve?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Twelve when I - aye George - we called it George street, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 What hours did you have at the school, when did you start in the morning? When you were at St Michaels?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh nine. Nine o'clock like, to half past twelve. For our dinner. And then back again to - half past three.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Was there any kind of school dinners in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Nothing like that? None of the children came from so far away?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
They never - it's only in one - thing I mind that was in the town like, I never went like to it like but - you called it the soup kitchen, and if I can mind, it was wome}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7605709\charrsid9768143 n }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 where up by Queensbury Street.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Up about Munches Street?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Up Munches Street, that's right. There were the soup kitchen and they went with jugs to get soup, and - even coffee, they would take jugs of coffee and big lump of cheese.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 I didn't think coffee was as popular?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Ah well that's what - they used to say, and that, because this lassie I ran about with and she says, I'm going to soup kitchen for my mother's coffee ken and all. And I went home, I said to my mother like I says, what about - goi}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7605709\charrsid9768143 ng for - coffee? I says, Maggie}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
 says she's going - goes ken for her mother like. I says, I'll go and - but of course my mother said like and that she said, oh she didna go there you ken like and that, because - my father and that, it would just have been not allowed that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You think your father would feel it was beneath him to go?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh, no, it would be - spending a penny or tuppence - that would do him. That's aye, that's all it was. And what - there werenae so much go and - and - in fact in them days - and I c
an mind of Bob and that too, and - like he was kind of fond of coffee, but was ken all the bottled coffee then. There werenae this Nescafe and - all them, ken like ground coffee. Well -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Camp coffee?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Yes, yes. There were only one place I think i
n the town and that was Lennox the grocers, and it was fresh ground coffee, ken, for I mind when we was at George Street, ken, this big machine, and you seen them put the beans in and there it went. Well that was the thing I wouldna even Bob too, and - an
d I used to say, oh I dinna ken how you can take that, oh - oh he ken, and he thoroughly enjoyed it. And still it was down at the infirmary I started with coffee too.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 But your mother would never have coffee in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh no, she never, no. No.
 Aye, but I had - ken, what I mean I just - in that - that - day the wee nurse says to me she says, what about - ken, trying a coffee like? Oh, I says, pooh, oh no, I said, I'll no - well - oh no, couldnae - I just told her straight, and there were everyt
h
ing on the tray, kind of trolley like, everything and - and that, and it was her that said to me, she says, oh, she says, try it and if you don't like it like - then you'll get something else. Ah well, from then, and I like my coffee. And never - in the m
o
rning and that if you come you - there's only - in a morning and that and if I take a notion - and a cup of coffee. And it's still there, her at Summerville, she'll no take it. And her man's the opposite and I've seen them, ken, if Irene's in and saying t
o
 Irene, wee cup of coffee. And there - she's to make tea for Nessie. She'll not have it. And - with me - and if I took the notion - a cup of coffee, and even cheese I never used to be fond of, I can take ken I get a lump of cheese and kind of slice it and
 kind of thin. And I sit here and I can thoroughly enjoy it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did your mother go in for cheese much when you were wee?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh aye, oh there were always cheese, aye, oh aye, but it was only sixpence a pound then. Mind, there were a Gouda cheese what I 
don't ken, what - whether it was skimmed milk or what it was you ken it was big round thing, I think it was about }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7605709\charrsid9768143 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143  three}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7605709\charrsid9768143  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 pence a pound or something, I maybe used to to Lipton's in the Square for it. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did you ever get cheese and pickles?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh
 we never - we never - oh we never got pickles. That was - that would be a luxury. I do now, I - I - ken what I mean, I'll certainly say that - I maybe didna then but the likes of pickles, and that was a thing when I had rheumatics and I was }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7605709\charrsid9768143 v}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7605709\charrsid9768143 r}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
y young at 
the time, I mind Dr Kerr, he's no here now but - I can mind that was - one thing I was to - never to take, a pickle. Or vinegar. Well I'm still - and if I take a notion even beetroot, I can go in there and just get the whatnot, the beetroot and take it. B
ut I like the - Irene likes cauliflower in the mixed pickles. You k}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7605709\charrsid9768143 no}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
w, she leaves the onions and the - ken yon green - things, the green -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Gherkins or olives?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Whatever - aye, well, I eat yon you see and that. But she took a notion at the weeken
d, she said, I've brought a jar of Branston Pickles. I says, funny you saying that, I said, I was going to say you ken about it. But then they - they vary with the prices. See, Irene'll say, I like to get it when it - if I see ken maybe the bit I'll say, 
j
ust have a look and see ken like and that. Well you see, Nessie's like that. She'll just like - like many another boy - just needing a thing, ken, getting it or needing it you see. And I'll - ken she'll sit there and I'll say, ah well, you old mother's no
t
 like that. Because I says, if I'm ken getting it cheap - I says, I'll put it by, I says, I've been like that all my days. And then, I says, maybe the day comes - maybe I havena money or anything to pay for it, I'll always say - and I keep it in there, an
d
 she - many a time or ken, an odd time if she's going in there she'll say, heavens, you've an awful - I says, well it doesn't matter. I said, the day might came as I tell you before, I havena the money. Well it's there, and I said, I've got it cheap, and 
I says look at now the prices and that they're charging and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Your mother would never make wine or beer or anything like that would she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh ginger wine. Gin - ginger wine, aye. Ging - like we used to get the bottle of ginger wine - essence and - water and sugar.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did she make that at Christmas or the New Year?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Just for the New - aye. Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 She never made beer or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh no, no. Oh no, no, that's - ken, the old fellow as I telled you and that even with that you ken, wou
ldna - no, he wouldna - wouldna waste his money on anything like that or -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
When you were finished eating at the table did you have to say something before you left, did you have to ask permission to get up or was it a case of when you were done you went?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
We just - I think you got up because if we'd have said - can - we leave the - it' what you would say now, it would just be a case of, have you finished, get up. Aye, that's - that's what he would have said to you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did you have to sit up straight and use your knife and fork a certain way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Well to tell you the truth and that - I dinna think we - I dinna ken about the knives but for the forks and that I dinna think there'd be much go - ken - have many forks in the house, that about the size of it. But if we -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did the wee ones maybe get a spoon to eat with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
It were - oh that's it - just - get it over you and that was - it wouldna matter what it was but - I mean you werena like - taught like, young ones nowadays to use a knife and
 fork. You just had it to get over you. You see, the likes of me - being even at George Street and learning all that, and then with Wyllie the baker as I telled to you like, there was catering - parties and all them things. Well you see, I got learnt ther
e you see with all the - and how to, ken, put the fork and knife - knife and all the spoons and other, that's where I learnt it all you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 But you didn't learn at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 But I didna - oh no, at home. No, no. Dinna - have the time and that for anything like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Did your mother and father ever tell you how to behave with your younger brothers and sisters? Did they ever tell you to do so and so for your wee brother or don't do something else?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh well, he was - like that, he just - ken -
 just gone by what he said. And finished. He was the boss. That - that's what I'm telling you you see, that, with my ma and that and he was king of the castle like. Just the same as Johnny's wife, I mean - it was her and it was her that - ken, for Johnny 
-
 he'd come up there and - and see that - and I said to him, I said, I think you had an awful cheek Johnny, I says, think the rest of us as is left. I says, no that I'm wanting any of his money or anything, but I said, I worked hard and sore just like the 
rest and I said, I think - so he admitted then, oh well, he says, it wasna me, he says, Bessie wanted out. Well you see there the law turned. Family. But it wasna them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You say you got on well with your father when you were very small? You said that you were his favourite?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh I never you ken what I mean - should - he used to I couldna do any wrong you ken what I mean, the likes of our Jess, my older sister, if he couldn't ve got a catch at her any time, our Jessie used to get it. But I cannae mind
 ever you ken bothering much with him. Because as I tell you and that by the time I got my messages - and - the shops and then Rotchell Park, I went over there and washed steps - and it was a teacher at St Michael Street school, Miss Caldow, I have her le
t
ter in there too, same as the rest of them and that's no yesterday, and they went away down to London. And this was a letter - wondering if my mother and father, I think I telled you, would let me go down there. And whenever he read it - finished. And it'
s getting yon way with old age and that, tell you the truth. Well I got three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7605709\charrsid9768143  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
pence - over there and - on a Saturday morning I done the back stairs, ken, just up to their drying green, and I got a sixpence for the Saturday. So my - I mean - I wasnae much in
 the house like but I had the benefit of the time. But I mean I was busy running, ken, messages and that. No - I wasnae made do it. Ken what I mean, I was nae like, even - my father, he didna make me do it. He just - I just - that's what I often say and t
hat, I wasnae - I wasnae made do it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 How about your mother, did you get on well with her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh I liked my mother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Was she the kind that was easy to speak to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh - anybody. Anybody - anybody that - ken, minds her and that will tell you the same. She wouldn't have harmed a wee fly.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Sometimes people say that now that mothers and children show more affection to each other, they kiss and they cuddle each other more, was your mother the kind that would give you a kiss and a cuddle?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh my ma was like that and she made us the same. My ma - no, my ma you ken, kind and that one thing and another. But we were all the same to her.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 She didn't make more of one than the other?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 No, that was one thing, she didn't make - didna do it. 
And then, my granny like, she lived in the High street, and that's where you would have found us oftener. I liked my granny too, I liked - that was my mother's mother. And oh I liked my granny, and she was just the very same.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 If you were worried about anything you would go and speak to your mother rather than your father about it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh I - oh well of course the - the whole thing was and that that - he wouldna listen to you. My mother was the one - you just - aye. Ken you could - I would go to her a
nd that but - I mean, or - if you - or getting into trouble or anything like that, that would - that would have been enough you ken. Or if anything harmed you - outside the door, and he would have done it. Ken what it mean, it wasna a threat.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 What sort of thing would he have thrown you out for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Well say and that - maybe - I had went with Bob for years and that, and maybe it come - and I had to get married or anything like that. Oh my goodness, it would have been terr - I often think of this - her
e today, there's half them would work his old barrow for him, because they wouldna - aye, but it's the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7605709\charrsid9768143 trut}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
h, they wouldna, you ken what I mean, but he just always you ken, it was a case of you ken no that we were thinking anything like that because - as I
 say, years ago - nothing like that never you ken - passed through our minds or - or that or - or boys and that or playing with them and that, we never thought anything about - ken, what they get teached nowadays certainly there - there - there's some of 
t
he boys, they're really - they'll maybe need it and that but - I always say that - lassies and that - I don't know, I - sometimes, ken, maybe I'm mistaken. I think maybe you ken a lassie's a lot to blame. I don't know whether I'm right or no, but - Nessie
 
wouldna have it that way. And she'd, what do you mean by - that? I says, aye, well I says, now look here. I says, some of the lassies, I says, I'm no classing them all the same - and I says, I had proof of it up at that school, and I don't know or care wh
o
 - that - on there this morning just brought me in mind of the whole thing. The whole drawings. I never seen the likes. I says, I'm no classing every lassie the same. But I says, there is some lassies and I says, ken nice boys and getting them - in fact I
 
was that - mad you ken at her, ken, I just got it off my chest. I says, well what I'm meaning is - ken, it's always a case of - what do you mean though? So I just - I says, what I'm meaning is - I says, some lassies would just work a boy up. Now I says, I
'
m telling the truth. I says, and the day I'm no sitting here I said, or maybe it'll come back to you and just say to yourself, you'll say to yourself, my old mother, she was right enough She's right enough. No, I says, I'm - aye, well - here she was telli
ng me the other day - oh no, Linda was down for - a weekend like. Oh just -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Did your mother sort of bring you up to be like her, sort of fussy about these things and worried if things weren't just right? Or do you think it's just the way you are made?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh I think - I think - I think myself and that just how you ken. Although I often say - they'll say and that well - your mother - you are natured, you ken, you are natured like her or anything like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 But you don't remember your mother ever saying to you, when you're grown up don't you be like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
No, oh that - that was - one thing she never - you ken, and after we were - ken married and that, she wouldnae have said - you ken, or anything - oh no. Oh that's one - you ken what - she wo
uldn't interfere or said you ken, and I - I can always mind - I thought it was a great novelty, and here - wee Bert like and here of course - I was just three month married when I fell wrong, because that was just as bad as the long - ken, years afore tha
t
, but anyway it doesn't matter. My God, I was fair - oh, I was over the moon. I I was fair delighted, From English Street I run down Queen Street and along Shakespeare Street through the Mill Hole, and - to tell my ma. I can her mind her just saying ant t
h
at to me like, she says, oh well she says, I'm pleased and that but she says, you ken - as much as - I hadna got much time. But I didna thing nothing you ken about that, I - I was fair ken over the moon, and still I lost him you see when he was six month 
old. And he'd have been forty-eight on the 25th of July. Wee Bert would have been.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 What did your mother and father think about swearing? Did they swear themselves? Or were you not allowed to swear in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh the - ken - the old one - maybe ken in the mill, but oh my ma didnae - she never - oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 What would happen if you swore in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
I - oh heavens you darenae and that, that's what I often - I've never - even Irene Nessie, too, if you heard them something in their talk abo
ut a thing and you ken maybe this B---- and - I just - ken - now, that - that's enough, I says, you don't need to use that word, and - even on there, some of them programmes. Disgusting. I'm - mad at that, believe me, you - you - you ken I feel as if I - 
i
f I could ken and that but I'll - I'll put them through, ah but it's disgusting and that, that's pure, what I say - it's pure filth. And for the sake of it, that's the whole thing. Oh no, no, and - Nessie'll say, oh you could swear yet. Oh, I says, look h
ere now, now, I says, if I happened and that to say it, I says, always ask God to forgive me, I says, anyway, it's no, ken, necessary that you should talk, I said, you dinna need to bring that word in it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 If you did something that your parents disappro
ved of what would happen? Would youget a telling off or would they go further, would you be punished?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 If I did something?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 If you got into trouble?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh - well, getting into trouble, I doubt - I doubt - I'd get over the fingers for anything like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Just with the hand?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Mm hm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Apart from getting the strap at the school you didn't get a strap at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh just that - that was the only - the thingummyjig, oh - oh I - what we called the tawse. We called it - and he made them
 himself. And they were leather.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Your father?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Aye. And I mind at the mantelpiece and they used to hang on this nail. And there were four - legs as you - and he used to burn them so often - to make them hard. Yes. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did you girls get that as well as the boys?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Eh? He would have used them in a minute. And thought nothing about it. That's what he made them for. But then we kenned and that, you ken, we darena and that because we were feared for them tawse.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did you ever get it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 No. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Do you remember any of your brothers or sisters getting it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
It was just the threat I think, that's - yes, I just think that's what - they - what it was. Although I'm - I'm - no going to say he wouldnae - ken he was a hard man, he 
would have used it. He would have done it if he'd - he was a very very hard, you know what I mean. No mercy. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 What sort of things was he hard on you for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh maybe if you'd been doing - no that I can mind of - ken any of us and that doing ke
n anything wrong or - or anything like that, I mean, we didnae seem - I dinna ken, just like any other family I expect. Didna - ken - getting into trouble or anything or - or - or that, I cannae - seem to, ken, think that they - I dinna mind, no, that's w
h
at Nessie'll say to me too, about - ken - badness, now as I say, you ken the now and that with badness, ken, men and women, the way they carry on and so forth, and - she turned round and said to me one day, she says, aye, but, she says, I believe, she say
s
 - it went on in your days. I says, what? She says, I believe it went on in your days. And - the same ken, all the trouble but that's a different thing like with - with what they had and all this and that and you ken what I mean, as I say to her too I say
s
, aye well, I never - heard tell of it, ken, now. But she says, aye well, you talking, or even them having a wean, and no married or anything, she says, that never happened in your days? I says, I didn't say it never happened, I says, I know an odd case. 
B
ut I says, they werenae, I says - made - marry or anything like that because I says the simple rea - I says, that's how many a decent lassie was left. I says, it wasna a case - I says, nowadays I think it is and that, and - they've got to marry them. And 
t
he girl was left, yes. But I says I canne - oh she says - well of course - his mother's - different to - to you, ken like - well I think we were brought up different even from them for all the - anyway, she's old as me but she man mind of this and that, b
u
t then - I mean, as I say, just at the present, she's mixing ken with a different class of people. And John'll say that himself, ken he'll say - you're no - you're no - you're no like my mother. And he doesna talk about anybody but he says, you're no like
 
my mother. He says, it doesna matter what - you offered her, she would take it. But you're no - you're that independent - you'll no unless you pay for it and so forth, he said, my goodness, he says, Rachel, that's what he calls her, he says, my God, give 
R
achel anything and - and - she's to to the stage too with him and her, and there's only one of the family and they think that - they're - better - they're no better off. The fellow left the buses to make extra money to kind of keep himself, but he's takin
g
 it out of himself and that, like he's in ICI but - he left the buses, they're getting bigger wages now, but five or six year ago he fought for it and that and he liked the job. But he only shifted for to make - because - three pound odd's a lot for a ren
t and so forth. But then, his mother -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
When you were wee were there many books in the house? When you lived in Burns Street were there many books in the house there, were you readers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Ah well - the - I'd a brother and that, he was a great - read
er. Of course he was the smart one you ken in the house like, he was and he could have got somewhere if he'd just had a - had the chance like. I mean, from the school like.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Which one was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 That was - Billy, he would be - aye, the - Davie, an
d Lily, and then he come next. Now he - that one you ken in latter years and that, he had a band. And I don't know whether you've ever seen Billy Miller's dance band, but our Bill had the dance band for years, and they lived in Brooke Street. And it was a
 
Cheltenham girl, like Mabel come from Cheltenham, and of course he - oh just three or four year ago, ken, he died. And Mabel of course - was left like, with nae family you see, there you are again, they'd nae family. And Mabel went away back to Cheltenham
.
 And she's a sister and here she was left a widow, Mossie, she was left a widow, so Mabel and her are living together like, but at Cheltenham like and that, and she often comes but - it was last - summer like for a holiday, but anyway, she took-bad and wa
s whipped away back like and that so - I don't - I've never heard - how she - ken got on like. But he was really - ken he was a smart one like you know and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 And he might have been one of the musical ones?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Aye, yes, yes, I tell you, we were a
ll - from the cornet to the - to the violin. But the violin - likes of the other - brothers and that - as I tell you the town band, I mean their instruments, they got them. They - from the band like. Cornet, euphonium and - and ken along they went, but my
 brother lives further down there, oh - violin. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did he have one of his own?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Aye - had to - oh of course I think maybe half a crown it would cost you ken then. But anyway, it's a wonder my father - ken, bought - bought him it for - because 
- you ken - it's just money but this - Harry Adams, of course he'll be - away, dear knows now, but - he was a - a great musician, this Harry - Adams and father and him was - very friendly, and this was a violin that was supposed to be ken years old you kn
o
w. And - Bob and that, give him his due, and Harry Adams tutored him. Of course my father paid him so much, you ken. But Bob and that and ken honestly, he just - Harry always said and that - he just had the, ken, the way of playing that violin. Well Bob h
ad - he wasnae so much - but he could with instruments. But they were all musical, and as I tell you, our Jessie now, a piano if she'd have -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 But your father was willing to get the violin and so on and he wasn't willing to get a piano?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 He wasn't 
- no, I wouldna, would - poor Jessie, if you ken, it was just the boy. And of course it was that musical himself like. And - oh aye, with being in the Territorials, the army like and that, and the like of - Doctor Kerr, well he was Colonel and that and - 
s
o forth and that and they were all - and they used to - ken of course when you're young listening and it was just - like - Doctor Kerr just Peter, and Peter you ken and - for anybody, ken, men in the house, you just listened, and you - you got them all of
f
. But anyway my father was a very same. For all, you ken, in - later years in this room they always - all their instruments was there to - to pick up, and oh - the, ken, I sit and think of it now, my father and that used to - and he was a cornet ken with 
him and all that you got was, Sausages for Tea. Oh there were sausages - oh my goodness, honestly and we thought he was, you ken.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did the Territorials have a band too then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh aye, the Terriers, aye, yes. Oh aye, the Terrier Volunteers you ken what I mean.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 That was just something he did in his spare time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh no. No, no. No, no, he never - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did you play anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Me?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did you get a shot at the cornet?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 I have - maybe I should but I dinna think there were - any musi
c in me at all. I used to think I could sing. As I telled you and that whenever I started he said, there's the fog horn started again, and me trying my best, and then - oh - ages after that, ken, a gramophone. Oh, mighty, when I think about it, and it was
 a wee thing, you ken, the big horn. And - the - the records wasnae laying on, they were round. And you slipped them on. Three and six. There - that's - the music, ken. The music we got.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did you ever collect together as a family, maybe on a Sunday night, and sing all together? Or did the boys play their instruments together?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh well the boys - they were mostly at their practice, you kwn at the Town Hall like that was in Shakespeare Street. They were mostly at the Hall practicing you ken, always at - something on there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 They didn't practice at home much?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh - oh they did their time for that you ken, I've seen them going into the room having a blow like and that and so forth. As I tell you, that brother up the Lockerbie Road, he was - onl
y nine - and he gave his first solo in the - Drill Hall, and ken when I see - there's that wee boy in there singing and carrying on and then it struke me one afternoon I says, Mercy me, no need to talk. My own brother was only nine, oh I didna mind it, bu
t I says, he was only nine when he first solo in the Drill Hall. And he must have been away - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did your parents ever play any games with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh no. I tell you and that my father and that it was just his work and away out for a walk. Back, get
 his supper and into bed. Up the next day, just the same.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 And your mother would be busy looking after you all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 My mother - that's - she had plenty you ken what I mean. And if no she - ken she used to take us up to my granny's, that was in the Hi
gh Street like, we hadnae far ken, as I talk about that Mill Hole for the Burns's House and cut through, and - just up the High Street.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Sometimes you played games maybe of a night like snakes and ladders or ludo or something like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 She would never sit and play that kind of thing with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh - I've seen, you ken, me, I mind I bought a - a ludo and it was only sixpence. I'd to say up for it like and that but I got a ludo and it was only sixpence, and many a time we used to sit 
and play ken. At that. And my ma - I - I - it was of course me, I used to say, come on ma and have a shot you ken and see ken and that and just - of course my father was away out and that, and we got away with - I'm no saying we got away with some - but y
o
u ken we were more freer when he wasnae in, and you could enjoy yourself and have a laugh where - if he'd been in it would have been a case of coming out and saying, what's going on, what's going on, and that dumped you, that was the finish and that. Spoi
led the whole thing.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Can you remember anything that you did with your mother and father at Christmas time when you were wee? What was Christmas like when you were wee? You would hang your stockings up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 We hung our stockings up but - all that we 
got was an orange and an apple and two or three sweeties. And then I was very old, I tell you, it was a wee sweetie shop and maybe it would be no more than sixpence, we - we ken bought a - ken, just a wee thing, and I can mind that Christmas - Oh I was ov
er the moon with that wee shop. I think everybody - ken the lassies like even at the school - oh I thought it was great you ken, and it would cost no more than sixpence I don't suppose.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 How old would you be then do you think? Obviously you were at the school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh aye, it was after I was - oh aye. I'd be at the school for a while before you ken - I got the likes of that. We certainly hung our stocking because I can always mind ken the fireplace, and we all had you ken, in fact we used to - I used to
 write my name on my stocking as if, you ken, of course there were no - well ken, not today, all - we knitted them at the school, our own ken but there it was and that. And I used to have mine, I made sure you ken, but that's - that's all we got.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did you have any special meals at Christmas, like now you get a big Christmas dinner?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh no, no. Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Would you have a Christmas cake or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 No. Never had anything like that either. That's what Nessie'll say to me too, she'll say, I di
nna ken - in fact to tell you the truth, it's - it was for Linda like that I - I used to get - get a wee tree, I liked - decorating it then, and then - it finished up an artificial one. And oh I used to ken - because Linda was - when she was young, and sh
e
 ken, she likes anything like that, just like any other wean, and I used to sit many an hour decorating it, that I've all the - ken, the decorations like, all in bags, and I used to spend - oh and I was in my glory. And of course - now - you see I've got 
a
way from that too. And of the one at home of course, Irene, oh she'll bring it, we have it in a big bag you ken, the tree, and she brings it out and of course decorates it up and it's only you ken for the - for the likes of her, 'cos Linda - Linda's like 
that too, like any other she thinks there ought to be ken a tree. She wouldna say to you like and that, but still I know and - I mean I'm no out of pocket because I've had it for years.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did many folks have Christmas trees when you were wee, can you remember seeing any?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh no. No, I canna. But maybe at the - Sunday school ken, our - Christmas - do like, a wee tree maybe you ken like and getting a wee present maybe, no much and that, but getting the likes of that, but it was only at the Sunday school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 How about birthdays, did you get anything for your birthday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 I canna mind ever getting anything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You don't remember any of your wee brothers or sisters having a birthday or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 I cannae mind - well, maybe the youngest one, I
 think our Walter, he would maybe get a wee thing you ken, but there's an awful thingummyjig between us, and that but I still say even at the present I think the younger ones ken get - are inclined to get a wee bit more and that but - I think our Walter w
as the only - only one - that ever got a wee thing. That's the one, he was born - when the Titanic - was - sunk. That Sunday night.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 How about Newspapers, did your mother and father get any newspapers regularly?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Well - that - Weekly News as he cal
led it like, we used to call it, the Dundee News you ken. My ma used to get it. And on a Sunday - now what was that paper? She used to get a Sunday paper. The News of the World. But - Irene always ken - I'm always saying about getting - I says, I think I'
l
l have a change to the Sunday Mail. I think I'll - get the - the News of the World. Oh she says, get away, she says, you're no getting yon paper with all the scandal, all this, ken, she just - gets it off her chest. But anyway I says - oh well, I says - i
t's just for a bit of a change. But - my father of course, it was his paper. And my ma had to - and the - Bulletin. Ken. A daily - the Bulletin. That's what was in our house. But my ma got them like and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did you bairns get a chance to read them or did you not bother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh I used to like reading the paper. I, ken, even yet that I like ken if I read a paper and kind of tally things up and that it's just the same as shops and anything, and the prices and that. I sit and I - I study like them up. O
h just to - ken - or maybe - maybe - having more time I don't know and that but still I know and it just - I mean keeps me going.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Was your father a reader then?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh he liked his paper. And I mean it was always maybe - after his tea he'd have a s
kip through, and then away out for - ken, just down to the Suspension - there used to be a week - dyke do you ken, off the Brig, and the tuners ken, and the - men from the mill, there, and then away they went a walk. And back again, by the time he'd come 
i
n it was supper time. And maybe a wee - and then, off to bed. And you werenae long till you had to - vamoose too. Of course there were nae - no wireless or anything like that, you had to - as I tell you that wee gramophone. Three and six. And when I think
 
of them records, you - I dinna ken - if they're - on the go. I can - mind ken of what I - and slip them on like the - like the barrel like just slip it on. Just - and old fashioned, that's how you ken - this woman through the wall, she had - well, his wif
e died like and that and then he married her just - about six month after, I was only down here - a week and that when - his wife died - it used to be terrible, that's years ago.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Was there much difference of opinion between Catholics and Protestants here?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh - oh then, oh aye, they - they - and the Catholics like and that, the likes of Glasgow, that's where you seen the parades.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 What about down here?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 And - well there werenae so much - you ken, down here like and that. There were just th
at wee - ken, and that, no that it made any difference to me, because the simple reason - I run mates with a lassie - and she was a Catholic.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did she go to a different school from you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Aye, oh she went to a Catholic school in Brooke Street like 
and I went to St Michael Street. But still - Maggie and I got on like that. And then - here, on a Sunday, like I'd go to my own Sunday school like, and then after - after - getting your dinner like and that and you - you went out ken afternoon. We used to
 
- land away to the Convent. I used to go with Maggie to the Convent. And of course - I can mind it was like a big veil, and all the - you ken, the folk - we just heard kind of voices like, but - you were sitting facing this way ken like an altar, and they
 
seemed to be at the back of you, but you couldnae, ken pick them out but oh the lovely voices. And then it was then - it - and - you ken, it didna - it didna say inside but I said to Maggie like anyway, I says, where was yon voices coming? You'd have actu
a
lly thought it - it was coming from the heavens, you ken? Oh lovely sweet voices. So Maggie telled me. Oh, she says, Jennie, she says, that was the nuns. She says, you couldnae - but they were at back of you like. Got a big heavy kind of veil or something
, and she says, it was them. Oh, I says, what lovely singing, oh really and honestly, you ken, it was. Anyway, we used to - then on a Sunday night - we finished up at the chapel.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 What did your mother and father think about this then?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 At wait now
. I think about him. Here Maggies says - to me this Sunday now, she says - we'll go to the - she didna say chapel, she said, we'll go to the church like. She says, what about coming Jennie? Oh, no harm in it. I says, aye, I will, I says, I'll come. So of 
c
ourse she warned me. She says, there's only one thing. She says, you ken, you'll have to - ken, kneel, do this. I had to put my hand in the water, the Holy Water, and - I had to cross myself. And she says - ken, will you do it, because - ken there were pr
i
ests and father or something around it, but anyway she says - you ken. I says, certainly. Well I thought well - I thought nothing about it. I says, certainly. And of course when we come - went into the door and this - big thing whatever it is in the bowl 
w
ith the Holy Water, oh heavens I put my hand in and all the water was over, ken I was that excited, and Maggie looking as much as you ken. But anyway - then when she come to - ken, where we were going to sit - we had to get down and, you ken, like this, a
n
d we got in. Well, I went to chapel with Maggie for long enough. To here - my father got to hear about it, and oh he's bitter against the Catholics. Would you believe that? Oh, what a bitter man, ken, with the Catholics. But anyway, here of course it was,
 
oh - oh for long enough and I fair enjoyed it, went to the convent as I telled you - in the afternoon, finished off in the chapel. But I was at my own Sunday school, it was at two o'clock like in Irish Street, Greyfriars. Always was at my Sunday school li
k
e. And if there was anything special on at the church like, but I was always at the convent, and I - I - I liked the - the nuns singing, it was lovely, and going to the chapel at night. So here this - it was a Monday dinnertime as usual. Sitting at the si
d
e of him like and he says, where was you last night Jennet? Oh of course never thinking - I telled him. I telled him the truth like. He says, yes, he says, I heard all about it. This had been - a weaver - was good enough to tell him. Oh maybe the woman of
 
course never meant nothing by it, just like ourselves maybe passing ken, oh I seen your daughter at the chapel, or anything, maybe no, but he mae it such - so he says - oh it's - true enough? Aye, I says, I went with Maggie and that, I says, I go to the c
o
nvent in the afternoon. And I says, I've done it for a long time. Well, he says, you go - keep away from them two places. Now, he says, if I hear - about you being back - and that finished it. Now would you believe that? And still I got pleasure out of - 
ken - I - I went with Maggie and - and I - I really thoroughly enjoyed it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You said your father was in the Masons? They're very much anti-Catholic aren't they? You didn't get Catholics in the Masons I don't think.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 -Oh - my father wasnae a Mason. 
Oh no, it was - my own man - my - Bob was - of course like Bob's father and - even his brother Jock over there, they were all you ken like - they just join I think joined it after another like and so forth. Oh no, my father - but I'll tell you what I thin
k
. A - a communist is it - ken, them kind that argue and bitter, I think he was - something to do with - that, but - but another word, ken, down at - at the Dockhead and that, used to be, ken - they used to have ken on a - on a - platform, and lay it off l
ike and - and that, it was something like that. I dinna ken if you'd have called a Comm - Communist or - or - that wasnae the word like - they used about him - like agitators. Ken, they were just a crowd of ag - agitating.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 He wasn't a Bolshevik?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh it was more like something like that you kwn, like well - maybe - if it was now - maybe they would get called that. But he was that kind of - ken what I mean.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 He was interested in politics then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Well sometimes - I dinna ken whether - they us
ed to be surprised at him - being, ken, a workman - and that was years ago where they - you ken, there were only two parties. There were - what we called Tory - and Liberals. Duncan was the Tory. And - and Gullane was the Liberal. And I can always mind ab
o
ut, ken the two cards like just like what you get yet, and there was Dundan, that was him - from Newlands. This is one of the - one of the older ones, ken, I dinna ken whether the - the family's still continues or no but - it'd be one of the older ones li
k
e. Then. But he was for the Tories, we called the Tory. And old Gullane as they called him - was for Liberal. Well the working class and that was more - on - for the Liberal - then. And her of course I can and that this day, and of course - ken, at the sc
h
ool like, and of course this Ethel Murphy I run about with too, and she said - she was saying about, ken, like - did - your mother get - ken - gullane and - and Duncan's - photo? And I says - aye. Who does your father vote for? Just you ken naturally, any
b
ody would say - I says, oh I couldna tell you, I couldna tell you who he votes for, but I says, anyway, I says, I ken - he took gullane's photo - now, I can mind of that, and he tore it into; and into the fire. Oh, she said, Jenny, dinna tell me, she says
,
 that your father returns a Tory. And of course I wasna interested in them things then. I says - I didna know - I says, oh well, I says, that's what my father did. I says, and Duncan's photo's up on the - the old mantel. I said, Duncan's - he put Duncan's
 
photo up on the mantelpiece, and old Gullane was torn into - bits. Now I can mind of that. And Ethel thought - oh, she said, mercy, I never thought for one minute Jenny - mercy me, they're all I ken more for - ken - Gullane, and it used to be vote, vote, 
vote for gullane and that you ken like.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did they have unions in the mills in those days? Were the weavers and the workers like your father in a union?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Well - it - it did come and that, ken, a union - cropped up. But - I canna just mind when it was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Would your father be interested in that sort of thing?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
And - he was - wasna interested in - anything like that at all, you ken what I mean, he just - wasnae - but I can mind and that of - this - union, and it just had started. And I mind - t
he meetings was held - held in the Labour Hall. I can always mind of that. But anyway, here they're coming out on strike.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 When would that be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 But I was - oh well - when I was in the mill, weaving. And I canna just exactly say how old I was but a
nyway - here it was going to be - a strike. Well, here they picked me, and ken, you know one or two of the younger ones. We were to be the pickets. And that of course, when I went home that night - you ken, at tea time and that, as usual he's - sitting yo
u
 ken at side of me so - he was saying like - so I says - oh, I says - I'm going to the - the Hall. I says, I'm a picket father, I says and naming the other three, I says, we're going to - and we've got to keep them out, keep them you ken. And that was eno
ugh again. And he dared me to go. He dared me to go to that - but anyway, by the time went on it was all settled by midnight. And I didna need to have gone, but he wasnae even - he wouldna even have let me - he wouldn't have let me gone.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You were saying that your sister died when she was quite young, when she was nine?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Nine, aye, Jeannie died, aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Can you remember much about her funeral? Or can you remember anybody else's funeral that you noticed when you were a wee girl?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh well, to tell you the truth you k}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11692283\charrsid9768143 no}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
w, there were - lots of - of - like funerals and that, of course you never - thingummyjigged or gave - gave them a thought then. But - wee - wee Jeannie I - I didna ken, I can just always mind of the - she had a wee white coffin an
d then - you ken, it - it - seemed to - you ken, away it went. You ken, when I - now think and that like - it must have been the day she was - buried, and I - and I nearly broke my heart, for all I kenned, and I kenned she was there, but - I canna say tha
t - I really - can mind.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You don't remember getting mourning clothes and that sort of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Well I think it was - it was - in fact, ken, when I think - a wee - I think it was a wee black - frock, and there were high - wore hats, and you called t
hem motor caps, you ken, they were just a - oh in fact I've seen the hat in there, I said to Irene too, I says, that's what I call a motor cap, that's what I'm talking about then - oh - years ago, you called them motor, just a flat thing you ken.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did it have a veil on it to h}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11692283\charrsid9768143 o}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 ld it on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh no, just - slipped it on to your head, you ken like and that, I can always mind of that. But it was - you called them motor caps. I don't ken what it was for and that but I can always mind of that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 But you weren't actually at your wee sister's funeral then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh no, no, I wouldna - you ken, I dinna - couldna say that I can mind her even. I cann mind her even being, ken, took out of the house.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did you remember anybody else's funeral then? Maybe your grandparents or even somebody in the street that maybe everybody went to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Well tell you the truth and that, even - you ken, funerals even at the present day, they dinna, ken, appeal to me. It's - it's just I would rather not - even my sister in Broo
ms Road, well I wasnae able - to, ken, to have gone, but even - ken, I sit and I many a time think here to - I would rather - and even Johnny up the road, like my brother that died last year, the year before, I mean, even - I wasna there either. But I thi
nk I would rather just - think on them as I last seen them ken like. I - I - I mean - I just dinna ken, I just dinna -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You said your mother used to take you to visit your granny?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh aye, if my mother - if we'd a - if she was missing too that's al
ways what - we would go to her up at 50 High Street. We were all for my granny like and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 She visited there quite a lot then did she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh aye, aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Would you go up and visit your granny without your mother too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh aye, oh were all 
- and then I started ken when I got older - ken, a wee bit older and that I - even - joined the church like and - was younger at joining churches then, I dinna think they - they bother now much but - anyway I used to, ken, in the - Communion come round, w
e
ll ken the morning service. I would - I would have rather have went the morning service. But anyway, here of course my granny - poor old soul, she couldna - so - I used to, ken, wait 'til an afternoon, three o'clock like, and used to get up for her and th
en - and then I hunted the - in fact when I go now they've to hunt hymns for me you kn}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14568195\charrsid9768143 ow}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
, with them specs I cannae - they've to thingummyjig the hymns for me. But I used to hunt them for my granny, and nae bother. But I've no thingummyjigged the - I havena 
been at Communion for - a few times and that but I - I just tell the minister and - and in fact they - they - they dinna even - that's one thing about the chapel and that, they - they - I dinna ken whether churches are the same, but that's one thing about
 
the chapel and that with their - Communion and that. I think - I think anyway and that that - when they ken I'm no able, do you no think that it's their place to - to give me Communion? I mean, they know that I'm no - and I'm going to put it to the elder,
 the - Midsummer - Communion - I'm going to say to him - because our - our minister's retired now like and that like and that, anyway I'm going to put it to him and -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did you ever go and visit your other granny?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh, never mind her. Didna know if she was dead, I didna ken. Oh, I didna ken - oh I didna ken nothing about - her at all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did you ever go visiting anybody else with your mother then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh I think there were ken some of her own old - pals and that too ken like. Used to, ken, follow you - on like and that with her.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did you ever go out with your father at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Nowhere. He never went anywhere, he never even went to church, never mind anything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Usually it was the done thing for families to go for a walk on Sunday afternoons?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Not him. Oh no, never - couldnae - say that he ever - thingummyjigged or himself or took us out or anything. No like my man, it be just a case of I'll just get them ready and ken we'd all go away out together, and - and then of course there wer
e a big family of Bob's like, we'd plenty of bits to go, go away visit with my side, where - we hadna many friends at all. Because on both sides our own boy and lassied I telled you and that, that - there werenae - but my father never - oh no, as I tell y
ou, all he did was - that was - he'd just - come home, get dinner then - and away and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 What about holidays? You wouldn't all get away together for a summer holiday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh no, never. Never. In fact - I can mind and that our Jessie - and that, my
 older sister like, and - every summer holiday - Locharbriggs. Well I think this old woman, ken she kept house to the - the - I - I can picture it ken, getting off - off the train mind, and get down this - steep brae, and the house was at the bottom. And 
I
 - I think he was a joiner, but this body, she kept house to him and I think she must have - my father and her must have been related someway, we called her Auntie Mary anyway, I ken that much. Mary Heggar. We called her - Auntie Mary but I think she was 
related to my father. But our Jessie and that - every year - her summer holidays.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Just Jessie?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
She went there and spent her summer holidays, and I'd be here running my messages as usual, just the same as what I did when I was at the school. And 
- and you had a wee bit time, well - you got a wee bit time to enjoy yourself and so forth, but anyway, when our Jessie, ken, this is now when she was left the school, and go to work, so it was a case of - of - Jennet'll go her summer holidays now perhaps
.
 And when I think many a time Bob and I had a laugh at it. When I think on getting my case packed, and going to the station, get the train. You sat down in the train, you were nae sooner sat down - 'til you're out. And then you'd this big brae and - the j
o
iner's shop ken now - well, it was the house and - and a joiner's shop, and - maybe it's no there now, God knows, but here - down there. So here, oh my God, on the other side of the house and there were a boy and, ken - he'd just be something like myself,
 
maybe older as me but he stood at the door and he were doing - at me. And used to stand watching, and he carried on. So anyway I went in to - Auntie Mary's as we called her, I said to her I said, that boy over there, I says, is putting his tongue out at m
e
. Auntie Mary. I says - oh she said - and I'm no touching - I'm no bothering him. Oh, she says, never need him, he's no just, you ken, never heed him. And I says, I didna like that. Oh - well - oh I've got to suffer six weeks here. It'll drive me nuts. So
 
this day she says to me - going into the joiner's shop Jennet and - and get a bit of wood, break it up for the fire. And it was seemingly an old bit of wood I was to get. But Janet went in - I went into the joiner's shop and I got a nice new bit of timber
 
and I broke it up. And then I got another box and - thinking I was doing - oh my God, here she goon to me, I had broke her ash bucket up too, her box, ken for the ashes. I - oh my, she was in a hack of a state, and she says - that was my - I says, well yo
u
 wanted a bit of firewood didn't you, I says, well that's all I could get and that wee bit of new stuff, I says, well I thought it would make it up. Oh, it nearly broke - so I says to her I says, I'm going home on Saturday, I says, I couldnae stick this. 
A
nd that was a week, and I says, my God, never again. And I've walked to Locahrbriggs many a time, you ken, since then. But when I think on it, ken, and - and I mind this Agnes Murphy I ran mates with, too, she came to the station to see me off. I was neve
r
 as thankful to get - back. And that was my, you ken, and still our Jessie and that now - just - must have been - oh Jessie enjoyed - every minute of it. But heavens it nearly drove me crackers. There were nobody bar that boy, ken, and standing putting hi
s tongue out. There were nae weans you ken to play with or anything like that. Oh I was just by myself, o this is terrible you ken.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 What about going away for the day, did you ever go away on a jaunt for the day? Everybody together?
\par }\pard\plain \ltrpar\s15\qj \fi-490\li518\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin518\itap0\pararsid8206157 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh I can only 
mind when, you ken the likes to the mothers and all that, it was only once in a while, you ken, the likes of Mrs Murphy, Mrs Morley, and the other families you see ken they were all big families. And just once in a while - Glencaple, the Old Queays we cal
l
ed it. And here of course they would make up their mind, and they were going to take us all for an outing, to the Old Quay, and of course we thought it was great, and it was the wagonettes, you ken, with the old horse, and this is what we were - here ther
e
 were this Fisher, and there were Clark, and the Clarkes - ken were awfully nice, we used to say old Fisher you ken, it was - all the trade he wanted, but this - I can mind? I - I dinna ken whether Clarks ken have any conveyance now but they were awfully 
n
ice like and the father ken was a nice man, I expect the sons all followed, and maybe grandsons too, but this Fisher, well the - the wagoneetes as we called them, it was the - at Ninth Place we got them. And this Fisher used to, ken, any Sunday or nice da
y, and they would be standing and ken saying, come in, to get his - wagonette ful, and Mr Clarke's standing and that nice a man but anyway we used to ignore him, but this was our outing, and away we used to go. To the Quay. It was only three}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14568195\charrsid9768143  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 pence each.
\par }\pard\plain \ltrpar\qj \fi-490\li518\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin518\itap0\pararsid8206157 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Would you take food with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Aye, aye, our mothers you ken, had - ken, so much, but it wouldna be much in those and that, maybe sandwiches and - a loaf like that, but the boys, they used to go down with an earlier bus and like my brothers and the
m other ones, they used to go in - and in the wood and make a wee fire and boil a kettle for to make tea for - for us arriving and then we just - then enjoyed ourselves, we just run wild you ken and that. Thoroughly enjoyed it but - that's all the - the o
utings I can - ken really mind when we were younger like. Bar as I say the Sunday school - trip too. We always, once - like yearly, we always went the Sunday school trip.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 We as that to Glencaple too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh no. No, no. The likes of that - Duncan as I
 was talking about - the Tories they called them, I think it was the same ones and that, used to - go to you ken his ground like, like a big house and that, Newlands, and, ken, round about his ground, and, ken, kind of special ones like that and - invitin
g
 you you ken, and you got there - got the - maybe a wee bit field and that, and that's really how we spent - oh no, they took - oh no to Glencaple, didna go to Old Quay or anything like that but - oh no, I'll give them their due there. But it was the wago
nnettes just the same and then of course buses come - on the go after that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did you run races and have games and things at your trip?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh aye, running races and that and ken you always got - a wee prize, you kwn, if you won like and that. But - it
 was really - and that - was worth it and then, of course, we'd nothing to take like, they had the big hamper ken with - what you wanted. But they were catering for you, you just had to take it or leave it like and that but - like they had it - like this 
big hamper.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Was there much difference in the way you spent Saturdays when you were at the school? Before you started working in Wyllies and doing the wee jobs?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 No, if I could - every day was just the same, bar the - like maybe - going to the mat
inee. And that was the - the Electric - the Electric Theatre, like pictures, the likes of them daft ones on there that I've seen some of their old faces, you ken, on there. But it was just a - like - if - if you went on a Saturday afternoon, as you called
 the matinee, I - even - I've heard the weans talk about the minors now, maybe something like that, it only cost - a penny - to get in.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 So you went quite often did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Aye - oh aye, oh - ken, just to spend the time and that. But there were crowd
s of us as Ken often says, likes of - them alssies even living in the street - aside of me and that and I run about - there were quite a crowd of us and we thoroughly enjoyed it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 What about Sunday then, did you get dressed up on Sundays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh aye. Dressed up for the occasion.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You would go to the church in the morning?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
And - well, no - ken when - oh after I started - like when I joined the church - then I, ken, I had to - attend it like. But was younger than that it was the Sunday school,
 and of course - we used to ken - up the stair in the hall and of course, young ones and then you were up there for a year and that and then when you came down the stair, just like the - the school, coming to the primary into the - and there's all we clas
ses and, ken, young ones. Learning, getting taught and that - and the subject and that and so forth.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Did you go to any other things at the church? Did they have any other organisations that you could join? Like the Band of Hope and that sort of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Well - it wasnae Greyfriars, but I used to go to the - Band - Band of Hope every Monday night, and I'll tell you it was South Free. And that's the church away at the bottom of the High Street. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 That's where you turn right?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 That's righ
t. And the - the Hall, as I call this place, we cut through into Burns Street, it was - that - that's the name it got, Mill Hole, I dinna know where they got the idea, Mill Hole, and the hall was there, we went to the Band of Hope, every Monday night a cr
owd of us again.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 What did they do there?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh just singing and - ken, maybe - a man talking about - the Bible and - you ken, all them wee things. In fact this - Jardine was - a - a great - ken, South Free, ken, some of the churches, some of the li
kes of - say the - our church, and McAllister - put us - I think the same as - tattie merchants, they used to be. Well I think they - this McAllister and they're great Greyfriars, ken, you'd have said, oh well, they're well in with the church and that. Th
e
 Jardines were the very same, but I'm no - meaning - the old Jardine, but Tommy Jardine like, and the other brother and that, the undertakers like and that, well their sons - are what you called - from this old Mr Jardine, but he was awfully good like. It
 was him, ken just what you would say now youth clubs, they talk about youth clubs, well - I think it's just something like that. Keeping you all together and one thing and another.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Keeping you off the streets?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 And keeping you off the street. And
 I think and that it - it - it was far nicer the likes that and - and you were amongst you ken and - and mixing. Now - in fact they say and that there's nothing for - there's nothing for young ones.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 What about the rest of Sunday, were you allowed out to play?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You'd to keep the - Sabbath holy. Oh nae - no - you didna get skipping and carrying on, oh no, not -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Were you allowed to play games in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Well I could - I used to - be the, ken, the ringleader in that way, ken like - maybe
 saying - oh, maybe playing hide and seek or anything. But there you were and that, and maybe getting into a place and werenae - and then of course, the door had always to open whenever you heard it, my father. And you had to come out of the hiding place 
and then he'd say, oh spy, and the he was - what - what was ken going on, what was going on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 So he was quite strict about it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh he was - oh -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 And yet he didn't go to the church himself you say?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Never - not even for Communion. He never even went - took Communion that - I can mind of.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Was he a member?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Yes. Yes. And he used to have his Communion card and that and - if you'd have liked to try and slipped it in, now fancy a - a thing like that, fancy, ken, you're no there and try
ing to - pass - just like a - a fogged note or anything like that, pass it. He never, no, he never and that, I - in fact he's lucky I think that - the likes of - the minister did - ken, bury him, because in - I ken - in our church and that, it used to be,
 I don't know now, but - miss three Communions, you're stroked off the roll. You're right off the roll. And he was on that, and I think it was just with my ma and that, well ken - as I tell you, she was good living, and maybe that's the reason.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did she manage to go regularly every Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Aye well - more maybe - night time, ken there were three services. The morning, afternoon and night time, and I've seen my ma but - I'll tell you what she was a great for - like - the Salvation Army. And it was 
just - my ma liked the Salvation Army. And you ken, with - women she ran about with and that, and they used to have a - you ken, meetings in the aft - like a - maybe meeting in a - Monday afternoon, and all meet like, and have a wee cup of tea, in the hal
l, if there were anything special on, my ma like this - she - she really liked the Salvation Army. And - and always - she said it was always ken homely and they were that nice.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Were you ever in the choir or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Me? Oh no, I never was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did you ever say grace at meals in your house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
There - oh there were never much - of that. It was just a case of, sit down and - you get up again and - whoever liked to wash the dishes get at it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 What about when you went to bed at night, did anybody teach you to say your prayers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
No, only my ma, you ken, my ma was just to say ken, now, mind say your prayers you ken and that was one thing about her. But - my father never - never mentioned, ken, anything like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did your mother teach you any or did she just sort of leave you to your own devises?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh it was more ken of Our Father but - I mean, even before I went to school, but then at the school you learnt you ken all. And you get -

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You would be taught some of them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Yes.
 That's what I often say and that on there, when you hear and that and you hear ministers too - and the - the Lord's Prayer like and I often think on that too. It used to - which art in Heaven, and it - now it's - who art in Heaven.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You were taught which at the school were you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Which. Yes. I - I've - oh I - I listen and all them wee - wee things you ken, I take note of, like and that. And - I said to Nessie, I says, even, I says, I canna understand. I says, one minister - one minister, who art, 
but then I've heard other ones, which art, which we were - taught.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 It might depend on the church that they're from?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh well - aye, maybe - I don't know, I have the - the - the Bible ken and it's - oh my ma gave it to me for my birthday or someth
ing once, I - I've had it for years like and the Lord's Prayers in the back of it - and it's, which are in Heaven. And I got into that, and I've seen me, ken, when I'm in my bed like, I canna get down on my knees, but when I'm in my bed like and that and 
I've seen me ken say, which, and then I, ken, oh art, who art, you ken, this the way I'm going on in bed, before I fall asleep.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You say your mother went out quite a bit then if she was visiting your granny and she went to the Salvation Army?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Well that's the only recreation she had and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Was she quite friendly with the other women in the street then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh yes. Oh that's what I say, I mean in them days and all, they were just all like one big family I've telled you. It was just a case o
f - your mother would help my mother or - or have you got - are you going up the Street Mrs Mellor? Will you bring me so and so? Are you Mrs Morley, bring me so and so. And it was harmony, it was, you ken what I mean. I canna describe what it was like, be
cause it was just all - and the families were all the same. No fighting, nae nothing, that's funny, there were nae fighting, no even the boys and that, were nae fighting nor no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 It doesn't seem natural to have boys and no fights?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Aye, well I - an
d I'm telling you the boys and us, oh we used to play a lot together. And there were never, ken, a word out of place. And when I think too and that, we used to get away down to the Kinnel - and we'd join in with the boys, football. Ken, just kicking the b
a
ll, but the boys used to you ken to say, that's good, go on, you're doing well. And - and still - we enjoyed every minute of that. Because we had nae - nae money. But then as I say, I mean - we were all the same like and that. I quite admit and that that 
-
 we maybe kenned nae different, I don't know, I - I - I don't know, maybe you ken just brought up that way of - of living just the same as young ones now, well, they're - you cannae expect you ken on young shoulders and that - and - ken, going away back t
hen. But I mean, I've - happy memories of - every minute. For all what, you ken, I mean, but then I was brought, ken like the rest, we were brought up - we thought nothing about it. For enjoyment we'd to make our own.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 It surprised me that you never fell out with any of your pals.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
No. No, that - that - that - that - you ken what - when I often think on that, oh never and that, and I used to run with a lassie too - this - Rachel Gardiner. And she lived in the Burns Slaps, just opposite - where Iren
e works at McGeorges factory and Rachel and I too, well her father had a butchers shop in Queensberry Street, and I can mind her mother too, used to, ken, be in the shop. Anyway Rachel and I was great, and then this old Houston. There's an Houston a butch
e
r ken up the Greenbrae there. Well, there's - a brother, Rachel married Albert. And do you know this, Rachel and him - was boy and lassie sweethearts as you call them. Rachel and him, from they were at the - from they were - and Rachel had - and then of c
o
urse when they grew older - they got married. And then they went away abroad and I never - never - I've - often - ken would like to - to learn about them. Ken, I didna get up the butchers there like - like - well I dinna - but Irene, I mean - she goes to 
t
he butcher in Queen Street, but - if I'd been thing - up there, I would certainly ask - ken like - Bert, well, we used to call him Kid Houston, but - I would like to ken, ask about Rachel and Albert. And many a time I picture Rachel ken. And oh, ken that,
 oh she was really - I canna say that I ever fought with any lassie, ken.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
I suppose if there were a lot of children in the street, if you weren't agreeing very well with one there would always be somebody else to play with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Well I canna - aye, well I canna re - mind, I - I ken, fighting with - or any of them fighting.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 What was it like at the school then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 It was just the same, because the simple - it was the same ken crowd. That we were brought up with, as we went to school, as I tell yo
u and that at the Sunday school - on a Sunday, I was Nettie. Monday morning at the day school - Jennie. Now was that - I don't know, and Miss - this - Miss Smith - that was the - Sunday school teacher like up the stair, she - started calling me Nettie, an
d
 there were only two, and that nephew over there, and his brother, and I get nothing else but Aunt Nettie yet from them, even her - ken it's always Launt Nettie. But I were Jennie at the day school. We Jennie Millar you ken, we were always called wee, for
 I seemed to be the wee one amongst them all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Were most of the youngsters that were at school with you from the same sort of background, you all came from the same sort of houses did you?

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Aye, well - there were only - well Rachel you ken what I 
mean, her father had that business, and then there were - this - Molly Morrison. I never heard - that - I never heard that lassie's name mentioned, but they lived in a house in Broom's Road, but it was - their own house then, and that's going back a bit. 
Her father was a cattle dealer, just like Johston the cattle and that, her father was a cattle dealer.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 So they would have more money?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 And - but - on the whole, Molly and that, that was another one, and we got on that well with her ken, but - I've
 often said to our young ones today, too, that's the only - I said, there's such controls and that now, but we used to go through to the sixth standard, finished off at the ex-sixth, and then off to George Street we went, like, they that passed like and t
h
at. But Molly and that, oh really, and oh just an ordinary, ken, nice lassie, didnae - act it nor nothing, and that lassie I must say, oh she was clever. And every year - every standard we went into - Molly, the McLel - we called it the McLellan prize, of
 course she was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13396319\charrsid9768143 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
ix with the school at the finish, but the McLellan prize. And she'd a chain, and it was a half crown and a book to go with it. And every prize giving Molly had this chain. And then there were a hole - she got a hole made ken in a half crown
 and it was put onto that chain. And she was a lassie and that - no swell headed nor nothing like that. An extra nice lassie, ken what I mean. She wasnae swelled headed or - or tipped herself any way. And I mean, that's only one I could say, ken, all the 
rest of us and that - that were - our fathers worked in the mills and things like that, but still and on - I mean Molly and that and - she was - different but didnae - were nae difference.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did the teachers make any difference? Did the teachers pick out anybody special, either to be extra nice to or extra hard on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Aye, well of course - ken - might have - heard them saying about - ken, so and so and a body. Or - teachers }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid13396319\charrsid9768143 t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 ook, that's what they got in them days, a teacher's }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13396319\charrsid9768143 t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 ook, but I couldna see th
rough that, and it used to madden me and I would say, oh nothing of the kind and that - we - we were - ken, we were all the same and I - you ken, I wouldna have nothing said about ever you ken and that that's one thing we - I'll no have anything said abou
t a body. I - I was just as I think of myself. But I couldna say like and that or - or - ken - ken so - even at the present day and that, or going away and telling on you or - or -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13396319\charrsid9768143 
 clipping as we call it, a clip}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 . There were nothing worse as a clipe. But I c
anna mind and that. Nessiell tell often say to me, dinna - I dinna ken and that how - you - you ken what I mean. Well I says, we were all the same though, I says, I'm no saying - just me, I says, we were all the same.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Everybody joined in everything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
And we were all - I says, we worked in harmony and her - and yet she says, oh I dinna ken how - you ken, and this, I says, no, because the present day, I says it's just a case of keeping up with the Joneses. Now, this is - I'm just telling you straig
ht. I says - I'm no - going behind the bush. Oh she says, nothing of the kind. I says, aye, well, it is so.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 How about the teachers, did you like any of the teachers specially?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh well -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Or were there any that you didn't get on with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 O
h there were only - one - teacher, I think it was the fifth class he was in, or the sixth. This - we called him Tommy Maxwell you ken, Mr Maxwell like but - we got his first name, Tommy and that. But anyway he came from Troqueer Road. And - he was awfully
 strict, you ken what I mean. Well I - ken, I mean, we never thought anything about it and that but because the simple reason that we just - do as your telled kind of style and that. But he was really - ken, inclined to be a wee bit stricter.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 What sort of things was he fussy about then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Ah well, see the likes of history. Tommy - ken, you'd to put your mind and - ken, attend to that subject like, history. He was a great one for that. And then Mr - ken, say - Mr Duncan like - and that, this - the la
st the ex sixth and that of course, it was just a case of - everything was put in with him, just a mixture like you know, all that we got like and that, that's what I say now when I think you ken - Linda'll say to me - what did you get at the school grann
y? And I just tell her straight. I say, well I just am telling you Linda, that's all that I got.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 What about when you went to the high school though?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Aye well I suppose - we all went for - K just talked about that afterwards too, they had it on th
ere about domestic science. But - we didna have anything like - like that. Mind I said to you I went for domestic. But anyway - I learnt on there mind it's supposed to be domestic science, aye, I must have had domestic science but anyway - it doesnae matt
e
r about that, and the other ones - Commercial like. As I said - I was cooking and laundry and - all that carry on. And it was really - it was grand and that, I can always mind the - teacher that had our - there too, she was a Miss Crichton. And she was re
ally -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Was that the domestic science mistress?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Science, yes. Aye, she was just ken a wee body like myself and that but - oh, it was - smashing like and that there. Oh I enjoyed every minute up there too like.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did you still do English and arithmetic and things like that at the High school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Aye, oh we had - oh to carry on, we'd certain days say, maybe - Monday afternoon washing, ken, maybe took a wee thing to wash, and then another afternoon and that of course ironing. Laundry as they ca
lled it. And then - maybe Thursday afternoon it would be - cooking. 'Course you'd to take your own stuff and that too for to - and baking.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 But you still had to do other lessons too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 And you had - aye, yes. But I mean that did really take a lot o
f our time up like and that. We were learning anyway but still we'd other - subjects to take for all that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 How did you like the teachers at the high school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Well to tell you the truth and that I canna - I often think and that they were all just kind of the same you ken like. I don't know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 All just teachers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Well - Nessie of course, that's - another thing, she'll say to me too, oh, ken - you've to respect - you've to respect - even a boss, you've to - you must - and I - ken what I mean,
 fair mad with me, no like you know, they'll no listen, they just - out and say - oh she gets mad at me. And she'll say - oh I wish to goodness woman that you'd - cut this - respecting, respecting, she says, why should you humble yourself, or even take - 
n
o - or humble to a boss? I says, look here, in my days, I says, to get a job - for all that you were making, you had to respect - and there were nae - carrying on like young ones - as I heard - I - a young one in a shop. And do you know what she turned ar
o
und and said to the boss? Oh - and I believe it and that because I simply - as I telled you up in that school with the drawings, it was terrible. Ken what she said to the - he said, ken attend - attend to the - like they were waiting to get served, and th
e - the boss says to -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did the teachers use the strap a lot then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh well - ken, I mean, I'll say you ken, there was some - it wasnae that I'm no saying there werena smart or - or they couldnae do it, but they just didnae seem to - I think bother
 themselves. And still and on even strapping, I'll give my father his due, that was one thing, ken it was a case of - ken - not hitting, ken when we were wee. Dinna start hitting. If they canna take a telling, when spoken to, dinna start - you weren't to 
-
 and I was the same with my own three. I never lifted my hand even - even yet do it. Because as I say and that, well it's right enough, if they cann just - ken what I mean, well it was different I mean I'm no saying now with a young family bringing them u
p on my own, I don't think could do it, but I mean, Bob was like that too, you ken what I mean. They just didna get away with a thing. And he wasnae like hard on them or anything like that, but it was for their own food.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You were saying that your father had this strap?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
And that - my father with them tawse, and I'm telling you he used to put them in the fire to hard - harden them. It would be sorer on you. And still - he never - because he didna - he - he didna even believe, he says, aye well, bel
ting - doesna do so because you can knock weans just - and that's how I never ken - at the school and that. But I mean when - old Beaky Henry as we called him like and that, like we just went on from one standard to another, my God it learnt me. If he did
 ask me, I used to - I used to shout out and that, I says to myself, never again - and if I'd ever have got the strap from him again I - I don't know what I would have done.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Make sure you speak into the right ear?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 And, aye, believe me and I under
stand the man because - I often think and that too, ken, I often think if somebody would get my ears, I - I feel, ken, it's the wax. And folk'll say, oh get them syringed, and - of course Irene once she got hers did, but she says never again, she says, yo
u
'd be daft, because she says, my God, I wouldna suffer you again, but I feel you ken, and I just say to myself - well ken, going away back in them - poor old soul, ken, a wee bit deaf and that. And it's - I can under - yes, folk would have nae time and th
at for that but - still and on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Were the hours that you went to the High School the same as the ones at St Michaels? Ir did you have to stay longer at the school then?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh no, just - nine in - and - finished at four.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 How about your dinner, did you manage to get home for your dinner?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh yes. Oh aye, we always struggled for it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You would have quite a run home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh it werenae far - that far you ken, from George Street down to - Burns's Street you ken what I mean, it was just down 
the High Street you ken and that. But I always went home because as I say and that, our ken our mother's and that in them days, was a big pot of soup, and - the cheapest like, the big pot of soup, well - but - never - dinners and that, I didnae - I never 
-
 I cannae mind ever any of them stopping for their dinner. Of course they didna come from - away up the country and that as they do now. I mean the likes of - the - is here anyway and that, they come with even buses and that, but there were none of that, 
it was more ken just the town hands.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did you like the school then or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh - oh I - I - oh I liked the school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Do you have any regrets maybe that you didn't stay at school longer, anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Ah well, as I say and that, I me
an, we never even got the - no like now, they have your leaving age, and they say you leave at fifteen, now it's got to be - it's sixteen. Well when you were fourteen, you left, it didnae matter when it was. No before holidays or anything, whenever you co
m
e fourteen - you left on your birthday. And the likes of me, well, I wasnae so bad, with running messages for them three shops but with Wyllie the baker, well I had that job right away, that I could just leave, although it was only two and six a week mind
. That was my pay. And that was all day, from seven 'til you time at night, and that two and six was my pay. But there were only one and that and it was - that Molly Morrison as I tell you, Molly went to the Academy. She was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10710664\charrsid9768143 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 ix like that but she went to th
e Academy, Milly didna go to the High School. But she was rally, ken, clever like and that. But there were nae - I think - they mostly all ken like, they just left the school, I mean it wasnae a case of, if you've nae - work or that you'll just carry on. 
You just left and that was - the whole thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 What about night classes? Was there anything like that in your day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Well that's - I - some had to - had to attend night classes like and that. But there were two or three of us and that, and it was mo
stly to pass our time in. We used to go to the night class.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 What did you go for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
And it was just the usual - like what we did at the school. Cooking and things like that. And likely took a lesson, like some like - clerical work like and that for
 - them smart ones like, taking - some - that were - some that went into offices like, that's what they took, but we didna, you ken, the crowd of us and that used to go and it helped to pass the night in. And then our - teacher and that, like Miss Crichto
n, she was there at night. Yes, aye, just maybe two nights a week like and that then. And it was - it was grand, you ken, helped to pass the time in.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 How did you get your first job with Wyllies? Did they just ask you if you wanted a job, or did you go and offer, or how did it come about?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Well as I - as - as I said to you and that, my granny used to - she washed dishes for Wyllie the baker as I tell you, like pies - catered like, pies and peas, tripe suppers and catering for drives and things like
 that, and my granny - used to wash dishes because you ken what I mean for they piled up and the two - like Jenny Wyllie and Annie like the daughters, they were in the shop. And here it just so happened - Mrs Wyllie - asked my granny, and if she thought k
e
n I would go, and give a wee help. So - of course - there I got started there and it was just a case, you ken what I mean, it was - well you done this wee thing, you did the next thing, you thought nothing about it like, but - of course they wouldnae do i
t
 nowadays but - I mean you did this wee - and you did the next wee thing, and then it come to what about, you ken, coming - to work. And that was delivering rolls seven o'clock down that Middle Road and that, that - Mullen - Muller, he was a German bus sh
e
 was an Englishwoman but my God, oh she was terrible. If I wasnae down there at seven in the morning to deliver them rolls I didna half get tarter and that, and then - just - like - there are like two villas like and - the Muller's door facing this and th
i
s - boss of the McGeorge's - factory, him that manages, Johnny - Marshall as I - I talked about and that, that was another old friend of my fathers like they were all - and of course it was - it was him that put it into my head and that - about the factor
y
. In fact he asked me, he says, what does - Wyllie - oh this is ken when I'd left the school - no cheeky Jenny, what does - what does he - of course you ken they knew each other well and that because they used to visit you ken in Brooke Street or down Mil
l
 - how much - no cheeky, how much does he - you ken, and of course I never thought, I says - half a crown. Would you no like to come into the factory? I'm sure your mother could do with ken an extra shilling or two. You'd make more in the factory. Oh I ju
s
t - as I went away back to this shop and that I said - I telled them that, I says, oh, I'll think it over. And I'm going along St Micheal's Street, I says - him well, if I could you ken, I'd be better in there. So here - I didna - I waited and that and th
e
n I says - I said to my ma like and that I says - ken - Johnny Marshall was - saying to me about, ken, the factory. What do you think - are you no ken content where you are? I thought she was going to say, oh, ken, ask your father, of course it was, in th
e
m days, even - that it was silly enough you ken, ask your father. Well anyway - here - I says to my mother, I've made my mind up. I said, I'll tell Johnny in the morning. You ken, and - I'm going into the factory. And it was pulling gloves. Of course from
 that I used to learn finger, maybe, you ken someone with a frame and I would say, have a wee shot at it, you ken, and I was picking it up all the time. With gloves like. I was picking it up all the time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You didn't actually get trained?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh - no,
 no. No, no. That's where I got my training, maybe I would go to this one, and I would say, could I have a wee shot at your frame. And that was finger - in fact the hand machine too, and then fingering. Oh no, didnae get - no, no. They didna - like they t
o
ok them from the school now, I rene says the other week there were a crowd of them, all down you ken, young ones going through the factory. Oh no, there were none of that, it was just a case of - I picked it up myself because - I wanted to learn, right en
o
ugh, but anyway - I just got kind of settled at the job - when he went away and he - he, got a job, weaving in the mill says to me. My father says to me sitting and that, he says - go in the mill and you'll make more money. Of course his word was lawa and
 
that. Silly me, you ken like, I says - oh dear me, after ken Johnny Marshall being as good and - I telled him that - that - when he got me in it and that so - anyway, I just telled the man the honest truth. I says, it's my father, I says, I says, you get 
o
n with him like he wants me at the mill, I says, and, I says, I'm quite content where I am but, I says, I've to go to the mill, I says. And of course Johnny kenned what he was - and that, but anyway, I went into the mill as I tell you and that. My heart w
as never in that place. I never - it wouldnae appeal to me at all that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 But you quite enjoyed working in the factory?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 At - at the factory I was far better, yet I liked the - you ken, lassies and that and one thing and another, and then the weave
rs - not that - I'm meaning that - with rage or anything, but they were all, ken, all like - they were all old women like and that we called them, but - no, irrespective of that like I got on with them all. But it's just that I hadna the heart for that, i
t - oh I - I nearly broke my heart all the time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 How long did you stay in McGeorge's?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh - I don't - I was barely a year in it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 How long were you with Wyllies before you went there, from leaving the school? Was it just a short time too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
With Wyllie? Oh aye, that - it - yes, that's what I say too you see, I - I went to - I had to - I worked there about - I said to Mrs Willie at the time I says - in fact that morning I made my mind up and I've got my basket, and of course when I come to t
he shop window, you ken, I was sick and I says - oh Jenny or Annie's in, and ken, well Annie Wyllie herself, she was in the factory, this is the youngest Wyllie lassie, and she was in the factory on a silk frame, like silk gloves away at the bottom of the
 
shop, and here - I thought and that too, I says, well, ken - when I left like - Annie wasna pleased because she had to leave the job and go into the shop and she - oh she wasnae pleased. She says, oh Jenny I thought you would ken, I says, oh well, I says 
-
 I don't know, I says, but I - I'm going to do it anyway. But anyway, that morning and here when I got to the shop, here it's Mrs Wyllie herself. Even I was feared - I werena feared for the woman, I was feared to tell her. And she said, ken how you get ki
n
d of worked up and that - and - I says - oh, I says, I'm leave - I'm leaving, Mrs Wyllie. And of course she just, eeh, what do you mean Jenny? I says, Johnny Marshall's got me a job in the factory, so, I says, I'm going in there. So here of course all tha
t
 Annie had to leave, but I used to go and help them out, and especially on Saturday night and they were open to midnight, and I scrubbed that old floor, but I used to go round to Brooke Street and sleep instead of going home like and that, ken, midnight a
nd that and there we were trailing away around, shop was even open to - about twelve o'clock and that but I had to scrub all that shop out. And here - I got two and six for it. For a Saturday - two and six, and I got two and six for the whole week. And -

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 What sort of money were you paid in the factory, was it all that much better?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Aye, aye well it was up to yourself like and that, ken it was like piecework. And it was - the job I went into was like - pulling gloves, ken, they were a roll and you 
pulled the cotton to separate, like there were - the frames for - handing gloves like, they used to have the cuffs. There was a frame for cuffs, and then what you called the hand - hand - handers like, they put the cuff on and made - but this was off the 
s
team frames and you ken the glove was all in one one, bar the fingers like, and this cotton, and you'd to take the cotton and then - reel round the top, the cuff like and pull away, and it was - and then - after that you'd to mark them. Ken, there were me
n, outside and that and - different - bits of wool lie, red, blue and whatever you ken the size was, and - bundle them up, like in dozens. Penny a dozen. A penny a - a penny -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You'd have to work hard to make any money?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 I did, and my - believe me 
I never went home unless I'd two pound, and that was - I'll guarantee my ma and that could never - but I used to even take gloves home and pull them too. I used to take them home just to make, you ken, and if I'd been a penny off the - two pound I used to
 put a penny if I had a penny in my pocket, put it onto it. I wouldna give my ma you ken.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did your mother give you back some of that for spending yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Well I used to get half a crown. But then I was buying my own clothes and everything then too. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
What about the half crown from Wyllies then that you were getting for the Saturday night, was that yours or did you hand that over to your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Aye that - no, that's - just like the wee sixpenny bank as I telled you. I saved that m
oney. Mrs Wyllie give me a wee tin, and it - it - you ken, even a sixpenny bank it was left in the shop. And my ma kenned nothing about it. But I men - with the half crown of course she kenned all about that because I telled her like and that. I've got a 
-
 but used to - ken, this wee tin box, and put the half crown in there, and then my half crown pocket money, if I really - wanted something and that I used to say to Mrs Wyllie well - ken, have my money. I want so and so. We'd really to - we didna get like
 
- clothes and things as I tell you - bought us and that - and it was up to yourself and I was like that, as I tell you before and that, ken what I mean, I liked to be a wee bit - I liked to be dressed. That's what - my nephew's wife over there she says pa
pa used to say, oh by }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10710664\charrsid9768143 J}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
ove, our Jen liked to be dressed when she was young, and ken minding all their birthdays and all the day - he says, he never met any - anybody like her, and Sally says, oh but that's years ago you see. I says, aye well, I havena the m
emory now then and that but I said, at the present time a wee thing and that I says, just you ken. But I says for long s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10710664\charrsid9768143 ince}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
 I says - I -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 What sort of hours did you work in the factory?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Ah well, it was - it was just the same as the mill. Six o'
clock in the morning. To six at night. But there werena - you ken, like overtime like of the mill and that - during the war with the government work, used to work to nine. Six o'clock in - the morning 'til nine at night.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 What time did you get off, you got time off for your dinner did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh the dinner hour, aye, well just by the time you got back again - allowed an hour like, by the time you got it and back again, well - and then at teatime we just - had to take a piece like. And you just got half a - half an hour you got for it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 What about Saturdays, did you work the whole day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Worked on a Saturday too.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You didn't get a half day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Aye well - some - it come to that that they did ken, twelve o'clock. You dropped at twelve.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 What about summer holidays, did you get holidays with pay in these days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh - I canna even mind even - getting holidays or that. Oh I dinna - I dinna ever mind that you ken what I mean.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You'd maybe get time off at the fairs would you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 We
'd get - I - I think that the - the Rood Fair like. 'Cos my birthday's on the first and that, and I think the weekend. Ken, the mill was really closed then. 'Course the factories were the same and that, they're all the same.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You were telling me about working overtime in the war, you didn't work on Sundays as well did you,
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh no. Oh no, there were nae Sunday work. Oh no, that's one thing, there were nae Sunday work. Oh no, it was enough six to nine at night without - Sunday work.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You got on quite well with the folk that you worked with both in the factory and in the mill?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh yes. I got on - well that's what I often say, I cannae - mind ever - ken - any fighting between them or anything like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 How about your boss at the factory, did you get on well with him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Ah well, that's - that Johnny Marshall, he was, ken, the - manager.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 He was easy to get on with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 He was - uh huh. And there were other men like, for the machines, the mechanics and that too.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 What about the boss at the mill?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh, the - oh - oh no, the - likes of the - like there were the - Spence's mill and Troqueer mill. There's two mills, next to each other. B}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10710664\charrsid9768143 ut the I was in belonged to Sco}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 ts. Ken I dinna much history about them, but they were kind o
f - them kind of people and that. And they were, ken better at - and they were better at his workers, and they were supposed to be pure slave}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10710664\charrsid9768143 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 drivers. Of course I was young that I cannae understand anything like that, but - right enough I used to often here my father talking, and that, and he was there for years but - he used to kind of, you ken}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10710664\charrsid9768143 , go on his dinger with the Sco}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
ts. And they were just, you ken, just all for making, where the - next door ones - they were different men altogether. Spence and Charter - Chateris's and Spence's and something and that, I cannae mind. But}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10710664\charrsid9768143  I can always mind of them Scot}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
s and that - what I can mind of them ken in the office - and this - big one, he was a big fat man, and they called him - in fact - in the mill they calle
d him the Big Hun. And - right enough - you just, ken, the short hair - and, you ken. But it was Mr Douglas, ken Doug like, Mr Douglas. But the other brothers was Mr Leanard, you never heard him called anything, he was, you ken, a nice looking fellow, he 
w
as really nice, but this big Doug - and you ken what I mean. He just - and he just - acted the same way as what you ken a Hun, he would have put his foot on the top of you, that man. I can mind of that like. And it wouldna do to be standing about or anyth
ing like that. Even - even standing on the ground and that, like coming out the mill and - and that we wouldna stand and blather there. Mr Leonard - he never heeded, ken, he would pass on. But no that big Doug. He must have been the oldest like and that.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 When you went into the mill did you have to learn first or were you put right onto a loom?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Ah well, I - I just - for - so long I was put on to this with an older weaver. And it was just a - a matter of form, this carry on, because - it was just y
ou ken well - they was putting - a web in for you, and then they tie it up, and - ken, the four leafs like, they're always in a leaf, tuner comes and he tunes it and it's for - ken all different patters. They tune - thingummyjig it to that pattern. A set 
- aye. And then it's just - was a case of - you just turned round about, and you - ken, like my father, just put all them on, and there it's - to it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did you have to do very much about it or did you just have to watch it so that it didn't stick or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh you -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Nowadays most of it's automatic isn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh, aye, oh but in them days and that, say - ken likes - an end broke, what we' called it, you ken, well - just - oh well, it would just be the same as my jumper if I had a stitch th
ere - just the same as my - it wouldn't matter, well weaving just the same. Say, ken, like - in your web and that, and it broke - well you notice that. You stop your loom. And then - it's - well what we called heddles, I couldnae explain what - th}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10710664\charrsid9768143 ere were, you ken, and the leaf}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
s and that, with heddles you called them like, and wee eyes, ken, in the middle, and this is where the w}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10710664\charrsid9768143 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
ft as we called it, put it through it, and then - you carried on again. But that - the likes of that - being - and then out like 
and that, you couldna - it went to the menders. Like you - you didnae - you sorted it like, you wouldn't - and then you'd - away round the back, ken, tying ends. And youre - ken, was like this - this is a front end and that and what a job you get - gettin
g over for to to tie ken and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Being short you would find it difficult?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh aye, sometimes and that I've seen me and that, you ken, caught tying and this wee - Ned Durie I used to many a time get him I'd say - and he wasna much bigger as me ke
n, but I would say, oh Ned, could you tie that end for me, I canna get - you ken, I canna - and but I'd just to carry on the same. And the old shuttles used to this way and that and oh my goodness.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did you find it awful noisy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh - noisy, oh - oh you - oh never - never - never - it wouldnae appeal to me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Were you paid on piecework there too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh aye - aye, your web and that, you - you were - like so much. And as I tell you and that my father - I mean them sixteen looms, he did keep the
m you ken. Some of the tuners, ken, they wouldna bother even - putting a key to a loom or anything ken, when the weaver was off like or - or anything like that. But he was one like that, I'll give him his due, you ken, he had all the - but then it was - n
o waiting - to keep the loom going, and as long as you ken, he was getting commission on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 He actually got extra money? Was his pay based on the amount of material you produced?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 On - on - what we - the money we - yes. And - I mean we got a - used 
to - maybe - three pays a week. Aye, if we were off before dinner time you'd get your pay that night. But no after dinner time, you wouldna get your - but that's the way you were paid.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 I thought you would just get paid at the end of the week?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh
 no, no, no. No. And then - likes of my father, he used to stand round and he had a wee book, and it was all written down. They knew - ken, with his commission. Every ha'penny.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 What sort of pay did you get for that then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Ah well, it depended on 
the kind of web it would - be you see. The likes of the khaki, they werenae - you didna get so much. But likes of worsteds, what you - you've heard tell of worsteds but - I mean - the wove - it's - it's woven white and dyed. Oh I expect you'll get white w
orsted yet, and that, but they were - you more on them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 And you had to keep it clean did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
And - no, oh just you ken and that because - of course they'd stop even an oil mark. Well they could work and have stuff and that to put on that. But - 
Scott and that, they were always famed for their - their worsted. I mind I had a wee costume and that, it was - oh about five shilling a yard then, you ken, like but - oh mercy me, I wore it and wore it and wore it and I dinna ken where it went but - neve
r wore it down. But they were really - oh, the best.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 What sort of money would you make in a week do you reckon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh some of the webs and that were, you ken - maybe twenty-five or twenty-six shilling you got. But it depended on how many days it to
ok you to get that off. If you were held back or anything like that you ken, but as I say, we werena bad because my father did keep his looms - ken, perfect because it was - to make that money himself. And then - if the - ken, some webs and that, if it - 
for all we used to say, ken, rotten, like ends breaking and, ken, the - the weft and that was - bad, and - breaking, well you kept back like that, you couldna just - put on say - an average wage that you could make every week.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 But you made more there than you did in the factory?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh aye, I made - and believe me I worked and that, I certainly ken admit I - I worked in the factory, but it was only to make the money to take home to my ma like and that but - oh, I - slaved, and I've seen even their glo
ves now, and you ken, cotton - and that and - nick, you nick you ken all round. And I used to even pull with my - feet. Even - put it down and - to get it. It was - the tightness of the - the - the glove you see and the cotton was - and it used to be - an
d
 in fact the carpet gloves was terrible. But I - I were just you ken of course you were young and everything, and never think nothing about it but - I mean - I sometimes won - I - I sometimes wonder like - how we did it and that but - as I say and that yo
u never thought nothing about it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You managed to get some material for yourself too, you could get material cheap at the mill for making up yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Well I wouldna say so much about - ken, the cheapness. For the simple reason that I mean - the -
 the - as I say about their - their material and that that, it was certainly the - good - like of - the mill next door they said and that, they were just, ken, just like factories you'll see one factory, say the Wolsey, there's things perfect, and that Ma
rks and Spencer}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10710664\charrsid9768143 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
s - some - they get all their stuff. And then you maybe say, Oh McGeorges, I wouldna buy anything out of there for, you ken, faults and that you know. Well - Charteris and Spence - seemi}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10710664\charrsid9768143 n}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 gly you see they said too, their stuff was only rubbish. Where }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10710664\charrsid9768143 you did maybe pay for it in Sco}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 ts but you got the material as I say.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Was there ever a rivalry between the two factories?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 No, I - I could - well, I don}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10710664\charrsid9768143 't think - the Scot}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 s, I think they were kind of - that wee bit kind of distant. I don't think that they ever had anything to do with them other two next door. And still they seemed to -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did the workers feel the same, did the workers feel that they were working for a better firm?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh well I think it just - where you start like and
 that that I think you - you're like - certainly I admit and that their - their boss-s - I mean they were men like - they would talk, where the likes of Scots wouldnae talk to a - a worker. Unless they were telling you off or something. But they wouldnae 
t
alk, but they said - them other two next door, ken, they're - just like in the factory there, and Irene'll say too - this - Mr Chippings is a Jew boy but I couldna tell you. It's - this - what do you call them, see'd them on there - Yulmer. Is it Yulmer -
 hosiery? No, this is in Hawick, in fact it's - on there I was learning - like - what's the - Like - the - like the McGeorges, like Mr Robert was the last one left, well - he's out of it altogether now him. They thingummyjigged the business. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Can you tell me what kind of job your mother did before she was married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Well, I - think - that - she had been a nursemaid - and looking after weans.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did your father ever go out to any pubs or clubs or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Well as far as - I ca
n remember - I remember my mother always said like about her telling me, the first ten year of their married life - was happy. Ken, he went out for a drink. Now this is what - this now - away and - she said, you ken they were more happiness in the house l
i
ke, with him just ken taking a drink, and then - whenever he went teetotal, and ha' every ha'penny as I telled you, every ha'penny was a prisoner. And he wouldna even - as I say, even my ma never got her wage from him. A pound. And that was all days - and
 
I tell you a crowed of us. And he just - every weekend, you ken what I mean, every ha'penny was a prisoner. And we - I've many a time often wondered - in fact to tell you the truth I've often thought, I says, well I hope to goodness my ma's spared you ken
 
to get the - the good of that, I wouldna mind but I - as I say and that just the way he treat - he's my own father but I mean - I couldna say - that, you ken like I could - because when I got a certain age and ken I started chatting up and - aye, for a fe
w
 things you ken the way - he was treating my ma like, he werena - no belting her but worse than that, just talk - the way he talked to her and - and - her spending anything and carrying on like that, it was terrible and that, and - I used to and that and 
t
hen as I tell you I - that time I made up, I said I'll put it to him, I'm going into digs, and mind you I'd no more intention, I was standing on that mill and that old loom was going, shuttles was going, and he's standing at the bottom watching every move
,
 and you darena put your loom off once second or he'd have been up marching because he got commission on, you ken, he'd sixteen weavers. And here - I just - put it to him, so of course I had to sit beside him at my meals, you like it was just a big wooden
 
white table like and there we were all round it, and I dinna ken the idea but - I - I would so - I just - then and I kind of - ken how you sit 'til your mind's kind o ken made - I says - I said, do you ken what I'm thinking of doing father? No. You ken, t
h
at's the sharp way he talked to you you ken, you - we were used to him but - no. I says, well, I says, I'm thinking on - boarding with my ma. He says, what do you mean? I says, well I'm going to give my ma so much every Friday. And I says, and - you ken, 
t
he rest I would have for - for to buy clothes or things, I'd no more intention of doing that as fly in the air. I intended to give her it in front of him and then give the rest of the money you ken for to make her kind of - and whenever - if that's what y
o
u're thinking Janat, there's the door. Get out. And of course me, I - being, you ken, you know awfully game in my way, I said, so I will father. I says, so I will. So of course away early to his work like, he was always away early, the men all sat at the 
Brig at the Suspension Bridge like, the dyke round there, so here my ma of course, here she started greeting. And here she - she thought - she - she thought I was meaning it, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10710664\charrsid9768143 
you ken. I says, oh, I says, din}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 na be silly ma, I says, I only - I says, I - I'll 
learn that man, for all he was my own father and I was trying to hold my own with him, I says, I'm going to learn him. I says, he's no going to go on the way he's doing with you and, I says, even talking to you the way he does and that and - and of course
 
it was a case of now dinna get, you ken, she didna want me to get into trouble with him, because - whether he thought a lot of me or what it was I don't know but I didnae ken what I mean because he just fair disgusted me the way - so my ma says, don't you
 
and that - and never need him and never start. I says, aye well, I says, I'm no, you ken what I mean, I'd no intention, but, I said, it was just to ken, fear him. I thought - I thought maybe - he'd take a tumble and put more money into the house, give my 
ma it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 He wouldn't take your mother out for a drink anywhere then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh my mother never got nowhere, no. When we got older and that she used to go to the Salvation Army meeting, you ken on the Sands like and that. Used to be in Irish Street, my ma
 - that's all the bit in Greyfriars, the mother's meeting you ken up Irish Street. Them's only you ken, that was in the afternoon when he was working and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Was your father interested in sports at all? Like football matches?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh I dinna - I dinna - I don't think he even - bothered anything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 He wasn't a betting man?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
He was a - a - a great - cornet player, I ken that, I ken he was a great on on the music and all the boys just followed suit after him, but - for anything else, I don't think for one minute, I never heard him - ken discussing football or anything else.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
You say your mother didn't have a great deal of money for keeping the house, do you think she belonged to any clubs, like for buying clothes or shoes or that sort of thing.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh no, no. No, as I'm telling you, it was just your clothes was handed down. The likes of Jessie's was handed down to the next one and ken and that, that was - oh no, there were never - nae money and that for -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Nothing for that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 They had sick clubs and funeral clubs that kind of thing. Like insurance.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh, the - oh the insurance. Oh aye, that was just a - a - about a penny a week, stunt and that, yes. And that was another thing my father tried to stop. Now, he was a man l
ike this. His money - you had to have the money to bury - and I telled him that day about that I says, how can my ma have money - for a burial when she she hasna the money you ken for to have it? But he was firm like that, and, you ken it was a good job t
h
e insurance man even come, I can mind there were - Scottish Legal, and - the Pearl. Them was two insurances. It was only you ken only a penny and I think it was ten - pound or ten guineas or something, you got it for burial. And - if them men had have com
e
 near that house when my father was in he would have chased them. My mother lived in terror you ken in case - ken she's always to say to them and that, try and come so and so a time. He'd have chased them and that, because I kept on - the Scottish Legal, 
I
 kept mine on like it's from birth like, and I still you ken, I'm still in it like and that because - my ma mind she gave me it just the same as - I did with them two that got married. I handed their - their polices and I says, if you like to carry them o
n well and good, but anyway I don't - I - Nessie did and that but the other one and that, she didna want anything to do, she - just dropped the thing so -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 How did you get on with your brothers and sisters? Did you get on better with one than all the rest or were you all just friends together?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh - oh I think on the whole we were just all about the same. I mean it was just a case of helping each other.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 There wasn't one you would say you were fondest of?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 No, that's - I - I couldna say you
 ken like I - I - certainly wee - I always say my wee sister, her that died, between our Jessie and me like, she was nine, ken, I can - I can picture - and I can picture that day she was buried too.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 She would be a couple of years older than you then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Any. In between. And wee Jeannie and I - ken going to Sunday school. Well you ken as they always say, two's company and three's a nuisance you ken but I don't know whether that was right, but I mean we went away to the Sunday school, the three of us,
 Jessie, Jeannie and I, and it was up Irish Street, up at Greyfriars Hall, and ken our Jessie, and it was a cas}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10710664\charrsid9768143 e of you ken she was always a b}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 uckle, and pulling Jeannie's hair and pulling mine - oh what a laugh, she went - oh it was terrible. But I - I nev
er forget that day wee Jeannie ken was buried. I liked - ken her and I just seemed to - because Jessie was older but still and that she was just kind of, you ken, thingummyjig too and that, I don't know, I just ken like - I think with Jeannie and I being 
k
en always together and so forth, and then when I lost her it was - oh I nearly broke my heart. I had a photo of her too at the school and - oh I dinna ken - I think half of my stuff - from that Kirkowen Street, I think they put half of my stuff out you ke
n and that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 When you were wee did you play with your own family or did you play a lot with the neighbours children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh I was always - oh I was always out playing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Who was it you played with then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 And - oh just - well the neighbours li
ke, the lassies ken, we were all just at the school together and that, and then used to, ken what I mean the likes of that - wee Jeannie Lennox, come from Wallace Street, we used to get away down there and - play with her and Rachel Gardiner from the Burn
s Slaps, her father had a but - well, you ken I used to and that and, oh - oh I - I could enjoy - our Jessie wasnae, she was awfully kind of stiff, ken, and just no for ken - but I could enjoy myself and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Was it mostly just in the street that you played?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh no, in the Dock or the Kingholm and bits like that. Or maybe going away over or away over Troqueer, a field over there. Or - maybe - to the - the New Quay, we used to ken walk there. Well like the - the boys and us, we were all together. O
f course that's what I say, the boys - I was a great one and that and - with the boys. We all played together. And that's how you ken and that. Well our Jessie never had - she's inclined to be like Irene here at home, you ken like, no time for men and tha
t
. But then as I said to her, no, but I says, when you got older you were glad to get a man, I says, there you are, and then I says, you used to say to me about - I just telled her that two or three weeks before she died. She's sitting there and that. I sa
y
s, you used to talk about me and the boys and I said, it was all harmless fun. I'd never enjoyed myself as well. And I says, still there was you, I says, if I hadna got married when I was younger, I said, I would never have dreamt about it when I got that
 age, you ken. Poor Jessie, she's away now too.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Did your mother of her ever tell you not to play with anybody in particular? Or could you play with anybody that you wanted? Your mother never said, don play with them down there?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Well - oh my ma n
ever - she - my father was inclined to be a wee bit, you ken, kind of, ken like that you ken. It was a case of - if he didna you ken maybe the lassie's folks like, and didna think much of them he would try, but he never would turn me away, you ken like yo
u
 would maybe say to me Janet, dinna you play with so and so, and - well you see I would just ignore that, and gone on playing and then he never - he never own anything that he couldna say anything. And for the boys of course, they, ken what I mean, they h
ad other - football and things like that to occupy their time like, and they'd the music as I telled you, and the Town Band and all them bits of - they were fully -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did you ever get into trouble with your mother for getting dirty when you were playing?
 Or did she not object if you came in in a bit of a state?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Well - to tell the truth like I think and that, you ken, back and that, we never seemed to - kind of get into, you ken, first or anything, you ken like I mean - I don't know like, no, like no
w I'm saying now - I've been amongst the other ones and other and that, but I canna mind, but say maybe - ken, a wee summer cotton frock, but if I'd have dirtied that - and I used to ken get in - and I would wash it, and I would - and hang it out and dry 
i
t and get it - ironed and ken never let on anything about it and that. Aye wouldna let on anything about it. But - otherwise I couldna say ken because - we just had to keep ourselves clean because there werenae the clothes - no like now. I mean, they can 
c
hange and they can - and that, that lassie that came Sun - Sunday, and her auntie - right away when she come in here she says, and I noticed, but you see I wouldna say, even for all she's my own I wouldna turn round and say to her, but when she come in. S
o
 Irene was in the back kitchen, she came in and she says - she says, you've been getting new trousers have you - or whatever she called them, it wasna trousers but she said, you've been getting another pair. And Linda just stood there, she says - yes Aunt
 
Irene. She says, how? She says, I just noticed. She said, in the name of goodness - you - you'll never wear what you've got, she says - and - is that no another pair of shoes you've on? This is what - and that - and when the lassied come in you ken, just 
c
ome over and said, ken, how was I like and that, and I noticed and that, but I wouldnae have turned round and - and said to her - I think you've got new shoes Linda, or are them new trousers or - but then Irene just you ken, and that, and she turned round
 
and telled her. She says - you - you - you'll never get half of the stuff worn that you've got lassies she says, it's terrible. So of course just then I turned round, I - I telled her, I says, look here, I says, you've nothing to do with it. I says, we're
 
- you know, and - still - she's the very one, aye, she would go to Old Quay if she thought she could get her anything, that lassie, everything you ken, Linda. Linda. And - Nessie says you would think that - she belonged to her and she was a wee lassie yet
 and that, them things too you know. They - Woman's Own.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Can you tell me any of the games that you played when you were young?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh well I din - I dinna ken the games nowadays. Beds, and skipping. Hide and seek. And - what - what were it, oh that 
game - we - oh I forget what you call it, ken you hid it like and that, a wee thing like and that and - oh dear what did you call it. And you ken all - all the rest hunting, ken, and whoever found it like - it's aye, hunt the geg, that's what we called it
 in my days, hunt the get, I think that's what - aye, it was hiding a wee thing you ken.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Just any wee thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Aye. Anything like, aye. And you ken - ken hide and seek. One hides and the rest comes to hunt you, and it was - just something similar, 
you had the wee thing and you hid it and them ones had to - to hunt and find it like and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 When you were in the school in the playground did you have singing games and things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 To tell you the truth and that there used to be a Miss Bell, a te
acher and she was awfully nice coming - ken, coming out and - ken - playing like - like we didna have much time to play or that, you'd just to jump, by the time and that you'd - you got round to the - toilets where they were way round the back and that wa
s - the bell rung you ken, that was your playtime by. But - of course at St Michael Street school, ken there werenae that much - ground - down there like and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did you belong to any youth organisations when you were wee, like nowadays you've got Scouts and Guides and that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 No. We just went to Band of Hope and that, that's all, there wasnae - there werenae much ken like - anything like that for to -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 How did you spend your free time then, before you started on your wee job at the shop? When
 you weren't at school what did you do with your time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Like the holiday time? Oh the - oh I used to - ken - I used to go up my granny's and like she lived in High Street. I used to go up to my granny's you ken, keep her company or - ken, tidy up the 
house for her and things like that. That's - what of course a - I gloried in. But Wyllie the baker - that one I telled you I ran the messages for, oh they just had me, ken you would say a mug but I never thought about - anything about it then. As a mark l
i
ke and that, it was just a case of, if I wasna in the shop, away round to Brooke Street you ken, that was to the house, and always a wee job for me. Never got nae pay for it and anything like that, just, ken, but still and on I never - and it - it didnae 
bother me and that, I just -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Did you collect anything when you were wee? Like some folk collect buttons, boys would collect birds eggs. Did you do anything like that? Collect scraps?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh aye - scraps, aye, we used to and that }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10710664\charrsid9768143 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143  thin}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10710664\charrsid9768143  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 gummy, changi
ng scraps and things - them things. And then - I'll tell you what - we used to - ken a penny'worth of cherries, if we had a penny, well you got a penny's worth then, and you ken the wee stones. We used to play with the boys, they used to make the wee hole
 
in the wall, and putting the - what we called pip, we called them the pips, into the hole and that. And you ken - you - still laughing, I often think when some of them in there when they're being - doing anything like and missing the - say, oh my goodness
, it was - it's just something like you ken what we used to play, ken, pips. And then we the -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did you ever play with dolls when you were wee? Did you have a doll?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Had I a doll? Canna mind of having any - maybe a cloth one I made but - canna ever remember having a -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You would usually have a baby in the house, you wouldn't need a doll?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Aye. Yes. Yes, that's another thing. You see, we - never thought you ken when we're thinking now back, and this old midwife and it was a case of - you ken
 when you met her, and I can always mind, they just called her Sarah, Old Sarah Armstrong, I mind of the name like Old Sarah Armstrong, and - that was the midwife ken. And we used say - when are you bringing my ma another baby? And - at the school - oh, o
f
 course they were all big families, but oh I used to - how many of a family are we Jenny? Oh and I thought it was grand. Oh - when I got the age and that and - and you ken understood - when I understood, you ken I - I was fair affronted. That was the only
 
- thing I once said to my ma, I says, oh, I says, I'm fair affronted ma, I says. I says, I never thought for a minute when you used to say about - Sarah Armstrong bringing them - but I says I didna ken that's - you ken, and poor soul I can - picture her, 
she had - it - it hurt her me saying that. But I never and that, and by }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10710664\charrsid9768143 J}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
ove you ken after that - I would never say to folk how many there were, I thought aw - I - I thought it was terrible, you ken like. And still I'm no going to say that - ken like and th
at, maybe - the old one and that they never slept together. But you ken what - I understand things and that. Maybe him creeping in just, you ken, once. They say about you ken a man and wife sleeping together, well I wouldna sleep myself anyway, not 'til h
e
 goes - I never did it and that and even yet I couldna sleep myself but - I mean folk'll say, oh - once, it's impossible. Well it's no. Because you ken when I thingummyjig and that and think and I'll say, here's my ma, poor soul, maybe you ken and - havin
g
 all us chewing all day and fair tired and that, and maybe him getting up you ken. In fact our room was just across from it, and I've many a time heard him, but it never struck me, ken it didna cross my mind. No. And then - you got the age - seeing throug
h it all.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Can you remember when any of your wee brothers or sisters was born? Do you remember the midwife coming to the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 I canna mind but - the likes of Walter, the youngest one - but I canna - I canna really say that I can mind - used to 
run after Sarah Armstrong ken, and you ken that she - we thought she brought them you ken like and that but, I cannae ever - now, I couldna say I could ever mind of seeing my ma like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did she tell you beforehand if there was another baby coming?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You just awaited until it arrived and that was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
It was - just - yes, just what - I was saying to Linda about that on there you ken about - and it was for eight to nines, ken - it was like birth. And and it - it went through the w
hole thing, I was sitting and - I thoroughly enjoyed it and I was saying to Linda about it like and that and of course she was saying like - she says, oh yes, she says, at the - school like, she said, the Academy she says, - the class you know with sex an
d infants like explain, I says, boys and lassies together? Oh yes, she says, granny, she says - how - what do you mean by that? Oh, I says, mercy me, surely no. Linda says, oh, she says - there's nothing in it. But anyway, I got on - about - that and -

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Can you remember how old you would be when you first found out about that sort of thing? When you realized about your mother and father? If you didn't get told at the school did anybody ever tell you about it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 There were never - there were only this
 Rachel Gardiner, her father had a butchers shop, and - ken when her periods - started she kind o - she was saying but - couldna you ken like of course her folk would be like mine - mine like and that. But I can mind and that - we didna mature or whatever
 
you say - like now, you see, from nine, ten up and - you ken, aye, in fact that - and she's - oh, like you ken, a chest on her like this. And here - I was saying and that, I says, oh well Linda I says, do you know, I says, you're old granny - I always say
 
your old, you ken, your old mother, your old granny - your old granny - I says, was about sixteen. She said to me she says - what - what do you mean by that granny, what do you - I says, well, I says, I was about sixteen year old, and, I says, when that c
o
me on me that day I got such a fear, and I ken hadna fell, and I didna ken, I thought I'd maybe cut myself. Oh what a state I was in, and whenever I got home - of course I telled my ma, she come into - this wee room as we called it where we slept, I telle
d
 her, say, ken, I says, come here ma. And I said - and of course - and of course my ma just shrugged it away, and I can mind and that there werenae towels and things in them days, I mind it was a bit of cloth. And she telled me ken and two safety pins, th
a
t was it, two safety - and she telled me what to do. And she give me a book, and I'll guarantee it was nae mare as a penny, was just ken a wee paper one like, ken, the - even here like wasnae like bound or anything, a wee - and it just - everything, it ju
st explained - ken what - and that was all my ma said, she says - read that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You didn't get any warning beforehand?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 And I never got no - had no - Rachel certainly said - you ken about something and that, but then - we werena interested, ken, the
 rest of us werena interested you ken, in it like. But Rachel Gardiner - I - Rachel - you ken, she was the youngest of the - us, that ever - you ken, it come on her first. But I didn't know and in fact to tell you the truth - I was fed on chemical food 'c
os they thought you ken I was bloodless. Aneamic as they say now, I had no blood at all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did you think it was something to do with that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 I do -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 In your spare time again, did you ever go out for walks with your pals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh, we were always 
on the go. We were always on the go, we'd always somewhere - often we - you'd get away on the top of the Craigs younder and that, that's - oh all - I could run about then, I wish - I could do it now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did you ever have a bike?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh - oh aye, we nev
er owned one. Any time we biked ken we made our minds up maybe to cycle to the Auld Quay, or maybe Collin or you ken near hand, and - here it was a case of hiring one. Never - never possessed a bicycle. We'd always - and it was maybe threepence an hour, w
e
ll you'd to time yourself too for getting there and coming back again you ken like, well Kirkpatrick, the cycle agent and that and there were Richardson and that and - you - you ken it was a hire like, what you call hire, didna matter, an old mangle or wh
at it was like like and that, and - I says - you kwn many a time I used to think and that you ken, a bike, oh but no, no. Werenat allowed anything like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Was it just mostly the girls from the school and from round about the houses round near you that you went out with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh aye. Uh huhn. Oh well, they were just like one big happy family, as long as - my father wasnae in you ken, any of the lassies you ken, ken theywerenae - with him sitting or anything and that, they were just one big happy fami
ly, and my ma you ken, and we're all talking through each other, just - you ken.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did you ever play any games, any sports?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 I was - aye, but I - I - but I played tennis at the Dock. That tennis court wasnae always there. And - I - I thingummyjigg
ed in that, there were - there was Rachel and - And Ethel Murpjy and me, but there was another one, and I mind we - we made our minds up you ken we were going to have a game of ten - tennis. Couldna play tennis to keep ourself really. We went out of - and
 down to the tennis court and we thingummyjigged and then there were - the putting next to it, I dinna ken whether it's there yet or no to tell you the truth, and we were often on the putting and that, we liked it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 How old would you be then, this is before you got married is it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh aye, aye, aye, oh aye, oh aye. Oh be getting - on ken like and that, for all - we just seemed all - you ken, even - for all, ken, we got older and things - we seemed to all stick by each other for all that you ken like,
 I mean and my pals like, we just seemed you ken, and unless there were a break or anything like that you ken.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You kept together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 We just seemed to keep ken, in touch with each other and that and that lass I tell you - in America, and - she cert
ainly married a Swiss, and - Mary Ann and I were great, you ken, pals like. And then when she married Hermann Kinsler he was a - a Swiss like and she went out to Switzerland and then they landed in America and oh - oh I had beautiful cards and things you 
k
en she sent me, beautiful. And here, ken, after this, you ken, with this and I just as I tell you for - I cannae be bothered, it's no - I didna want to do it but I cann be bothered, ken, writing a letter, would you believe it. I write my messages out for 
Irene, but I - I cannae - I dinna ken what it is, but I cannae seem to get, you ken - I feel and that but - even with Linda I kind of said her too, I says, now mind, Linda, dinna look for me - writing back or anything like that because, I says,}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9768143  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 you understa
nd what - you ken, I says, I dinna feel - I could have sat down and just no bother once upon a time you ken, canna be bothered now. 'Cos she said - she said, oh, she said, don't worry about that granny, that was when she went away for - she said, it'll no
t
 stop me from writing to you though, but, she said, it's all - quite all right. Well that lass I wrote to, Mary Ann, and then it - you ken. That lassie started, and she wrote and she thought there was nobody like them. Here - help my goodness, here, poor 
M
ary Ann, she - she got word like Hermann - she's away too. And her mother - and that, her father - didnna ken whether he was kind of wasnae able or anything, but anyway I canna mind him ever working, but her mother - Mary Ann's mother, worked in the Garde
n
s, ken there were folk - you ken like, lifting tatties and things like that, but they didna get what they're getting nowadays like and that. Maybe - two or three shillings a day, and Mary Ann's mother used to slave and work ken in the gardens - to keep th
e
m going. But after ken - Hermann and - and that, she got - ken what I mean, she got on then and that and he was an awfully nice fell - man - fellow, you ken but really - you ken, I did kenned them - before they went away like and that, but - he was really
 an extra nice fellow, and then - they had a - a boy, drowned at the seat, I - I've even his photo and the grave's a big, ken flower - a big anchor. And he was drowned. And they lost the other one, they'd two boys and lost both of them.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You reckon your mother was in her sixties when she died? How long ago is it since she died?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 To tell you the truth I couldna - their - over thirty year ago.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 More than thirty years was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Uh uhn. Because - mind I tell you and that too when my father boug
ht that property up the Lockerbie Road, of course he was king of the castle. And - even now, you ken, up there - my ma had to pay him a rent. She'd to pay him a rent, just tell you about ken with a pound a week, she had to pay the rent. Yes. And - one day
 
- here I heard him saying like he says - he says - you couldna - I - I was just going up ken to see her like, and I heard him saying and that he says, oh, he says, he says, I can throw you out he says, I'm king of the castle. And it just, you ken, the win
dow, you ken, it was high up and I was in on the stair and I - really I says to myself, by }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10710664\charrsid9768143 J}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
ove. So I just - I just told him straight, of course I was married and away out the house and that at the time you see then like, and - wasnae fussy then, so I just 
turned round I said to him, I says - what - what way is that you're talking to my ma, I says, what do you mean by it? He says - it's my property, and he says, I can throw her outon Lockerbie Road any time. And I think she just got, I don't know and that, 
she had to at the finish and it was - on Irish Street, and - it was - oh, well, it had a name this place, ken it was like }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10710664\charrsid9768143 Veranda\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 . Ken, they were all - a lot of tenants like and that, well only my ma, in fact this Mr Robinson, he was a house factor, it wa
s his goodness that let, you ken, of course he kenned our family and he was a different man to him, and he, you ken what I mean - he - he ken, it was you see. So my ma got the house on Irish Street. Mechanics Court. It was - beside the Mechanics, there we
re a picture house, yes, off there, my ma got the house there, and - she certainly and that - her days was happ - they were happier then. Up there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You were saying that your mother used to go out to the Salvation Army?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Aye, she liked the Salvation Army.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 What sort of things did they do there? Was it just Bible readings and singing hymns?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh aye, just - you ken, singing hymns, and - and they had a wee cup of tea and a bun.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Was that in an afternoon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 And - yes, that was every Mo
nday afternoon. I can mind this Mrs - Jardine and her - the two of them used to always go to the Salvation Army. In fact if my father ken had been in he wouldna even have let her gone there but it was the afternoon that she could get - ken, please herself
 there, but there were no harm in that but of course I mean as I tell you, I did think - I don't think he was a man who even believed there was a God, you ken, he was just - heathen or - or something.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You said he never went to church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh not - not even Communion. And still he would have liked you to have took his card and slipped it in. At a communion time but you see -

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Do you think he wanted other folk to think that he was a Christian, that he went to church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 I don't think he cared for
 anybody. And he wouldnae - you ken what I mean that he really - I don't know and that, he - he - or anything like that, like my ma and that - I'm no saying she was a - but she was a good living woman, ken, she was a - just a pure saint. But he was the op
posite and he just - everything, you ken what I mean, I - I - I - I think he just got - he should have lived as a hermit, you ken, he should have been away by himself.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You think he would have been better not being married at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh well of cours
e you see - you sometimes wonder and that that - ken - he must have had the liking or something or - or ken what I mean but - I cannae express it right and that, I cannae - thinkummyjig like and that but - even at that - I mean - with even the family had 
-
 you'd have thought even the likes of that would have drew him and then he would have been - and he would - and he would have been - maybe for advice or anything, see, or maybe went and said, well, do you think that I should father or anything like that. 
W
ell you see - you got nae satisfaction here, it was just and that you ken, just - growled, didna speak like, it was just a growl, and that's how - that's how I stand on my own feet, I - all my life from I was at the school. And I plodded and my ma had nae
 
- but our - my oldest sister, our Jessie, she was inclined to be, you ken, kind of - feared you ken and - and - so forth like and that and she was feared for him. She was terrified for him and that. But - I just got and that that - I just - ah well, you'r
e
 no getting away with it but - I - I couldnae be impudent you see, ken what I mean, aye but - after I was married, and I was out the house, it was then if I, you ken, if I went to see my ma and he was - and maybe saying anything I just had him right - rig
h
t then, and nae bother. But then were two or three of them - now our - our Jessie and Lily - and Walter - I think - they were with my ma like up the Lockerbie Road like and in his house. Like they werena married then, and they went to Irish Street. And th
e
n - Walter got married. And - Lily and Jessie was left with her. Up to she died. That's where - she died, I can mind of that. But I was - jad a - ken what I mean, I - I didna even kind of thing about it because - oh it broke my heart the - the very you ke
n - oh I did, I - really.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You were saying that he did tattooing in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Ah. Aye, see that's what I - ken I mean -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Do you think he did it for money?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 To - to tell you the truth I often - think - you ken, I mean, I was a lot younge
r then when the men used to - ken, come up to Burns's Street - it was this big room, and it was always in there they were took. Like the old fellow just took them in there like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Was that his bedroom?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 And - aye - well, tell you the truth, tw
o beds. There were a bed for the boys and - and - he had a wee bed to himself, he had to have a wee bed to himself. But maybe four of my brothers lying in this other bed, you ken, I can picture the bed there and the one over here. And - this is where he t
o
ok them, and what - it was room - would even - I don't mind saying, he was - that he wasnae - clever and brainy - like machinery, in that room too - oh - you've no idea the folk that used to come. An engine - and he thingummyjigged himself like. He made t
h
e whole thing, and he had even - the steam, ken, he could thingymyjig it and I can mind it was the - ken the chest of drawers, they were big high ones in them days, ken a big - and here it used to sit up there and he'd a glass case for it over it. And the
 men that used to come up to see this. And really, you ken, I - I - I many a time used to think you ken if - if he hadnae just have been - been just a wee bit different and that he would just have been ideal.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Where do you think he would have learned tattooing because you would need to be trained for something like that wouldn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
I could - I do - really tell you the truth I didna - of course, my ma used to say about ken his mother and that, there were only the sister and him, and the mother - o
f course - everything - it didna matter what, wasnae good enough for John, ken, the like of his young life. But for anything I canna mind because I canna mind - ken, his mother or - or any of them. They must have been all ken away, but - my ma used to say
 
and that, she, ken and she just fair had him ruined like and that with just - John and - everything was for John you ken and that. And in fact I think we - at the time they were married too she didn't think my ma was good enough for her John. No. Well, my
 
ma - I - mind I can - ken mind now about her saying you ken too about - and - and she was old way you ken - if all stories are true, but my ma said not to - oh the - the thought of marrying a Kennedy. A Kennedy, as if there were any difference between a K
ennedy or another anything else. But it was - oh my ma said, oh, she thought it was awful.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Why do you think she thought that? Would any girl have been the same do you think? Was it a case of no girls were good enough for her son? Or had she something against your mother's family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Well - I think within myself - I once said to my ma too, like when she telled me that's no yesterday, and she said it like - at the time, I says, well, I says, when I start to weigh it up ma, I says, I'll tell you, I say
s, maybe she never wanted him to marry. Wanted him like the Old Ted Heath, ken, a bachelor, like that, and it was just - my ma says, well, she says, I never - even never thought on that, she says, but, she says, that's have - maybe been the idea.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 There are mothers like that. They feel that whoever their son marries is just not right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh - that's what I say at the}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10710664\charrsid9768143  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 prese}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10710664\charrsid9768143 n}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
t - day, get that right enough and that. But then - in - in - the likes of - my father of course I dinna ken, I canna - his mothe
r or any of them - in - even his sister, the one I was called for, well she was in Glasgow, oh I seen her an odd time but I couldnae - I couldnae give you a picture of her like, no used you ken with themand that. But she really - she was in - in Glasgow. 
I never seen much of her.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Just your mother's family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Just - just my granny, yes, and my Aunt Mairn, you ken, like the Kennedy's like and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You were saying that your mother had her friends into the house sometimes and your father had his friends in, but never at the same time?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh never - no. No, no. Oh no, he never would, ken, when he was in, nobody had to come in, I tell you even insurance - in fact I - I was just away in there putting - them insurance books away in my own drawer in
 the room, it's - four weeks, aye, past on Monday, well you see I never has been used - with this carry on. My insurances - ever from I was married - it was collected every week. Every Monday. One came in the morning and the other one just at back of dinn
e
r time, and that was it cleared. And I never missed a week. And I wouldn't even be out, ken - ken and they were coming. Well, here - a month - aye, past on Monday, aye, the third - of July. And she's never - and ken the book - and every time I open the dr
a
wer, oh no, I was saying nothing about them but - every time I opened the drawer you ken - I says, now I'll just have - and have the money ready, for her well she's never - now that - do you no think that - but that - you ken, mounting up like that, I don
't like that you see, I would rather have paid it weekly and - and off my -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Was your mother like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh, yes, she'd none at all, yes, but she would - no, no, she - that's one thing she never did. She hadnae much but believe me she never owed a ha'penny.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You were telling me you sometimes went to the pictures when you were young?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Aye - the -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did you go when you were still at school, or was it after that, once you were out to work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 We-l, and an odd time ken at school, the mat
inee. A Saturday after - it was only on a Saturday afternoon, an odd time. I got there. But it was very very rare because - and what - as I telled you I was more in that shop - for that Wyllie and that had me there and it was just a case of doing this and
 doing - and then away round to Brooke Street to the house, and that was all for the tanner a week and that, and I'd very little time for anything like that, but during you ken a wee periods and that - I had - ken, I could enjoy myself.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 This is if you had some money yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Aye, but - aye, that was - just maybe 'cos - you ken like, maybe - the customers and - ken, you used to deliver and maybe a penny, ken a penny but a penny was that and you used to, well - that was my own, my ma wouldnae ken I
 used to say, oh ma, say - I says, look, what I got, ken and I would would say well - Mrs Marshall, Johnny Marshall's wife like she kenned her and Mrs Adweiler and - look what I've got. And - I would - I - she - but she wouldna take it, so I just used to 
put it in a sweet tin, and save up and that and - and if I wanted a wee thing or anything like that then I got it. But a penny was a penny in them days like and that and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 What about your house, was it a rented house? In Burns's Street?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh yes, yes. Oh aye, it was rented, aye, well that - we -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Would your father or mother see about the rent for that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh my ma had to attend to it, my ma had to attend to all the - ken like and that, he never had nae - responsibility, no, no, he - he - we -
 we - we - likes of you and I we would say to our men and tell them and that, I ken I did, it didna matter even what I paid for a thing I would say to Bob - you ken, fancy that coat was so and so, you kwn, and I - I always you ken and he would listen. But
 
my father never with anything - he was - he never took nae interest in the housekeeping. He just handed the pound and - you can get on with it. And her rent was - she'd to pay the rent, and - as I telled you the insure - well the - only penny policies you
 
ken like and that, but my ma had to just carry on and in fact after I was - you ken, married - and I give Bob his due, he was very good to my ma. And he used to say to me too about it, he says, never see your mother wanting, Jenny, because he says, she re
a
lly and that and he thought there were nobody like her. And many a time she used to say, oh I'll never repay - I'll never - and Bob used to say, oh, he said, away and forget it woman, he says, he says, now look here, if it's doing you any - and many a pou
nd - ken, not that I'm doing any blowing about it, but we gived to her, just to kind of kee her on, that was she was in our house in Irish Street, away from him, like, it was then.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 What was the landlord like at Burns's Street, was he the kind that came and looked at the property regularly?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Well I'll you - the property - I said to you I run messages for Reid the baker too that I got sixpence a week from him. Well, it was building. It was his property. And Mrs Morley was down the stair, and my mas}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10710664\charrsid9768143  was on the top of her, and the}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 n there were a Mrs Blackstock ken along the landing, she was - but - coming up the close and going through - Reid had his bake}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10710664\charrsid9768143 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 house. The bake}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10710664\charrsid9768143 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 house was up there you see. That - it was, ken, what I mean it was just his - building. But they just went and - yes, aye, but oh, ken, I mean, give him his - he never bothered here.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 He was quite easy to get on with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh aye. Oh aye, he was -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 If there were any repairs or things needed he would be quite keen to do the place up if he was in the same block himself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Aye, well - not - ken what I mean even - ken, the buildings wasnae - just so old then. But - my father and that, ken, maybe wee odd just in the house, you ken, he would do, he wouldna say nothing or that, but - say like}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10710664\charrsid9768143  - or p}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
utting a washer in the tap or anything like that, I'll give him his due because - I mind - I dinna ken a thing and I wondered what it was and I says to my ma about it and she says, oh it's your father - ken, for - turning off the water, I 
forget what you call them but - I - you ken, you turn off - aye, and then - another day what did I find - like - a plunger. A plunger, oh I learned a lot in there, you ken what I mean, when think on it now, and here it was for the - lavatory, in case - an
d that, and it was - clean it out. And I can mind, ken, I'll give him his due there, them wee things - he wasnae bad. He would do that, aye.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 What kind of lights did you have in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh the gas.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You had gas for lights did you? Even though you didn't get gas for cooking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
I - the - no, there werenae - no. My ma hadnae a gas cooker. It was all done in a fire, all the cooking and everything was done on the fire. But we had a lamp up there you ken but - it wasna for long - oh, you couldna have done with it. Oh couldna -

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 They did a lot of sewing and fine work by the light of the oil lamps too.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Was your mother a sewer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Well - she had a lot of sewing to do. But I tell you what she had to do, I can always mind and 
that and it was just for a shilling or two, and I think that's what doner eyesight, ken gloves like out of McGeorges like - well - the - finishing them off like, the fingers. Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Joining the points together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Yes. Aye, yes. Well my ma and that, 
she used to - and - oh mercy, didna - think maybe they'd get tuppence a dozen or something you ken for that. But I can mind of that, because I've seen me often going down to the factory, and - ken - it was like a flour bag, and maybe - seven dozen or ten 
d
ozen gloves - put in there and I used to get it over my back and way down to the factory, to get her another order. And she had to do that, for to - kind of eke her way, that was when we were all younger like at home like and that. She had to seam gloves.
 
Because many a time I used to sit and - and I - I couldna finish them off, but lift loops, ken, taking the - and leave the - the wool and my ma just had to thing - and - and she could finish. Our Jessie could do it. But I never could finish, you ken, I co
u
ld lift the loops and that, and many a time we used to - in the summer holidays ken when we got our holidays too, used to sit up in that landing with the gloves and that and there my ma - and - that's she had to do for to - and her - her eyesight and that
 and she couldnae - talk about me with glasses, I can - I could get away - and thingummyjig}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10710664\charrsid9768143  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
glasses - or teeth too. Linda telled me the other day that - oh, she said, granny, she said, you'll have - she says, oh - why - she says, some day I'll come out and 
I' - I take you, but there was my ma and that, you couldna afford glasses in them days. And she used to buy - the - you could get a pair sixpence in some of them old brokers shops you ken. Sixpence.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Like a pawn shop?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Like - aye, that's what it 
would be, yes. And she ruined her eyesight. You ken, having to get them and seaming, she ruined her eyesight poor soul, and she could - oh no, she couldna - she couldna get - glasses. But when I Irish Street and that when she got that house and that in a 
wh}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10710664\charrsid9768143 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
le, oh she was there a while, when here, you ken, I said to Bob too, I says, I says, oh my ma says her eyes and that, and my own eyes is no very good but - I says - I said, my ma's eye - I says, you ken, I - I can - he says, well, he says - tell her, he 
says, to go and tested, and he says, for all that they'll cost, he says, I'll pay for them. And I says, oh, I says, I'm no going to tell my my ma, she might you ken. All right, he says, he says, Ipll put it to her. And Bob tell - and he just you ken he sa
y
s it's for your own good now, and he says, just get your eyes tested and get a right pair. He says, buying them - - oh - and - and - he says, you dinna ken, he says, really, and he says - mercy me other folk wearing them and so forth, he says, I - he says
,
 for all that they cost, oh they werena dear - you ken then, so he just right away says - he says, you get your eyes tested, and I forget whether - an optician, an - a - I can't - mind she went like and she was highly delighted, and I think - I think they
 were only three and six. Nice glasses. And she was nice you ken, she was lovely.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did she go to the pawn shop at all, would she ever pawn anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh no, no, no. No. No, that's - that's - I often say yet and that. Never you ken. Never like that 
no. No, as I tell you, I - I many times sit and think, I don't know how in fact she - she really did manage.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Once you started working and you had left the school, what did you do with your spare time then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 When - when - I started - left - left t
he school and then started working, from six o'clock in the morning 'til nine at night? There werena much time - by you got home then. But if it was a night off, like - like maybe - we were off at six like, one night maybe a week, and that, but it was jus
t
 a case of - of - dandering about as - as usual as I've telled you and that, it was always we were away down the Kingholm or somewhere like that, and - and I was gey old before I stopped you ken, playing with them - boys, no myself, but about half a dozen
 of us and we played, ken, and - and well I often have a laugh when I think of them and that now I says - help my goodness if they were just ken passing their minds and going back and thinking about the daft, ken, carry on on the Kingholm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 When did you give up playing like that and go out seriously with boys then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh - well - I think it was during the war when Bob - oh no - oh no, that was wee Cecil Paterson, I - I thingummyjigged - off and on with him like and that, I - I like - I liked the fello
w and that, but no, it was later on and that and then - when I met Bob.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You were a good bit older were you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 And - aye, and he just - you ken, just ken how we - we thing - just know right away and that, and then we used to ken and I'm sure - oh 
and I went years with him, you ken, before he even - it was - cropped up. I did. And then, I mean, well - August - the tenth, 1923 we were married. And then when he - he said to the ol-fellow, you ken, when he asked him just like the rest. I've nothing ag
a
inst - I've nothing against you, but Janet's far too young. No - too - oh no, she's far too young. That was in August, September and I was going to be twenty-three on the first of October, that was the only thing he - so Bob said - like and that so - oh w
e got married and of course there were no houses then, we'd to start in a room. Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
When you started going to your work did you keep going out with the same pals that you'd had before, from Burns's Street and from St Michaels school and the high school, or did you get new pals from where you were working?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh no, just the same all. Just the same, aye, of course in them days I mean it was either just factories or - or the mills, for us. Like unless you ken the shop. I was with Wyllie the bakers, ce
rtainly, she got me there but - heavens - two and six a week I was getting, you ken, like that was after I left the school, she wanted me into the shop, as I tell you, and that was it, Johnny Marshall that was - foreman in McGeorge's factory, it was him, 
in fact he asked me. He says, no cheeky Jenny, he says, what does she - and they were - friendly, like the Marshalls and Wyllies ken, of course entertaining round at Brooke Street and that that's where I used to meet them when I was you ken so }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10710664\charrsid9768143 high}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 , but any
way, and I said to him, and oh he says, mercy me, he says - would you no like a job in the factory? He says, you'll make more there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Had a lot of the girls that were in your class at the school gone into the factory?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh - aye, oh aye, well - as 
- as I'm telling you there were - you may say there were only factory and the mills - for you, werena like jobs now you ken like, and for shops of course all them supermarkets and all them, well you could have counted all the shops in the town, in my days
 
you could have counted them you ken. And just - and - and - I can even - you ken, any of the lassies that went in - to the shops or that, well they were there 'til they - I ken have - I - I dinna ken where half of them is now and that, but one or two and 
that went into shops, and they were there all their - days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did your mother mother and father expect to know who you were going out with at night, or did they just let you get on with it yourself?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh - even - ken - we had to ken be in at a certai
n time. Even from - I'm tell - I - yes, and Bob and that, many a time I've been - you know, I think about them nowadays, maybe say - if he'd have left me, he could have been away with another one for the rest of the night, you ken, just think, aye, but I 
-
 thugnymmyjig and that, it just says - it just shows you, but - ken, and he would say - your father you know - oh., I says, fear, just fear, oh I says, my father - and he'll lock the door and that - night up on top of the Craigs with him, I - I can - both
 
of us sitting, Bob's laying all off about the countryside, and then it was, what time? Oh my God. Ah, down there, down the Craigs Road and long that St Michaels Street, and I hadna time to - I just had time to say, oh goodnight, and up them stairs. Or he 
w
ould have locked - you ken, he wasna a man just saying - ken, maybe you and I would say to our family, you - if you're no in at a certain time I'll lock you out no meaning nothing by it. Aye, but he wasnae like that, He said, he meant it. And still and th
a
t - like Bob's side like, and up at Noblehill, you see - his mother and father's life was different altogether. And - and she'd a big family. And when I - I think on her like and that, I says what a difference, but - his father like was an engine driver, 
and - they were at - Noblehill for - lived there up to the - mother and father died up there. But their life and that, it was different ken and when I used to go up there, used to, ken, wonder.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You would notice the difference?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Notice, I could - 
used to say to myself - ken what a difference. Oh the grandpa and that and you ken - anybody could have got on with him and - nice to talk to, even - even the wean - ken, even when I had the three of them and used to take them up, oh their grandpa was - b
ut they couldna mind of - my father, they couldna - difference.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did your mother want to know who you were going out with at night before you went out? Where you were going?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 No, no, never - no, never - I never was bothered like that. I mean -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You were quite free to go out and do what you wanted?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Aye. That's - aye. Oh I couldna get just doing as I wanted but I mean - it - it it was just a case I should - ken, my ma would say, ken - oh I'd - like I would go in and say, I'm going to the pic
tures maybe tonight ma. Ken, like anything like that. And it was all right. But - she kenned everything was OK, you ken what I mean, I'll give her due, with - with me like she would say, oh - you ken, ken it's all right. And then the old fellow of course 
a
s I tell you, he went to his bed early. He just had his tome for going to bed. And he wouldna need to ken turn that handle. And then the boys and that when they started with the dance bands and things like that and later but - they werena, you ken - they 
werena -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did you ever go to the fair, that sort of thing when you were young?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Yes, I had - had smashing times at the fair. Free rides.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 How did you manage free rides?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh, I - that'll open your eyes for you. Free rides, our ones'll - th
ey'll no believe it unless I can get somebody - ken, of any - of - and - and ken I've been running about with, they'll not believe me ken. Well - on a Rood Fair morning - that - or - that's a Thursday, the Country Fair was on a Wednesday, and that was a n
i
ce time, ken two or three of us over on the gallop, and trying to hurry over to get our web off, just dead at the dinner hour, and you ken they couldnae - 'cos my father didna like that either, and they could do nothing in it you see. You stopped in, clea
ned your room and go the afternoon off, and we looked forward to it, the - the, you ken, the country fair, but I'm no saying every year like, but we looked forward and ken they used to come in with the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14711763\charrsid9768143 stars}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143  in their hats and ken, the fellows, the country y
okels, and believe me, by God you talk about enjoy yourselves and spend money. I think they just go paid every six month or - or something. And the money went. But that had nothing to do with our own fair. The Thursday morning, well - we all met the gallo
pers, \{ILLEGIBLE\}
, you know the leaping horses, I liked yon gallopers you ken, and - and went quick and that, they were just down at the bottom of Fresher's Close, just come from Burns's Street down Fresher's Close and there's - and there - when they starte
d - ken, if you could get - you got a free ride.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 If you were there early?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
If you were early there. And then - that butcher I telled you about - the - the penny's worth of liver, two penny's worth I always went, well Davie Mulligan and that, he u
sed to - like - he'd give so much like, and got a bundle of tickets and this was off Wilmot, like, he had the motors and - and them gallopers, and - Davie used to get a thingummyjig of that, bundle of tickets - ken for the free ride - like a free ride for
 
us. So - and I used to get down you ken, well - well, I used to ken - ken how you talk and talk, oh my God, he'd say, and - can I have a ticket for a free ride Mr Mulligan please? They'd call him Davie you ken, could have a ticket for the free ride Mr Mul
ligan please? Oh and he - he used to ken, and our Jessie, so fair, she would get one solitary - and she used to come to me and couldn't understand. I said, w}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14711763\charrsid9768143 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 ll, I says - the man give me the - but I says, I wasna going to refuse them. And then - we got that and you ken you got every ticket and you got - the free ride.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 That was quite good.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
But for speculating, oh heavens, no, never - no, you ken when we got older like - like and that it was different and that. But - no then, it was all free rides.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did you save up before hand for going to the fair?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
No, and then - well of course the fair, it was always October, my birthday ken like and that, no that I got much or anything like that, but - I never - that - that's only think I liked was the 
gallopers. I loved the gal and Biddles Show, and if it was away down the Bock - oh, the - like - like - more like a kind of circus ken the ponies and everything and - and Biddles Ghost you ken, and - and the clown and that and it used to be down at the - 
j
ust at the bottom of - Swann's Vennel, Biddles. And then there were - a Green up this side, and you ken they'd a platform, and - oh many an hour you used to stand and watch, ke, talk about them Danny La Rue and - ken they come on and there they would - be
 acting and - and singing, that was just a wee display afore you ken, but I was gey old afore I could afford to go in and see the show right. But this was just outside and that, and I can mind of - ken what I mean, really it was - it was marve}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14711763\charrsid9768143 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 lous. Oh it would only be three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14711763\charrsid9768143  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 pence but I mean that was something in them days, three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14711763\charrsid9768143  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
pence. But Green's Show and that, Bibbles - Circus like and that, well they were good and I think they were old stagers you ken, Like I dinnar ken. I ken - Biddle himself like and t
hat, oh he was an old man then, so he must have been, ken a wonderful age and that when he died. 'Cos I can mind they had two, they were a wee bit here, a wee bit there, ken and up a one - and up a stair to, ken to pay to get in. Aye, for - yes, yes, and 
it was just this wee pay desk thing and get in.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 When you went to the fair did you go with your own pals or did you have to take some of your wee brothers and sisters along with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh no. Oh no, never had none of them with me trailing with me. N
o - know, I - you ken what I mean, I - I - even with - with - with nursing weans I mean - like - they get a certain age now and I can carry on, but for - say nursing a young }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14711763\charrsid9768143 one}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143  or anything like that, I - I - I admit and that, I never was just on for it, I
 - I dinna think I could do it to tell you the truth and that. You ken, like I never - but they get a certain age, and then - I'd be full of it and that, and - I would have took a wean of mine - many a wean I used to take a walk, if I got my web off like 
and that and - they were kind of slack maybe, that I did get the afternoon - I liked nothing better as to ken get away, had a wee one and ken, the street like and that and I took them away for a wee walk.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Not your own brothers and sisters?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh no,
 no. Oh no, they were at the school like you see. Aye, they were all at the school and - and one thing and another, but I liked to - I liked to - taking the - I liked taking the weans. But certainly see the - I often say with Linda and that you see she's 
got - no that she's any different like and that to me, but when she was wee and that you see, I gloated. When I had her I was in heaven like and that. And just - yes, that's what it -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 How about Sunday when you were working? Did you still go to the church regularly?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh - I would - ken, I would not say that - I was a regular attender, 'cos I would be telling a lie. Ken, I have really went. And - and just occasionally. But like communion, and it was just a case of having - it was a case of having or
 getting stroked off. But - we - my sister like - up to she died - she never missed the church. In fact the elders, ken, when he come with communion cards, he always ken, he says even yet to me, and - and - and the lass she went with, well, Meg Dunlop, sh
e
 lived further down - St Michael's Street, ken, off Burns Street, further down and our Jessie and Meg Dunlop and it was up a stair and they sat and the elder used to say, there was the two of them, ken, whole bit and nobody - but just the two of them sitt
i
ng up there, and he says, every Sunday. I says, ah well, I says, of course, I says - you'll no ken mind it and that but - I says, ken Jessie's as old as him, I says, that was one thing - she wouldna have missed the church. And of course, me, ken younger k
en I used to say, oh I ken - dinna be silly, or maybe in the room and I couldna get in the glass for her getting - and, I would say - oh dinna}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14711763\charrsid9768143  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 be silly, I'm as good as you and I didna go to the kirk, and - and all this and that, aye, but our Jessie just - I
 don't know. She just - liked to go to the church. Oh - you ken, if I'd had my - my own way I would really have went to the Salvation Army. Ken, that - you could go in - just this - ken, having to get - dressed up, and - just - well I don't know, Christia
n
ity, I telled the elder that too, once he was here, I says - I says, the only thing that I have against and that, of course I - I mean - the other churches'll be the same, well - I don't know, but Greyfriars, they were always just that kind of - they talk
 
about the Academy and snobbish and that, but the certain class, you ken what I mean. Well say the likes of us, ken, poor, well we were called poor folk then, and you hadnae, you ken - hadnae - you werenae dressed even to go to com - communion, and I think
 
too even - with that, ken, go to the church and that you felt it. Because mind you - as I say even - at a communion - I mean unless you'd a new hat or - you ken, a new hat, no that I bothered because I never - and many a time I used to say to Bob too, I s
a
ys - oh the style like and that, I mean down there. He belonged to St Mary's of course, but I says, oh, I says, the style, and, ken, the hats and the carry on, and ken many a time he'd say, oh, he says, never heed - he says, I'll tell you one thing Jenny,
 
he says - he says, dinnae ever think that they're above you. He says, they may be as good as you, but no better. And Bob always rubbed that in. You ken I sometimes felt it, or - or even maybe ken some of my - my old pals too and ken who would get off thei
r mark or anything like that you ken like and that, and saying you ken, oh - love a coat and you ken and all this and that. But he was like that, he was very plain himself. Ken, he - he never heeded as long as he was clean.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Do you think it was just you feeling that yourself or did the other people in the church sort of look down their noses at you?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Well, I often think and that in the church and that, I dinna think that you ken all yon gaping and - and talking and carrying on, you ken, I have seen
 it and I've noticed it mostly - sometimes on there on a Sunday morning, and I never miss - I never miss a service there. I telled the minister that. I says, I'm at the kirk every Sunday, and he looks - ken, he says - and - I says, oh yes, the service in 
t
here, and I says, I've a different minister every Sunday. And oh you ken what I mean then. And that one too, you ken a lot didna like Melrose and that, but - no that it bothered me anything, the only that I've got against them is - I'm no able to go to - 
t
he elder would even take me in the car, but as I telled him I says, oh my son-in-law would do it but I says, heavens, I says, the time that I get in and that, heavens, I says, I'm - I'm in agony when - ken I get back. So I says, what pleasure is there in 
i
t? Well that's the only thing. And - when - Mr Johnston, the next time he comes I'm going to say to him, I think and that - that - you ken, when you're no able to gone I think it's their place that they should come here to give communion, if they were - i
f they thought. If they were thinking anything about you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Who was the minister when you were like a teenager, when you were working?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Who was the minister? Oh it - it was the Reverend Jamieson.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 What sort of person was he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 And - oh he wa
s a nice - oh ah, he was a nice man, and even his wife was just - kind of like a wee country woman and - very plain and she used to talk to you - the Greyfriars meeting, like my ma used to go to. Oh - she was, you ken, oh no, I'll give - Jamieson his due,
 
and then when Jamieson - thing - retired like - well, he - thing - went away, there were another minister come but you called him - he - I can always mind - you called - it wasna Reverend, Doctor King. But I think he'd been abroad, ken, amongst the missio
naries, and maybe that's what they're called instead of the Reverend. Doctor. Well, but - God, he was no sooner there too than he chucked it. And then - Melrose. And I'll give him his due, he's been there a while, ken what I mean. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Your mother went to Mrs Jamieson's meetings at the church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh aye, oh aye, that was - he hall in Irish Street you ken. That was the mothers meeting. And - lik}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14711763\charrsid9768143 e granny used to go and then to}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 o, and they used to get a wee there and Mrs Jamieson, ken, took it and it wa
s just the same with the Salvation Army, you ken like, a wee cup of tea and - and - and - ken - maybe a hymn or two or something like that you ken like and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 But they were the sort of folk that you could speak to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You didn't feel that they were away above you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
They - no, no, not - no, that's what I - no, I - I - I just say, ken it was just them two or three, maybe, ken - businesses. I could name them all like, and they'd all businesses.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Like big }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14711763\charrsid9768143 businesses}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid921314\charrsid9768143  in the town?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Ah well, I wouldnae - say, some of them ken, they weren't that big but they would just seem to be in that position - where it was more - it wasna working class more it was just poor ones, ken, that's, long ago, it was just a case of - you were poor, k
en, and that, and just - you seemed to be ignored.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 There was a dividing line more between the ones that had money and the ones that hadn't?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Yes. And I mean of course as I say, the likes of the minister and them, they'd nothing to do with us, they couldnae ken -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 And ministers wouldn't have very much money either?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
And they would - no. And that's what - the old body over there too, we - we - ken - of course she belonged to Greyfriars and that, and just through that day and that - and was 
gey nasty to me and that. She said she was - she was in all the time. And I thought of delivering my message and I said to her - in fact I was going for a good sleep that afternoon, and here there were a knock and - the post, it was a parcel, and the fell
o
w said like, I opened the door and shouted in like, he says, would you - would you mind taking this parcel - for Mrs Leithie you ken up the stair? So I says - I often say and that that long ago - that - I mean, when I think on my own mother and - them all
 
and that, heavens it was different altogether, you never - some folk'll say, oh it couldna have been and that, there must have been fighting, there must have been badness and all this and that, well I canna mind nothing like that. And I never - no, and I'
m sitting here telling the truth.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Were you interested in politics when you were young?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You said you were picked as a picket once when there was going to be a strike.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh - aye, the union. The union, I was - oh aye, that was - and
 here I - that night we - when we went to the union meeting it was smashed up, you ken, the - the strike just - and there were -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You weren't interested in political parties or anything like that when you were young?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh no when I was young like and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You didn't go to any election meetings or things like that when there was to be a general election?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh I always went and voted. Like -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Before you had a vote you wouldn't be interested?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh - oh no, I dinna think I'd be - I th
ink just from I was married like and Bob and that, it was just a case of - and him talking and just went with him with voting or anything like that well - just naturally you went, you - Bob said, oh well, I'm voting for so and so, well, I followed suit li
ke and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You had a boyfriend when you were working in the mill then before you actually started going around with your husband?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Or did you have two or three?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh I think a few through just daftness though, you ken what I mea
n, never meant anything by it but - Bob used to this wee bloke, and - I'm wee - and - and - you ken he brought the heavens down - for me that - boy you ken at the time. And ken after I started going with Bob you ken, and whenever we met him - and ken - Bo
b
 would say to me - he says, look. Have a look at him. He says, that's what you were going out with - that's who you - and you ken I used to - and I was fair - aye, even with him, I was going - I says, oh away and take a jump and - and leave him alone, I l
i
ked Cecil and that's all about it and that. But he says, look at him, look at - look at the way he walks, you - you'd think he'd shit himself, now them's the words he used, aye. He says, you'd think he'd shit himself. And you ken, oh many a time, and stil
l
 that fellow, to the - even this day he'll ask Irene how I'm getting on. But he's married too, like - Cecil's married and that. But I did - and he was a nice wee fellow and - and I didna ken like and - and that but Bob, oh many a rise he took out of me ov
er Cecil.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 What sort of things did you do when you were young and you were going with a boy, did you just go out for walks or what did you do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh, it was more all walking because - the heavens, the - the boys hadnae money either to take you to the
 pictures, there were none of - it took you all your time certainly when you were set on a fellow and going with him like, say the likes of Bob, well you ken what I mean, go to pictures and everything then, but afore that - I mean you couldna -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did you go out in a crowd or like with Cecil did you just go out with him on his own?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh after - o}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14711763\charrsid9768143 h - I - I got away from all my }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 pals. Oh once I - you ken what I mean - dinna ken, oh I was set - set on him or what you would say but - I - I - I thingummyji
g, it was then, you ken what I mean. In fact it was himself you ken, he would say, you ken, he said to me too, he says, well mind he says, Jen, I'm no - he says - say, ken, we had our nights. Monday, Wednesday, Friday and a Saturday night and a Sunday. An
d
 the other two nights. I hope you're no - do you ken - I hope you're no out you ken with your buddies, that's what he called them. I hope you're no out with your buddies and that, you ken what I mean. And I would say, oh no, but many a night - ken, I did 
go out for a daft night with them you ken. The Tuesday or the Thursday, I did go out like and that. But - there were - you ken there were nae harm in it and that but he thought maybe I was sitting in the house and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You said setting just now, is that sort of one stage before getting engaged or something, before courting seriously?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh I dinna ken and all - you ken what I mean. Song since some of them and that, they went even - longer, years - longer as me ken with a fellow, you just seemed to g
o on, got - like nowadays, they just ken and they're married. But you had to go on for a certain length of time before you ever thought, as I tell you, my father wanae on, the thought I was rather young, and I'm sure Bob and that, and I was ken tig towing
 like long afore I ken went out regular with him. Tig towing because the f}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14711763\charrsid9768143 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
llows and that ken used to be from Gasstown and - and - Noblehill used to all come into town you ken what I say, into the town and just for a right daft night and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 But it was usually just collecting together in a crowd?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh - aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 And then go for a walk, something like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 That's - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You must have had some good times then,
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 But I've many - oftener you ken - like - ken used to many a time go up 
to - Bob's mother like and that and - even - well she'd just the two lassies - like and that and both of them were married, but - ken, I - I - I liked - ken, I used to - say, say, can I do this or - will I get you your coals or - any way - and she appreci
ated it like and that, that I - I enjoyed doing that better as what I'd have done you ken, maybe away -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 When were going around with Cecil did you get to visiting his folk?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 We knocked about a while you ken like. It was always - this night - I min
d, in the close and - talking and that and here - it was then he said, oh Jenny, he says, I want you he says - to meet my mother and father and - ken and that. Well, I kenned like his two sisters, I kenned Nen and Jean like. In fact wee Jean and that - hi
s
 - youngest sister like - she a hanging eye after a brother of mine. Wee Jean Robson and - and - our Davie, but Jean was, ken, and many a time my ma used to - it was funny, she passed that remark, she says, ay, she says, I would like to ken see Davie gett
ing wee Jean.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 But it didn't happen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
And - no, no, he got a wag too. In fact she can just tramp over him and do what she likes with him and that, but there you are, ken like but my ma always said, she said, you ken, but I mean - Jean got a good en
ough man like, I'm no saying anything about Rob like, a good enough man and that, but it just shows you and that how - you just feel like that couple, you ken. And wee Jean Robson, she was an awfully - in fact she - she's - I think she's oftener - oftener
 down by - like just her nerves and - like and that, and wee Jean's having an awful time of it like.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You were saying that you were taught to respect the teachers at the school and that sort of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did you have to curtsey to them, or anything like that, or did you have to nod to them when you said good morning or anything like that?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh - aye maybe you ken - going into school like it was always good morning. But if you met them outside - ken, you kind of you ken and that, the boys
 used to so forth salute you ken. Yes, they always done that. But - we - they really - I just - even - say the likes of - I ken, some of the - the teachers and that, and some of them - I was at school with and that, 'course they wouldnae - they - you ken 
w
hat I mean, they were inclined to you like with teachers you ken and that and just as much as you ken but anyway - I never - it never appealed to me that way and that. I liked - every teacher I had. And - bar that, with the headmaster giving me that strap
,
 and I never - by God Jen, watched and that. I never got a strap again from the man. Anyway I didna ken he was deaf. But - there's some of them and that, you know, one or two ken were inclined to be you ken with teachers and it wasna - you ken what I mean
.
 They liked to chat back to them. I mind there were a boy and he - my - like he went through in school with me, and he was - but I don't know really what you ken and that, and this teacher and that - in fact it was Miss Caldow that - asked me - if I'd go 
o
ver and wash her mother's steps over in - Rotchell Park, and she was awfully nice you ken like. And here this boy - and I think ken what she said, ken, like - it was something - he says, do it yourself, just like that. And you ken, I - I felt no well afte
r
 it, I - I - you ken, I thought it was terrible. He was - he was in the front seat and I was about ken the middle, I wasnae at the top of the class, I was about the middle. And I just thought like and that - and it was funny, Miss Faldow and that said to 
m
e - ken, when I was over - and - I washed the steps - on the Wednesday night, the front ones. Well on Saturday - I washed ken them at the back. And I got - you ken, threepence for the front ones and threepence for the back, that was sixpence. But - awfull
y good like, ken with clothes or anything like that, no that they were any used to me, but clothes and -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You got them handed on did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh my, you've no idea, the best friends and - really and honestly, it - the - you ken they had the money and
 that and so forth, but oh mercy, they were - they were nae difference from me - as what - ken, with her own daughter. And Mrs Caldow and that, she was awfully - ken, she was really - never grudged doing anything - for that woman. And believe me - I wasna
 that long left the school - and if I'd have got my way like and that, I would have went down to London.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 So it wasn't just a case of a dividing line between the ones that had mon}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14711763\charrsid9768143 e}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 y }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14711763\charrsid9768143 and}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
 the ones that hadn't? A some of the folks that had money were quite nice were they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 That - yes, I say - you ken, money didnae -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 They hadn't let the money affect them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Aye, just pure - gentlewoman or gentlemen and that, I wouldna - I mean - ken, to the heart like I mean. And I've worked with a lot and - an
d - and went through you ken like and that too that - and that that - I mean - their - made nae difference for all ken I was - the poor one, I don't know, but that - woman too, and they were going away their - you ken, with the school holidays. Of course 
t
he house was shut up. And it wouldna matter all the stuff ken now was put in a hamper. Ken meat - meat and everything like that, and - and I got that. And my ma used to say many a time too, eh - she says, you're the luckiest one you ken ever met in with k
en. But then I liked to do for the folk and that, many a one wouldn't have did but I liked to do for them. Because they were - good like that well - I often think that it was as little as we could do.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Is she the sort of person that you would call a real lady do you think?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh she was, aye. Oh aye, and - and I mean - she was - Miss Caldow herself, the teacher - my God, she was, ken, getting on when she teached me, and mind her mother - a lot older as that, but she was - tall, you ken and - and she 
could carry herself, but - ken, awfully nice - an awfully nice expression and a nice way with her and that. And then there were another daughter, but she was married, and away down London. And then the son as I telled you and that, he was married, he was 
s
upposed - so the old fellow when he got to the bottom of everything he said he - he was a great - car racer, that Caldow. So he - aye, he turned round and telled me that once. And it was - their - wean I - I was - ken, to - look after like, it was just th
e - aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Do you remember anyone ever being described as a real gentleman?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
No, to tell you the God's truth and that, I - I - I canna even - think you ken on that - with just the - the - the - really the way we go on - I - I - fighting or anything 
like that I mean there were never - we never had this, ken like - no like what - nowadays - never seemed to you ken like - had any cause to fight, you ken like say we were all together and that in that, never any cause.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You got on quite well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 We just all go on, I cannae ever mind of fighting with any of my - mates.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Some of the people who lived beside you weren't quite as well off as you were? Maybe your mother didn't get the money in her hand but your father must have been quite well paid? In comparison with some of the folk round about.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Well - there were one - consolation and that. If he'd have done - you ken what was right and that, he was in constant work, you ken, no a day idle. As I telled you that - that - pal of mine that was in 
- America, married a Swiss, now her poor old mother - in the gardens, and mind that was you ken you would have said, oh that's - you ken, some of the folk would say, oh, ken, oh you ken, what a - what to come down to you ken and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Do you think some of
 the folk that were beside you that wee in constant work like that would look down on the ones like Mr McKinnel that had to go out and work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh I dinna ken, I think my ma and them all, Mrs McKinnel and them all you ken just ken, they all got on well 
enough and that and so forth. But I dinna think they made any - distinction between the one and other like and that. I think and ken - oh I'm better as you kind of style or anything like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You think your mother didn't feel that she was better than some of the other women round about?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 How about your father, how do you think he felt about it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Well - to tell you the truth and that - his history, cannae - I couldna say even ken that much about him. Because, I mean, it was just 
- had his own way of living. But he was a man - he'd no time for neighbours. He'd hardly pass the time of day. Because I can mind a - a Mrs - Murphy saying to my ma once and that she says, oh, she says, I dinna ken she says, your man, she says - ken he'll
 
no pass the time of day. And my ma was awfully - but, no - he never - seemed with neighbours, ken like, say - your man would go out and have a - if your neighbour or anybody standing, well, would say, oh good morning or something you ken what I mean. Aye 
well, no, he never - bothered much - that was one thing - he never bothered with neighbours.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 How about the folk where he worked, you said he went out with some of the other loom tuners?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 The men. Yes. Just - just a certain clique now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Were they in a clique because they all did the same kind of work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh I think that's really what it was. Just like me maybe picking up with a lassie working ken in the factory or mill and that and then going mates with her or anything like that. I think my f
ather - and there were - this Geordie Borthwick he come from Wallace Street, well my father and him, you ken, I think they must have got on well like but they were always together, but there were another tuner, this Bell, and he seemed to be - he was a ki
n
d of - I dinna ken whether he didna bother but kind of standish off. I can always mind that, ken in the shed - they'd all - the six - the three of them. But that Bell, but then he was more inclined to - to - well I wouldna say fancy woman or that, you ken
, he was inclined - he had a - ken, maybe a weaver that he -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Would your father have time for the bosses in the mill?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh no. No. Oh no. I heard him many a time and that there, ken, giving them their character. And it was ken, it was in the mill, t
he men talking like and that and I heard him once say, oh, he couldna do with the Scots at all. They were really, you ken, and seemingly and that, I don't - I can mind - Big Doug and that but, ken they never come down to the weaving shed or - or interfere
d
 with us and that, I never seen them anyway. And there were Mr Leonard. But I cannae say I - I ken anything, I kenned the McGeorges far better, and I wasna that long in there, but I kenned them. Could rig them all, but no them ones. But that Spence and Ca
teris next door, they were different seeming bosses altogether. They were different altogether them.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
When you were speaking to folk like that, did you call them sir or anything like that? Did you have to show respect to them, or did you just talk to them like you would tal, to anybody else?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Well, I never - I never ever really come into contact you ken with them, and that - and that but - the likes of McGeorges, you ken, I mean there were Mr David, Mr Ally, we called them misters, just the same as
 I - we - Dr Neilson, and I dinna ken how it is but there were a nurse passed a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4858831\charrsid9768143 remark}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
, I call him Mr Neilson. And I don't know - I - I dinna - I canna ken - and I cannae get to come - it's Doctor - I call him Mister, and the same with him from Edinburgh. 
And - this wee nurse you ken was getting my clothes on this day, she says - she says, you ken, I always say, is it my hero, you ken, like, is it him like and that, and she'll say, oh - you'll see him there, he's there you ken waiting on you. And - then ma
y
be she'll say - oh Mr Neilson's there all right, just having a laugh out of me like and that. She says - she says, it amazes me you - ken - saying Mr Neilson. I says - well, I says, certainly - Doctor Neilson up on his, ken, door, when you go in to him, b
u
t I says - there was Beveridge and he was a doctor of nine years ago, and - a lot dinna - and I liked him and he was dour looking but I liked him you see and - when he become a surgeon, and he telled some of the patients and that it was Mr Bev - and in fa
c
t if I can mind right I think it was in the paper, ken, when he come - become surgeon, Mr Bev - with his initials. Yes, when - well I think, I - I don't know but I think it must be that but - I cannae get into ken saying it - it's just Mr Neilson and Mr O
mer, and I say that and when they come in and maybe good morning ken, you're sitting waiting on them and - well I always refer to them as Mr.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Can you tell me was there anybody else in the town that was highly respected that everybody looked up to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Well you ken like I mean - two or three - you ken, folk that - I mean, you ken, would do you ken a good turn or anything like that you ken, going away back, say the likes of - well of course I dinna ken much about this Provost, and - but Provost McCallie
. And - he was a man you could haved talked to him. But then - I was - he had two boys and George was at the - the oldest one, the other one was at the - St Michaels Street school too but George was in my class, he'll be a fellow my own age if he's - stil
l in the land of the living, I don't know, and George McCallie, in fact that was a fellow too I - I kind of fell for ken at the school, you ken I thought he was a wee }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4858831\charrsid9768143 masher}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143  you ken and that, and here - they lived - just at McGeorge's factory, and it was ju
st like a wee opening, I can always mind, ken they lived down there, in a house, you ken no - no a big fancy house like and that, Provost McCallie, that's where he lived. And the boys going to - and ken, you ken whenever you seen him on the - you ken, alo
ng the street or anything, ken he always spoke or maybe talked to you, tapped you on the head you ken and things like that, that - well them was folk well you just thought oh well, you ken, that's a nice body you ken.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Folk that you would look up to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 You would look up to.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 It wasn't a case that you looked up to the ones that had money or the ones that had the most education, like doctors and ministers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 No, no, that - aye, that's - see that's what I - often say and that that - say the lik
e now, now there's that wee - oh, I'm going way down - back to my own doctor ken, Doctor Dunne and them, they're all ken related though - oh that one - Mur - no, Borthwick. Doctor Borthwock. Well mind I was saying about - jobs and I said to Linda and that
 
too I said, you want to go like the rest of them, get a wee job and it would always be pocket money for you, I says, heavenz, I says, your father's working and it's taking that much to keep you, get a wee job like the rest of them, they're all working, I 
s
ayd, they come from colleges and one thing and another, even at the school, and has wee jobs and that, and it's no - but what she's tried and she cannae - in fact in Boots they wouldna even - when she was at the Academy, entertain her, because they kenned
 
well enough and that that she was you ken, and they wanted - they want lassies - that - they're at the school but they've got to - aye, aye, she would explain it better herself. But anyway, here - that wee - Borthwick - his boy - at college or university 
he's at, his boy - and two or three more, you ken where they are? During the holidays they're working, the ICI. Thirty pound a week. Now thirty pound.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 What about the policemen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Oh aye. Looking up to them too.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Did they ever come around Burns Street and round about there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh aye, they had their - usual routine, just you ken - I dinna ken now what they do and that but they had their ken just a walk round about and that, like on duty every night. And through the day they'd be on the High St
reet or marching about there or one thing or another, but I mean there were only a handful you may say in my days. That I kenned them all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Say you were out playing in the street with your pals when the policeman came round, what did you do, did you sp
eak to him or did you run away?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Oh we wouldna have run away and that, but - ken I've seen - seen that - Sergeant Campbell and - and - what do you call the other one? Killop. They were - ken they were awfully nice and that, and you ken of course - the
ir - family too was at the school with us all but - ken maybe coming along and through Burns's street and they would get through the Mill Hole, like past Burns's - through the Mill Hole from Shakespeare Street and - you ken it was always - enjoy yourselve
s
 you ken or anything like that. No I couldna say - Inspector - Service - he was a kind of firm man. Ken I'm no talking about ken with me or like but say ken with men like or anything like that, he was - and if he got a catch - you were finished like with 
him.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8206157 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 Once he caught you doing something wrong?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1604703 JR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
Once, they say and that, once and that. Say a week - say a boy like maybe and that - he would - never have his - eyes off that boy, he'd watch him - like a hawk. And then there were a Thomson, Serge
ant Thomson down in the Annan Road, but he was - but that's only ones I I and you ken, the other ones was in the office like and that. But that's the only four I can mind in the town. Ken there werenae - nae - much stirs or anything like that, maybe a dru
nk }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4858831\charrsid9768143 o}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
ne - now and again but - and - and they were - they were took up to Buccleuch Street, now they say - the police buildings - it's Loreburn Street is it they're doing now, well this was in Buccleuch Street and I can mind and that ken when - I only once se
en a man and it was when we come out of the school like, the High School when we went there, come out of - George Street as we called it and here - we wondered what was - and it was - market day, it was a Wednesday you ken and the farm - farmers and whate
v
er coming in, but anyway whatever it is, but this man was struggling and I think that he - he must have been drunk. But anyway, Service was there that day. And he was telling the other one who had, and here it was just One story we weren't able to do was 
t
he tale of when her mother got a pram for the very first time. It was a very old one which she reckoned cost her mother something like a shilling. And her elder sister Jessie was very very anxious to take out her smaller brothers and sisters in this new p
r
am. But Mrs Robson herself was so disgusted at the state of it that she wouldn't under any circumstances have taken out any baby in it. She didn't appear to have been very much concerned with her younger brothers or sisters at all. But she says that Jessi
e
, when she was young, was very keen on them and she used to wear one of the old grey shawls which the women did wear in those days, and before the pram arrived she would take out the babies wrapped in the shawl with the shawl round her shoulders and the b
aby tucked insi}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4858831\charrsid9768143 d}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid921314\charrsid9768143 
e. Another story which she told me which didn't come out on the tape, was about her father's bicycle. Apparently he bought himself a bicycle for going out to his work and so on, but he was so worried in case any of the boys or anyone else us
ed it when he wasn't there, that it was strung up on a pulley, in the lobby of the house, that's the front passage, it was strung up on ropes there, and he only brought it down when he wanted to use it himself. Mrs Robson tended to repeat herself quite a 
bit and a lot of the material which is in this interview isn't quite relevant to the period but I felt it gave a picture of how she felt herself and what sort of background she came from.
\par }}