{\rtf1\adeflang1025\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\adeff0\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang2057\deflangfe2057{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}{\f38\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f39\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f41\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f42\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f43\fbidi \froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}
{\f44\fbidi \froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f45\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f46\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f48\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}
{\f49\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f51\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f52\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f53\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f54\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}
{\f55\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f56\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden 
Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs20 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}}
{\*\latentstyles\lsdstimax156\lsdlockeddef0}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid402781\rsid598689\rsid2691702\rsid3609828\rsid4016750\rsid8418499\rsid14303707\rsid16215132\rsid16480941}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 11.0.0000;}{\info{\title Int 159}{\author PRASAD3}
{\operator lhorto}{\creatim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min8}{\revtim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min8}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords13705}{\nofchars78122}{\nofcharsws91644}{\vern24613}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 http://schemas.microsoft
.com/office/word/2003/wordml}}\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1800\margr1800\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0\ltrsect 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\donotembedsysfont0\donotembedlingdata0\grfdocevents0\validatexml1\showplaceholdtext0\ignoremixedcontent0\saveinvalidxml0\showxmlerrors1\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace180
\dgvspace180\dghorigin1800\dgvorigin1440\dghshow1\dgvshow1\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\splytwnine\ftnlytwnine\htmautsp\nolnhtadjtbl\useltbaln\alntblind\lytcalctblwd\lyttblrtgr\lnbrkrule\nojkernpunct\rsidroot16480941 \fet0
{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}\ilfomacatclnup0\ltrpar \sectd \ltrsect\linex0\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ltrpar
\ql \fi-461\li461\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid3609828 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\ul\insrsid3609828\charrsid16072257 Information about interviewee}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid3609828 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid3609828\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\ql \fi-461\li461\ri0\widctlpar\tx2057\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid3609828 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid3609828\charrsid16072257 Date of birth}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid3609828    \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid3609828\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid3609828  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid2691702 1890}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid3609828\charrsid16072257 
\par Gender}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid3609828           \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid3609828\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid3609828  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid2691702 F}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid3609828 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid3609828\charrsid16072257 Marital status}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid3609828 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid3609828\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid3609828  
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid2691702 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid3609828\charrsid16544153 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid3609828\charrsid16072257 Occupation}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid3609828 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid3609828\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid3609828  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid2691702 Teacher}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid3609828\charrsid16072257 
\par Geographic region}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid3609828 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid3609828\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid3609828  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid2691702 Shetlands}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid3609828\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\qj \fi-461\li461\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid3609828 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Could you give me your present address please?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 68 St Oaf's Street.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 And the year of your birth?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 1890.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 And the year of your marriage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 1921.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Are you are a widow?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 A widow, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 And your birthplace?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Firths Ness, Delting.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Can you tell me how many years you lived in the house you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 I was ten mont
hs in the house I was born and then I came to Turtigers. And I've been there ever since - I was married in Turtigers and had may family there, three boys.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 When did you move to this house here?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 I moved to this house in -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 So you came here in 1937?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 And I've been living here since.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Can you tell me why the family moved to }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8418499\charrsid16215132 Turtigers}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 ?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
Because I was born in my grannies house. My father was at sea and when he came back he took a croft and we went there and we were very happy there. He w
as a; sailor all his life, well since he started, he started in fishing and didn't like it so he went deep sea and they had no family but myself. No brothers or sisters. And - though I was living as an only child I was never unhappy or without companions 
b
ecause we were all very friendly in the neighbourhood and most of the bairns came along with me from school and we were all treated wherever house we came to. We - we weren't rich but we all had plenty. We had plenty of food, hand baked bread, potatoes, v
e
getables, and apples in those days were only a penny apiece and when a little turned - spotty like, when apples began to go spotty we got them for a ha'penny each. And we could buy a biscuit for a ha'penny, it could be our dinner. We had no school meals. 
W
e went to school, some of us had to travel three miles, I was a lucky person because I could go to school in ten minutes, I could see the school from the house door but some of them travelled, well my husband's family did, over three miles to school and y
o
u had something to eat before you left, usually - maybe a bit of meat and a bannock and you took your piece and your bag or your book and your peat under your arm to make a fire. But there was over sixty of us and sixty peats made quite a good fire. Only 
in very wild wintry days sometimes the peat blew away, sometimes it broke and sometimes it caused a fight until there was very little of - of it left. But we were a very happy company.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 There were sixty children were there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 There were over sixty i
n the little school and that's the same school that's in existence yes, only it has been renovated and I think it was spoilt because the big room where we all - where we all sat in, there were just on a teacher, it's been cut off into cloakrooms and - of 
c
ourse they don't need it that size now. But it's a good building yet. And - they've gone all over the world, we've had a science teacher, several M.A's yes. And when I grew up I was assistant in that school for some time and went on to different schools a
fter that, when I was a teacher.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 When you used to bring the peats along did you put them all in one fireplace?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh yes, there was a big - bunker fireplace as we called. It was a round iron contraption and we lifted the top off and filled it up. }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8418499\charrsid16215132 There was a women who put on fires, it's the only thing that was done for us and sometimes the teacher had to do themselves. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
But it was wonderful how much we did learn from that one man. And - he could even give you languages and - and was most thorough.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 What languages did he know?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
Well - we - we didn't learn them very long you see, just - a smattering of French and Latin and - and they didn't go to play very much those days. You got half an hour in winter for your piece and you couldn't stop in the 
school and eat it for leaving crumbs }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8418499\charrsid16215132 round}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
 the floor. So you sat under the lee of they dyke and then raced as hard as you can - could to get warm. And we got - most people had a cow then, it was small croft and some of them were just cotters. They had no -
 no milk to take so they just ate the dry bread with a little butter on it. Now the - the most of the people went to the fishing. They went to Fara and Iceland for big fish and they went to just the deep sea round the Shetlands for cod and ling and - near
 
the shore they got piltocks and mackerel which they'd net for herring and then in the summer time of course there was a quantity of beats went to the herring fishing. And after the steam tractor came, that would have been about 1900, there were four hundr
e
d drifters in Lerwick harbour and as many sail boats but the - the most of the sail boats was a great disappointment to the - the people especially to myself for I liked to see the sailboats going and coming back. And - and they had a horn, a big cow's ho
r
n that they blew and each one had a different note so you could tell what boat was coming. By the sound of the horn. On a misty day like this they would be starting to blow the horn when they were a good bit off the land. And the womenfolks would go to th
e
 banks. It was a very kindly homely place, Shetland, And whoever was in trouble everybody mourned for them and if somebody needed help well they all went to give them help. The crofts were dug by shovel and spades, which you don't see nowadays. Three or f
our people together. Especially the young folk before they went away to the sea. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8418499\charrsid16215132 
If an old body had a piece of land and they wanted to plant taties well, the youngfolk went and dug it up for them. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Or if they needed peats around the house half a dozen went a
nd fetched fisher peats each of them. And if they had no peats of their own they got for their neighbour. It was well - and they had no - no incomes. There were no pensions. And it was a great disgrace to be a pauper.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Were there some paupers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Th
ere was, yes, some paupers. Well the pauper got one and six a week and - the sixpence rent, so they just had one shilling to spend during the week. Well they would go out among the folk and get milk. I - I've seen about half }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8418499\charrsid16215132 a dozen}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  bottles going out in one day. Just old bodies coming along with their bottle for milk, but there was nothing asked for it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did people give them any -other things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 They give them if they thought they were in need - clothing and - there was no cast off clothing lost. And
 the bairns when they were going to school, some of them had eight or nine of a family. Well somebody had boy or girl going to school and a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8418499\charrsid16215132 neighbour woman}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  had shoes that had grown too small, anybody needed. But was just that kind of community. So - really
 want was very uncommon in our district anyway. And if there were old men that weren't fishing in the summertime, just fly catching, and if they got maybe thirty-four piltocks well they were just divided for your supper to the people round about. People t
hat had no land to go and fetch. And - a line - you could say the line in the dry sand where I lived, it's not long since I did that and get very nice flounders.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 You've fished yourself have you?;
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh yes. Up 'til the last few years. I haven't had a
 line down this year at all because I have such sore feet, so I hope that they'll get that feet a lot better I've been washing them in the sea to get them better in summer. But I've been busy, I've had to get some repairs to my house. I've been so busy th
at I didn't get back. But - oh I'll get back, I love living off of my boat - live when I'll not need it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 You said that your father started off fishing and then he did deep sea fishing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Deep - not - deep sea sailing. Yes, that is running to the continent and - Mediterranean.;
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Was he away for long periods then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
He would ago when seeds were sown, about the month of - end of April or to May and he would come back just when the harvest was in because we could always get young people that were
 at the fishing, boys and lasses, to help us to take in the harvest. And we did everything that was needed. I've mown corn and hay. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 You and your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Me and my mother, yes. She always did the - the building. I did the mowing and that sort of thing. Just after }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8418499\charrsid16215132 school time}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 .
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 What sort of building did she do then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
Oh you built them in stacks you see. And there was an always an old man about that would come and help. People that was - well there was a - say from over seventy you see 
that couldn't be working anymore except in the crofts and by cutting peats ad that, they used to do that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 When your father came home after the harvest when did he go off again, not 'til the next April?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 He'd be - yes, he'll be - he would be home maybe - nearly two months.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 And then he'd go again would he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 He was - yes, every year he went. He - he sailed a lot up the Baltic and
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 But when he came back after the harvest would he go off again in about October?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 No, no, he didn't got back 'til the spring. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 So he was at home quite a lot of the time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
He wasn't at home very long - just - he would do the hard work like seeing that the ground was dug and cut the peats maybe before he went. But you see, when he was sailing we 
had more money then, people that didn't go far away. A-d then I was just one and if you had eight mouths to feed it was a different thing. No, we always had plenty. Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Had he ever done any other work at all, or was that all his work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 He did everything that was to bed one. He build dykes and repaired the roof and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 He did everything on the croft?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Yes, on the croft. He was a great worker.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did he ever have a sort of job working for anybody else of any kind?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Not ashore. No. Just on his sailing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did your mother ever have a paid job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Never. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Had she grown up on a croft too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 She grew up on the croft at Potsness until she married and then she - he took a croft you see. She looked after the cows and sheep - you 
got more work to do than you could manage. We would get girls to carry peats - they would carry home from the hill in kishies. You maybe never see that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 How big were the peats?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 That lovely stuff the peats, they're not dirty like coal. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8418499\charrsid16215132 I - I can s
how you a kishie if you are for it.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 It's a sort of basket?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 It's a basket. With a band across your shoulders you see. And - I'm not able to carry one now but I've carried many a one.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Is it true that women used to knit as they carried them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Yes. Yes. You would never go away to the stud without your knitting.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 You did that too did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Yes. Well I can show you my knitting.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 How }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8418499\charrsid16215132 old}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
 did girls start to knit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh we used to start to knit before you can walk sometimes. It keep
s you in peace. We - somebody said to me, what games did you play? We never played any games except - just did - and - and chasing each other about the playground. But - as for the time and hit the ball like playing hockey, oh that would just scorn of the
 Shetlanders. I doubt -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 They thought that was silly did they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
They'd think it was silly. Spend and use all your energy doing nothing but - hitting a ball with a stick, goodness me, if you were seen doing that when I was young you'd be told that you - fit for Montrose.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Was there a mental home at Montrose?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 A mental home, yes. No, no, you had to work or you were thought nothing of.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 No games at all, no hopscotch or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh well, we chased each other about. Maybe we ha
d a hoop or something when we'd nothing else to do. Well, if you walked three miles maybe to - to the school you're gay tired where you sat in the school and you did your lessons and when you got out - it was half an hour in - in winter and - nearly an ho
u
r in summer. But he tried to get you in as soon as possible, just swallow us dinners and come back again because there was so much to do. I don't know how they can spend so much time nowadays, of course they have plenty of time at night but - we worked in
 the school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 What sort of work did you do when you got home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
Well we had - we had home lessons. Oh yes. And we had to do big exercises in grammar in my time. And - spelling they were very particular about spelling, they failed you in your class fo
r not being able to spell. I was - quick at reading but I sometimes left out an e or put in an e where it shouldn't be and had to stand in the corner for that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 When you were reading aloud you mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 As a punish - as a punishment. When I was writin
g out exercises. Yes. Now they just never mind spelling. I think - I think they're far too - lax.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did any children misbehave themselves at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh no. Quiet as mice.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 The teacher never had to discipline the children for bad behaviour?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh no. If they did well - the punishment you got if you didn't do your spelling was to stand in the corner until you could spell. }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8418499\charrsid16215132 But - if they did - well like - having to play rowdy and maybe kick each other, you got the strap. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 And if you forgot to lear
n your spellings maybe three days on end you got the strap.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did you ever get the strap as a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 No. It's a wonder. But - oh I got thundered at, he would - he would be very angry sometimes, if we talked.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 You weren't allowed to talk?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 I
 and my chum used to whisper over some - you would - never know 'til you were lifted by the shoulder, set - set on the floor and you stood there. And you forgot you - what you were telling her. And you mustn't compare notes and help each other. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did the parents ever visit the school, have an open day or anything }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8418499\charrsid16215132 
like that}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 ?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
No. No, the minister came. And members of the school board. They were very great officials you see, they had powers. And if you didn't come to school there was a - an attenda
nt officer came to see why you weren't there. And if you were ill you had to get a certificate from your doctor. You had attend, it was four }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid598689\charrsid16215132 hundred}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  openings in the year.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Four hundred?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Openings. Two - two - there were two markings for each day.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did some parents keep the children away to help with the hay or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
Oh I - yes, they did. And I was kept mainly a time if it was - building hay or carrying peats or something that was urgent special, or chasing sheep, they - we had no dogs t
o - to guard the sheep. The school was let out to drive them into the croft - the farm. And - they did that in all Shetland. They let the school out.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 How often would that happen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh maybe two or three times in a summer. When they were raising the
 sheep you see. But - they were only out half a day maybe. Well the hills like Dales Lees or the hills of Noth Maving, you needed quite a crowd to drive in the sheep.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 When your mother kept you away, did she write and tell the teacher or anything like that?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
Well just the - the attandance officer came along. But there was something - there was something lax because then she had nobody but me to help her. And if I did my lessons and wrote that my - everything finished, then }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid8418499\charrsid16215132 they}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  let you off.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 To go and help your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Yes. They would - they were very good to me like that. And two or three other bairns, well, that's when you grow big could work that had }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8418499\charrsid16215132 nobody}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  home - they let them work.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Would they do that to very young children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 No, well you - before you come to work.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 About what age would they let you go and help like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh I couldn't say, just according to your size.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 About nine years old or younger?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 No, nine or ten.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Do you know how old your mother was when you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 My mother was twenty-nine I think.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 And your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
He was a year older. Yes. He'd have been thirty. People didn't marry very early in those days. They couldn't because they had nothing to live on and I know my father went
 a-ay for four years and never was home before he married, to gather a bit money. Money was scarce and they didn't have big wages. And as an Able Seaman that got thirty shillings was very - considered very well-to-do.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Thirty shillings a month was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 No, no, thirty shillings a week. No, no, they started about -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Thirty shillings a week was quite good money for those days was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Yes, yes. But they started - with less money, I just don't know how much. But eighteen and sixpence a week was - what they called the }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8418499\charrsid16215132 humper's}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
 wages, that's those who carried coal here at companies. I knew men with families that went from Delti to work at that job and it was a heavy job, you see, carrying bags of coal and that's all the money they got and they ha
d to pay lunches. Well lodgings in those days was seven and sixpence.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 So they didn't have much left then did they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 No. But they bought their dinners - usually at a restaurant or something like that, I don't know how they managed anyway. But girl
s who went to work in shops just got three and six a week. And - they used to go from here - from the country to - Lerwick in the summertime and paid for their - the extra they needed but have to kept girls at six shillings a week. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8418499\charrsid16215132 You mean they stayed in the shop did they with the shopkeeper's family?}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
No, no, no, no, they certainly did not. They had to get lodgings in the town. In the lanes you know there was - there was old people that like what I am now, they had a room and a bedroom and 
they would have a big bed for two girls and two girls would sleep together you see and have the use of the bed. And that helped - that bade them through but they needed more as they could get from their employer and - boys serving apprenticeships got thre
e
 and six a week to start. That was my husband's time. And he was - you went to serve your time as an apprentice at sixteen. Well you had to be at your job at six o'clock in the morning and you worked 'til six o'clock at night with one hour off in the midd
le of the day. And - if you were five minutes late in morning you worked it up at night. And - you paid seven and six a week, I know that's what he paid when he went living in the country and got lodgings in town.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 That was when he was getting more money though was it, if you were only getting three and six how you pay seven and six for lodgings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 His people had to pay. They helped. They had to pay the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid598689\charrsid16215132 extra,}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  oh yes, they couldn't have lived on - on what they were getting. Oh no, no. They couldn't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 I suppose not everybody could afford the extra?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 No. That was the difficulty, some of them couldn't get - extra money.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Your husband was apprenticed in the fishing was he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh no, you went right at sea with your.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 But he was an apprentice though at some time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
No, no, he never was an apprentice. He - you served your time, you went abroad the boat you see and you brought your food with the men. That was how they lived in the fishing. The men give you - well you brought something from 
home. They all brought something. A bag of meal usually, grown on the croft. And then they had - one of the boys was a cook, baked these bannocks. And they would maybe have piece of boiled pork or mutton or something.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Can you describe to me what the croft was like, the actual house, was it what they; call a but and a ben?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 A but and a ben.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 What was that like?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Well it's just two rooms. A-d then they had outhouses. Sometimes they'd big families and they had lofts in this house and they - y
ou wonder where }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8418499\charrsid16215132 you put}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
 the bairns, but the way they did was they had their but end and the ben end and the ben end was occupied for - father and mother slept there and any }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8418499\charrsid16215132 babies}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  that they had. And - the bigger ones was put on the loft and they made straw
 beds and put them up there and they slept there cosy and comfortable under the thatched roof and you never had anything in a house where there were a thatched - thatched roof. The - the thatch you see stopped you hear the rain drops. And it stopped you t
o hear the wind. So they thatched the roofs well and it was the cosiest }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8418499\charrsid16215132 corner}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  you could ever think of sleeping.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did they have beds in the but end?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Sometimes, yes, they'd have - for the - young people that had grown up. They would have a bed in th
e partition and one above it. Say two girls, if they had four girls, there were two in the upper bed and two in the lower bed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Which part did they do the cooking in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh, in the kitchen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Was that a separate part?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 No, no. The living room. Just what I've got here.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 What sort of fires did they have for cooking then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh beautiful peat fires. Open chimneys. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8418499\charrsid16215132 
And they baked lovely bread, ditch ovens You could bake the finest cake you ever tasted in a dutch oven. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 In fact, they were bette
r than any bread I ever tasted whether it was because I liked it when I was young. And you baked especially big one for Christmas, sometimes two if your family was big and there were quite a lot of people coming along and everybody got apiece. And - that 
and a cup of tea.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did your mother bake her own bread every day?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh yes, she certainly baked.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 What other things did she bake?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh well, we baked bannocks and - pancakes, pancakes was the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8418499\charrsid16215132 quickest}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  to get. We'd eggs, you see, we'd hens. You could beat up some eggs with milk, we had milk, and if we didn't have milk we had butter milk and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid8418499\charrsid16215132 bland}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 . That's the thing - that's what we drank. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8418499\charrsid16215132 Bland}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 . That's what they call whey in Scotland. Whey. It's made from buttermilk. You pour hot water on butterm
ilk and that gives the most refreshing and quench thirsting thing you ever drank and we had a big bowl they took to the sea with them. That was bland. They didn't drink any beer in those days. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did they make anything alcoholic at all, did your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 No. Never.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Nobody had anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 No, no. They had - what they would call the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8418499\charrsid16215132 Yule bottle}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 . They would have something well I never tasted it because - we didn't use it, but - some of them had a bottle of - well it would be gin or 
sometimes gin was thought to be a medicine and they would keep some drops in the house. I mind them giving it to calves that got - gripping pains in the stomach, I don't know what as I mind having to go for some, to a neighbour that had some in the house.
 They kept that for a medicine. But - strong drink was just never known.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 They had port wine sometimes if they were ill?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Well father - or for a wedding.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Where did they get the port wine -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8418499\charrsid16215132 rum}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 , did they buy it in Lerwick?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh they no, they bought it in the shops in the country, it was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8418499\charrsid16215132 licensed}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
 in the shops. Before the war life was much nicer. The first world war 1914 to '18 war seemed to crush the life out of Shetland. See, a great many young people had gone abroad - some to New Zealand, some
 to Australia, America, the States and British Columbia, Canada, and - when the war broke out these boys all volunteered to a man. And he come back to France and some to the Dardanelles, when they tried then to cross - Europe, which was a very foolish thi
n
g to do and a wicked thing. A great many were lost going ashore and - what come back was never strong. They dispersed and people had lost their - enthusiasm for life. Nobody could understand, not even this last war, what that meant to the people who were 
living before.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
When you were living in the North mainland was there anybody else living in your house or was it just your mother and you and your father when he was home?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did you have a granny or anyone with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 I had a granny, she lived wi
th us until she died, she - she died when she was into her sixties, my grandfather had died before that. So granny lived with us and an aunt, a sister to my mother. And she was a great baker and a splendid housewife. But she wasn't very strong, she took t
h
e rheumatic fever when she was a little girl. but she was really - you would say the very core of the house. She baked the best cakes. Knitted all the hearthrugs and kept the house clean and always had a fire on, everything was happy when Auntie Meg was t
h
ere. But - she went and then my father and mother were left when I married, you see, in - in the old house. And until they were able to look after themselves and then they came here and were beside me. He was - she was two years, two and a half years and 
he was one year. And they died within twelve hours of each other. They just lived for each other. And when they were both together everything was pleasing. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8418499\charrsid16215132 They}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 - they went step by steps as you can go down the street. Everybody thought it wonderful though, they were buried together in the same place.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 The grandmother and the aunt, they helped with everything in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh yes, everybody }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8418499\charrsid16215132 did their}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  part. You see, we were just one family. and if there'd been half a dozen of them it been all the same.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did your mother and your aunt and your grandmother all bake, or did one person do all the baking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
Oh no. Everybody - everybody washed, if there were a washing they did, everybody washed or - you did your part and I did mine. You washed for me or I for you, there were no idea of fighting.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did they have certain set duties that they did on certain days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did they always wash on one day of the week?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 No, no, it was just as you needed it. And as the weather was. I do the same 
yet. I've never had anybody in to wash a sheet. I just do it myself. I never keep anything long dirty. We did the same. We just put it in a tub and there was a shed outside where you could wash and hang it up if it was a wet day, if you were needing thing
s
. And - now of course it's all going down. But still I can go up there and do washing there as I can in the town. I have big boiler on the top of the stove and - and you can boil your clothes in this, oh dear me, it's been lovely. You could hang it out an
d keep it there all night. And - clothes bleached beautiful. And - in the night air, just about the middle of June. And get them like -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Because it's light so late then isn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 It seems to whiten the clothes much better and if it was stained wit
h tea or anything you just lay it on the green and the green seems to help that, clean it. Oh it's a clean country. That's what the worst that I felt coming to Lerwick. I didn't like the cold and kind of smell of this factory they have in Dressay well you
 know it, did you ever smell that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Can you tell me about the clothing then and how it was got, was it made or bought?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Most of the clothing was made when I was young.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did your mother make your clothes or your aunt?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 No, my aunt made. My mo
ther was like me, very - doing some - well she did ordinary darning and things like that but I'd rather make an all over }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8418499\charrsid16215132 Fair Isle}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  jumper myself with a hem on, skirt. I learn by rote and of course if you had to do it well you just had to do it but - it was
 all made to measure in those days. In the homes. And you would get a pattern book and some of the girls were very clever. I had one - a chum that was - she came to be my sister in law and she used to rig me up as she called it. And - then there were anot
her girl and first she married and went away. She made me frocks when I was young. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 What about shoes, where were the shoes got from?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh they were all home made.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Were they clogs too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh no, no. We - my father had clogs - wooden clogs that he made to go }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8418499\charrsid16215132 about}
{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  in the wintertime with but - oh no, we had very good boots. Very finest - kid leathers for Sunday and - and we were dressed when we did go out.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did you wear boots in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh no, in slippers.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Made of leather or something else?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 No, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8418499\charrsid16215132 wear}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
 just slippers like this, with slippers like this.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 When the boots needed repairing where }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8418499\charrsid16215132 did}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  you take them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh just to the next door neighbour, every man could do repairing. You never had to go to a shop to get your 
boots repaired and it never cost you a ha'penny. Just you get the bit of sole leather and a patch put on the boot and - well, they didn't patch much except it was very hard wearing. No, we had plenty of boots. My pair of boots only cost eight and six when
 
I was a girl. And if you got the best - boots made here in Lerwick there were two shops, Whites and Goodlets where you could get very beautifully made boots and you were - and they only cost thirteen and six. Of course that was a lot of money in these day
s, it was like thirteen pound now.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 But the lasted well did they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh yes, they lasted to very - end of the life that you'd get them mended.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 When your father was at home did he mend boots?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 He did that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did he ever knit, did the men knit at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
Oh no. The men didn't -knit. They'd far too much to do. They - my father made kishies and - and prepared straw for the roof, that was pretty heavy job. You had to thrash it and draw it with your finers and make it perfectly straight and cl
ean before you could thatch a roof. Well then you had your house roof and your byre and barn and lamb house and one for the sheep when the winter was very bad weather. And that all needed thatching. And then you had to - make }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8418499\charrsid16215132 simmons}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 , that's the rope that kept it on the roof, and you made that out of floss, that was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid598689\charrsid16215132 dry}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
 in summer, we used to cut it at a certain time of year and put it up in small bundles and dry it and hang it in the roof. And when my father come home he was - wound into - to ropes for that
 purpose. And then he made kishies with it. And - all the men were busy all the time and then they were - they would go even - he that had been away all year he would go for the fishing for some fish for the winter. And - that was salted and - oh the folk
 plenty to do - more than they ever could manage.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 They must have worked terribly hard?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh aye. You worked all the time. You had nay time for playing games. And the girls were always spinning, you - they were.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 You said your mother never paid anybody to help her in the house or anywhere like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh no, not about the house but she paid people to work outside. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 But not about the housework?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 No, no, she - she was just as myself, she worked. And when father retired and wasn't abl
e to go away to work he worked like a Trojan. He was very strong body. And -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 When did he retire from the sea?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 He retired when - when he got an accident. They were coming into the harbour and - he used to take the ship and out, he was oldest man 
you see, and coming into the harbour there was a rowboat broke and he fell down and hurt his arm. He never could lift it. He could carry a pail of water like this but couldna get - couldn't tie his tie. And he - felt that annoyed because he said, you migh
t
 all come and tie my tie but it'll never be right. If he wanted to have it perfectly right, you know, sailors are very like - and he would twig at it with his other had and he couldn't do it with his left hand, but - he worked about the house, did everyth
ing. Washed all our clothes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 He washed clothes did he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 He - all the sailors can wash clothes better than any woman. They learn them that you know. When they }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid8418499\charrsid16215132 go to}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  sea maybe for - in his time they would be nine months at sea.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did he do any baking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
Oh no, I never saw him baking. But some of the fishermen did a lot of baking. They baked their own bread at sea and - and - but - that was the boys that goy that job and they, I suppose, there are boys - boys that does the cooking aboard drifter ship.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did your father ever tell you stories when you were a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh yes, he would tell us that there was three fellows that was living away in Africa and America and what they wore and things like that.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Stories of places he'd been to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 He'd tell us about that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 What about other stories like fairy stories and that}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid598689\charrsid16215132  sort}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
He didna believe in that. Never be frightened for anything. If you see it, don't know what it is, grab it and look at it. And the result was that I live
d alone for many years in this schoolhouse, well I would come home for weekends, but - stay here and the house I was living in was supposed to be haunted, you heard queer sounds and you didn't know where it came from. And I never was troubled about it. No
. And I've cycled through the moss the mainland of Shetland, at any hour of the night, I've come from Lerwick, home from Lerwick on a bicycle, a broken down bicycle. Just ride it all the way home. Been goodness how long on the road.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 And not worried?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 I never worried, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did he ever do anything when you were a little girl like putting you to bed or washing you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 He never washed me but - oh he'd put me to bed and I thought when he come home I liked the smell of his tobacco. He had scented t
obacco. And I loved to snuggle down beside him and one time he grew a beard and come home. I just nearly mind and he said I tore it out by the roots, I wouldn't have it on his face.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Was he an affectionate father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh yes. Very kindly, of course he was matter of fact and that but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did he ever take you out anywhere without your mother when he was at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh we'd go to the kirk, anywhere that he went was just the kirk. We attended the kirk very regularly, he was an elder of the kirk. And m
y husband was an elder and my son John is an elder. We've always been kirk folk and his people was the same and he - they were church of Scotland and we were United Presbyterian but - the two churches joined up and - my mother's grandfather and my husband
'
s mother's father were two that started to build the church in Mossbank that you see there yet, 1847. You see, people lived a long distance from the kirk and they would be married in the kirk and when the babies came, if they had a baby that died unchrist
e
ned it wasn't laid into consecrated ground. It wasn't put into the cemetery. Well the cemetery was usually round about the kirk and they thought this was great pity because if you had to walk four miles to get a baby christened, might have been days befor
e
 it got there. So they decided to try and build a church, that was before 1846, you see the date up on the church in Mossbank. Well then by and by we wanted a church nearer to the people and that was in 1908 and they started - collection for - to build a 
- what they call a church hall. At }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8418499\charrsid16215132 Firth}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
. And if you go up there you'll see it standing there yet. That's just been closed lately because there's anybody to come. And I felt such - so sorry for it because I always went there. Had the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid8418499\charrsid16215132 sacrament}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  there every once a year at least.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 They used to have it once a year did they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 They had it twice a year but I always went and got }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8418499\charrsid16215132 sacrament}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  once a year. But of course I - I'm a member of St Colomb's here now. My son is - is attached to that. But we had a very h
appy time - having concerts to raise some money, we had to raise some money you see before we could - to get the hall.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did you take part in the concerts?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh yes, I was - choir leader for many years. In the church at Mossbank. Our old minister never allowed an organ in the kirk.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Why was that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 He said the voices were best and there were plenty of voices in those days. So he always put the best singers.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 And you sang unaccompanied?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Unaccompanied.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did you play an instrument too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
No. I never had time to learn it. But my brother-in-law, when we got a - organ the next minister that came, what our old minister died in - when - and the new minister came, he said we must have an organ. Well we got an organ and there were nobody 
to play it. So my youngest brother-in-law, he said, if I would sing he would follow. And he practiced until he could play very well. Then when he went way somebody else tried it and they carried on until this past summer. The last woman that played the or
gan in the kirk retired, she married a man from the South and she retired and went back to - to - some place from Edinburgh I think they lived. That's when was married. And there were nobody to play and they had a - a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid8418499\charrsid16215132 gramophone}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  in the kirk to play the hymn
 on the Sunday. Then they decided to close the - the little kirk, the hall. So my - the little hall is closed and I don't if ever it will be opened. There's - put in the water and you can get electric lights now there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 In the church you went to before 1908 that was the one which was quite a way further away?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh I never was before that one, I never was farther away then. We lived - was a bit further, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid8418499\charrsid16215132 Mossbank}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  was - Mossbank church was two and a half miles from our house and the surrounding district was - about three and three a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 half}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  and two and a half miles from the different dwellings.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did you walk to services?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Of course, what other way else would we go. We had two feet to walk on and we had no cars. There were nay motor cars.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 I wondered if you had any horses or pony and trap?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
Oh the - the high class gentry came on their horses and - ponies and traps and one girl I envied had a pony and - and she went to Scots to church, that was about five miles from where she lived. And she had
 a beautiful hat, one of these big brimmed ones and - a box on her lap into which she carried her ostrich feather. And she had a huge ostrich feather that which as she come into the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 Kirk}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  she put - she went onto the vestry put on this - ostrich feather on h
er hat. But she didn't carry it in the open air because it took the colour out of the feather. And people were dressed in those days. Our minister's gown was about - it had a train of about one foot from her heels when she come into the kirk and you could
 
see the train lifting gently as she tiptoed along, she was very light and a lady looking person. Her own name was Jane Dilworth and she was married to a Mr Robertson but he was - farmer's son and Aberdeen, come of a big family and they were well enough of
f but I think she must have been out of a higher - upper drawer because she was very ladylike and what beautiful }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 bonnets}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
 she had. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 Usually satins what she wore, a coat and hat. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
And - my mother had a very nice satin dress that she was married in and she wore that for many years and she had a - a what they call a cape. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 
They had them in fashion a year or two ago, they walked about here, and it had fancy lace on and I'm very, very sorry that I ruined that because Christmas time we went guizing. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
We went guizing.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 What's that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Well - did you never go guizing. That's what it - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 guizing}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 .
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 You dressed up in fancy dress?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 And - and go round in a group and - visit the houses and wish them happy New Year and they would give you maybe some sweeties or penn
ies or something. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 And you had usually a melodeon or a fiddle, if anybody could play the fiddle and you'd dance to those.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Was it young people who did it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh just bairns. Yes. School - school bairns. Oh well - and I've seen go and bring - we were o
ut of the school but we always tried to put on a false face that nobody could tell who you we were but of course they usually did know. But I went guizing and - somebody - some of the rest of the young boys guizing in this shoulder cape. And - and you kno
w I think it would be valuable now. Because it's eighty - it's eighty-one years past since it was made. It was satin and the lace on it was about the deep.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 When did she wear it, to church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 To her - yes. She wore it for years. She wore it you see, 
it kept in fashion for anybody that had one was very - much thought of. And one lady said that my mother was the best dressed bride that ever came in the kirk door in her time. My father brought this stuff in New York I think.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did they marry in white in those days?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 No, no. Black. Everybody married in black that ever I knew. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 
And then they started getting to marry in blue. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 And some in brown. The bonniest wedding dress I can mind when I was a bairn was a woman that married a - a Ness man and it was 
just like gold, but it was velvet. Gold coloured velvet. And she had brown eyes, the same shade as her frock. I did think her very pretty. They wore bonnets. When they got married. And then sometimes - well they put off the bonnet, wore hats, but to my - 
I don't know what's come of my father and mother's photographs, still here }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 before}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
 we cleaned up this room. I don't know if Angus has taken it - Scarroway, their Golden - their Golden Wedding photograph. And - she got - black satin dress for her golden weddi
ng with a gold coloured waistcoat and she was going to wear a bonnet and then I said, oh mum, that's all over today, go and get a hat. And father said he wouldn't go with her if she put on anything but her bonnet. He said, a good looking wife being spoilt
 with a thing like that. Anyway, poor father had to give in. She had to go in }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 a hat}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
. Yes, yes, this is 1940. March. Married in -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 In 1940 were people still bonnets then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 My mother wore hers 'til short before that, of course, she'd been going to the
 kirk without hats but he thought she should have this for golden wedding, you couldna buy a bonnet for a thousand pound though.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did the men wear hats when you were a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh yes, my father sore a hat and my husband wore a hat.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did they wear hats or caps?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
No, hats. To - to special occasions. Buy they wore other - they wore caps t work in you see. Oh no, my husband wore a - a bowler all the time I was married.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 When you were a child were you expected to go to bed at a certain time on schooldays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh no, just when you were turned sleepy.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 There was no fixed time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 What time do you think you usually went to bed when you were about nine or ten?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Well if they were not - if the were kishie making it would be n
early twelve o'clock; maybe if my father was busy. I'd never go 'til he went you see. It was a great occasion the wore - finishing up a kishie because he - he wound the - the simmons as we called them - the rushes and that took a night or maybe longer and
 
then he would make a piece of it, sometimes - well if he made the kishie off - it would be nearly twelve o'clock. And I never could go to bed when kishie was making until he rocked me in the kishie you see and of course he sang to me - sang to me and rock
ed me, but he put me in, a great big lass I was, sit in the kishie and he sang to me and - now it's time for bed, and off I'd go. But - to see the finish of the kishie was a great thing because - he cut the straw that he hadn't used off and there was }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 tufts}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  inside that he'd made extra eyes - eyes is the - that's the - the finishing, to make it }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 wider}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
 at the top and he sticks a bit of - a tuft and leave that points inside the kishie and when it's finished and he shapes it out he cut off that and put it in the f
ire and burned off the loose fluff that was on it. And all this had to be done before I went in the kishie. Of course I could do every - I could do it yet, just exactly as he did it you know, you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Have you made them yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 I have made little ones, yes. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did the women make them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Some women made them. But}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid598689\charrsid16215132  very}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  few women make them. And then last years they've worked with bags, peats and bags and that. Carried them in bags.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Made of what?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh well just whatever you could get, just }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 Hessian}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  or -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Do they use plastic now?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
Oh they have plastic bags now. Plastic bags is very fine because you can put them up and let them stand at the side of the road until you can get them home. You see some of them as you go along.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 How old were you when you were waiting up, you said quite a big lass?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
OH I never - we never took - we never took tent at time. You used to work away and you went to bed when you were sleepy, sometimes I fell asleep in the chair and they gave me a shake and tells me to go to bed. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 And you get a drink of milk and off you'd go. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
And if you were sleeping in the morning when they wanted you to get up they just, oh, come on, it's time to get up, and you jumped out and went.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did people get up at different times of the year?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
According to their work, yes. But the cows had to be fed in the early morn. But we got up about - in between seven and eight in the morning. And people that had bairns walking further to the school
 would get up earlier - earlier still. But I never was a person that slept too long, because there was always so much to do and if I was finishing a garment or doing some job I just kept on as long as I could keep up me eyes and then I'd go to bed and sle
ep. Sometimes four hours and sometimes six hours. Sometimes maybe an hour or two when the bairns was asleep. You never worried about special times to sleep.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 So you'd sometimes go to bed as late as two o'clock would you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 No, I don't know that late.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 But midnight?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Midnight. No. We were never out of bed 'til midnight. Much.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Only when it was the kishie?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 No, no, he'd never wait up 'til that time of night to finish kishie, oh no. He'd - no, a cow might have been sick, maybe a calf comi
ng or something like that, sit up. Or if somebody was ill.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 How did people wash in those days, they didn't have a bath?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 Wash}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
? Oh yes - everybody was washed on Saturday night. There were - there were a big tub - and there were a kettle of hot water
 on the fire and we had a shed - just a little bit from there house where there was a fire on most of the day. We did a lot of cooking in there. And when my boys were growing up they could look after themselves they were put in there with a tub and pails,
 
the water was just outside the door of the shed, and they made up there own bath and they got their clean clothes hanging on a replica of yonder and that was - from there you'd see the shade yes, it was new roof you see and clean turf and your shirt was t
here in front of the fire, big fire and the chimney, and they washed themselves to their hearts content and the one chased the other round the floor. I don't know how they did but they were always clean.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 When you were a little girl were you the same?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh no, I just wash in the ben end you see, there would be a fire put up there, we had a big tub and washed in it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Also on a Saturday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 On - on Saturday night you were always washed. And your hair plaited for Sunday morning.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did the hair get washed on the Saturday too then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Every Saturday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
Every Saturday. That's why we had such good heads of hair, we kept washing it. Well you see we had to wash it for we working among mould and stuff. There's nothing that hinders the gr
owth of hair like not washing it often enough. I know a cousin of mine has hair got fairly spoilt at the roots by not washing it. Her mother thought it was na good for it to wash it. It would take the oil out of the hair, and that's pure nonsense. Because
 I had a quantity of hair all the time. It was every Saturday and sometimes in the middle of the week too. If you were working in dust and things.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did the grown ups also wash on the Saturday night?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Everybody was washed for Sunday. Yes. The bairns would go to bed and the old folk }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 wash}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
 one and we had a ben end and we had a closet. We had a but end, living room and - my father was always wash - go and wash and go off to bed. Mother was last.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 And you were in the middle?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 And I washed. I had a little bedroom for myself in the middle of the house.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Where did you aunt sleep?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 She slept in the closet with me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 And your grandmother?
\par }\pard \ltrpar\qj \fi-461\li461\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\tx2700\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid3609828 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
Well - I slept }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid598689\charrsid16215132 mostly}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  with my aunt when granny was living. But when granny was away then - I had the closet for - and granny }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 slept}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  in the closet first. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 Aunty}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  Meg in the partition and there - there was a little bedroom between the - between the closet and the ben end and my father and mother slept ben.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\qj \fi-461\li461\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid3609828 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
And you ate in the but end did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Yes, yes. Cooked and ate all there. But when we go to the shed and we had the family I cooked an awful lot in - the shed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 But during your own childhood it was un the but end?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 It was in the but end.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 When you had a meal did you all sit around a table?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 We had a table. Just the same as we have here.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did you all sit in the same places?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
Oh yes, of - well we - no, you usually sat - father sat at the end. Whatever question is this you're asking. I think you know it's awfully foolish.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Your first job was in the school, in the same school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
In the same school I was taught in. There was a quantity. More bairns than the teacher could cope with. So they decided to give the woman that had come lately an assistant. It usually was a man teache
r, all my time it was, and then they became; very scarce. Men went to other jobs. And - this was a good teacher we thought she could do with an assistant and I was the one that was asked. My wages was five shillings - no, my wages was ten shillings a week
 and I was considered very rich because girls in shops usually got about three and six a week. Now -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did you get any food or board?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh no. No board or lodging but I was living at home and that's how it was more convenient for me and better pay tha
n if you brought somebody from a distance. Now I would stay - but I forget just how long. Now what - way we were tested was by the teacher's report and the inspector. And inspector came once or twice a year and he took great notice of this new girl that w
as put on you see, or boy, whatever it was, usually was a girl. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 And if he said I was doing well I kept the job. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
By and by they needed a side school teacher. That's a person that goes on their own and the - examinations are done by the inspector in the head 
school. Now - I seemed to get on very well but it was a peculiar kind of job because I didn't have them all together. I had one school about eleven miles from where I lived and the other one I could go there every day on a bicycle, it was three - three an
d
 a half miles or something. Now- it was - a matter of making them work at home during the time I was in the other school. So I was - a fortnight about. The first fortnight say in one school and the next fortnight in the other school and so on. Now you had
 to take your scholars to the head school. The head school for one - for all of us, where I was, the Head school for Colla Firth was - was Voe. And the head school for - for Garth was Firth - at - Firth where I had always been. Now if I }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid598689\charrsid16215132 could}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  bring the - th
e pupils on - to - to be as good as the scholars in the day school, head school well I was kept on. Now - this was several years before the first world war. I just I think it was 1907, not quite sure, but was 1907 I went to the two schools together.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 And you'd already been teaching for a while before that had you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 I had been teaching at the - at the school at Firth.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 You started there about fourteen did you, teaching?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh no, long before that. I was - I was put - I just could not tell you 
exactly because I would be a while when they needed me and when there were few pupils you see I was just off work and I was living at home and I didn't think of it as a job then because I was so much in need at home to be there to work and help my mother.
 My father was away. So - times went on and - and about 1907 - they put - they put two teachers on to the side school where I had done it - fortnight about. And - we }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 seemed}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  to get on all right because you took this - you took the pupils in your class into t
he class in the big school, and if they could answer as well as the bairns in the big school well, your pupils passed and they - the bairns were all right and we were happy as could be. So I was kept on and when they divided the schools I got the chance t
o choose which to stay at and I took the one with the most pupils and it was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 furthest}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
 away - but I had a free house. And stayed all week and came home at weekends.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 That was when you stayed all by yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 All by myself and that was during the who
le world - first world war. 1914 to '18. And - I was there when I married. My husband was - was demobbed and come hame and we married and he seeing was ill he came to the school house and lived there with me. And then when my first baby was to be born I w
ent home to my mother and I wasn't back. I was - I was eight years in Colla Firth. They were most wealthy people.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Were the merchants the most wealthy round about?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Well, some of them were and some of them just could make a living but this man bough
t knitted goods and had fish - a place for buying fish and he'd a big family and he left quite a lot of money, I'm not sure how much but some thousand but he }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 had}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  - oh they went all over the world, there's none of there now. They were pools, and then the Ad
es were the head merchants in - from Colla Firth where I was - that's the west side, they were cousins to the Pools. And - oh we were quite a happy community, people were very friendly and happy and we had concerts to amuse us in winter.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Were those in the school at the church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
Well sometimes we had - had them in the school. But - we had no halls in those days. Only the old school at Mossbank, it belonged to the church, it was United Presbyterian church. That we was built in 1846 and it's still in 
use. And - we had soirees for bairns and - well several entertainments then, if we needed hymn books we had a concert or two and got as much money as could buy some hymn books or programmes for the bairns.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did people tell stories at the concerts?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh yes. And we got all the elders to tell very serious stories and some of them I remember }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 yet}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 What type of stories did they tell.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Well usually - something - with a moral. And we had - the hymns and - songs, mostly Scotch songs. You know, Shetl
and is very poor in music, except fiddle music. But we have the best fiddler in Britain today, old Arthur Abbott. He's not so very old but he's an elderly man now. They had - a big test for - fiddling.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 And he got a cup or something did he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 He's t
he - he's the top. He was on the wireless one of these nights not so long ago. Very modest person but - this is - his music is good. Now in those days we spent - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 winter nights}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  by gathering together, you know the winter night is a long time, from about thre
e o'clock in the afternoon you could scarcely walk. Between one place to another at three o'clock, so we put the bairns hame early then it had a piece to go through the hill. And then the young people would have their tea and gather in a house. And that's
 when the stories was told, the old folk would tell us what happened in their time, and that's more than a hundred years ago that you would have to go back for the stories. And that's the way we got so many ghost stories and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 Halloween}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  stories.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 Halloween}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  important in Shetland?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 
It used to stay - have it in Scotland but - they always had a bit of a feast on Halloween and they baked the cake - with a ring, a thimble, a ha'penny, a threepenny and - I don't know if there was anything else. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 They do that in Scotland yet you know at }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 Halloween}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
. Well if you get the ring you're to be the first one married. If you get the ha'penny you don't marry at all. If you get the button, that's another things, you - you're to be a bachelor, the button used - used to go
 to the one of the boys but you didn't know who was going to get it, sometimes it would be one of the girls got one - got it, made a good lot of amusement. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 
And when that was over we - we cut this cake and we had - it was very. very fine cake, it was built in a - baked in a dutch oven. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
And - when the tea and the cake was over they went into the yard to see what sort of a family they would have. And they had to go in the dark, if the moon was out you put a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 handkerchief}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  over your eyes and you drew a cabbage an
d - if you found out what like your family was to be. If there were nodules on the stalk you would have a big family, if there was no nodules you had no family and if you got a - a big cabbage you were going to be very lucky during the years, and if you g
o
t a small one you're going to be very poor. And just mere nonsense like that. And we ducked for apples. As they do in Scotland, do they do that in England. They do that in Shetland, yes. You - you - you do that, you go guizing wi' turnips; And a candle in
s
ide. And wish the people luck. And they gi' you a penny. Give you something, maybe a threepenny or sometimes now you need a shilling. Before you can get something. And it's the same at New Year, they wish you a happy New Year. And we dressed up so that - 
people next }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 door}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
 wasna supposed to know us. Then - you dress up in any old thing that you could think there about and there was many as could dance the Shetland reel and - and on playing, usually a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 melodeon
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  because the fiddle was dangerous to take out at night, - it could have broken and - it sometimes it was very slippery. Especially Christmas time, frost on the ground.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did people skate at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Yes. That was a grand - a grand thing when the frost came. Fine place below our house where all the you
ngsters gathered. And - I could - enjoy the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 skating}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
 around yet. I used to - to go with the boys, my boys when they were little. But they don't skate here much now. You see, they're put off the roads. That was fine place for skating. At the corner of the Ce
ntral school. And then others steep place at the end of the - at the end of this house beside - beside Iseborough. But the water's dangerous you know, they might have been killed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Traffic has made a difference in that way hasn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 But that's ho
w you did your teacher's training. If you passed the and pleased the inspector and got a good report and a good report from the school board - school - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 school board}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  went a long way then - well with the paupers, what paupers were - there werena very many pa
upers in Shetland. People were not disposed to take anything but disabled people like old person like what I am now getting the old }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 age}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  pension, they would give them one and sixpence a week. And you paid sixpence for your house rent. They had a room, that 
was just set up by the merchant. And - people who weren't kind to them, we crofters that had milk, they would come and get some milk and they would get - whey and - buttermilk and anything we had.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 You say the merchants gave them the room, where would the rooms be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Well they - in Mossbank they had a row of houses that the merchant kept wind and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 weather tight}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 . And they had peats, they could cut peats in the hill. And some of those men you know were - they were pretty crippled but they could aye get 
a few peats. And they would carry them home on their backs and old women too. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 And do you what Stainy Hill is. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
As you leave Lerwick, that steep hill, goes up to the Lady's Drive. Well that was the free hill of Lerwick where anybody could cut peats. And peop
le - as old as I am now, when they were fit enough they would carry home the peats on their back in a kishie. So it was a great gift to give an old person a kishie. Because they took it to the shop and got the messages in it and if they got something like
 in the harvest time they would get some taties or - a bit of meat when they were - the killing sheep.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 You were telling me about .....?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 About life among the young people. Well I've told you -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 You were saying it was a grand thing to give them the kishie?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 A kishie, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 And then you were saying about the difference with the young people then?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 The - the young people had to be very respectable or they wouldn't be received into the better class society you see, if you fell away from
 - well, from decency in any way you were - you were very }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 ashamed}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
 to come out again. And you didn't mix with other young people. There were no }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 rowdyism}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
 and they would have dances. But - everybody kept - clean living. And - everybody went to church, if you 
didn't you was considered - well, just not - well off the upper - off the upper ten list you would say. They would might have been as poor as they liked but they tried to keep - decency. And - the - there was an elder that kept a curfew. In the district. 
H
e lived next door to where I was brought up but he was away when I - when - before I - I grew up and there was one in each district. And if there was something about you that they weren't very sure about he visited you. And told the minister whatever faul
t
 you had. And if there were people that drank too much they were put off the church roll. And - if they - if they came back they would get - they would get - the elder would come and tell you that you had to come to the penitents form. And there's a form 
a
nd you see it in the churches yet, church of Mossbank. There are empty seats, you see, the - the seats comes in like this, both sometimes the two aisles of the kirk and you - if you were an offender, if you'd been hard swearing or misbehaving in any way y
o
u had to come before the minister and the elders and sit in the penitent's form and the church assembled and had your excuse and you were questioned, whatever they'd heard about you. And they - they - that was the church of - the - the law - law keepers c
hurch. I - I don't know really what they called it but it was known as the - as the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 repentant's}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
 form. And you were asked before all the elders and the congregation and if anybody had anything against you it was brought up and they sat in session and if you'd been before the session and had your excuse you were forgiven and taken back.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did they always forgive people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 I don't think that - well, I don't - I never heard one of that things. You see because it was given up, the law took over and the poli
ceman were in service when I grew up but - that's how it was, it was in my mother's time. Before the police - well there police in the town I think all that time but that was for - outsiders coming into the town creating a row. But - the church dealt - if
 
you were a member of the church they dealt with you until they couldn't make any better of you before you put - they put you for the law. And - if you did something foolish, well they would have came and just reprimanded you and said you must never do thi
s again. Maybe knocked at somebody's door and frightened them or something like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Were they still doing that in your time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 No, no. They stopped that altogether. Even my son is an elder, he visits the people you see, he's a certain district, th
is is a big church we have here and - and he visits anybody in trouble or - if - well something that they can help them with. And there is a company of men here that looks after the juveniles but then they have - they're chosen. And people that can advise
 them.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
In some parts of England if people did anything wrong other people used to go and stand outside their house and bang tin cans and drive them away, did you ever hear of that in Shetland?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 No. No. Oh no. It was - it would be undignified.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Was dignity considered very important?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Very important.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 To conduct yourself well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
Yes. And they wore very long skirts you know and it was a great difficulty among the gutters. And you had to be - wearing enough clothing to keep your human sh
ape out of sight. And - in a very hot day I can remember one woman, very angry at my mother because she didn't have enough petticoats to - to pad herself you see and they could see her legs moving inside her skirt. Oh dear. They'd passed away. Oh dear. If
 they'd come up - they'd be lashed in and kept out of sight until their clothings was on, they'd take this up in the penitent's hall - form or something.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did people ever go swimming then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh they did quite a lot of sea bathing. But they did it out
 of sight. You see, they were - there were holes in the banks and two girls would go out in the early morning and have a good wash in the sea and take their clothing with them you see and have - well they had something to wear. They - they would never str
ip before anybody, no matter who. Whether it was their best friend. But that's why they - how }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 went}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
 went bathing. In the - early in the morning when the sun is coming up and when I'm up in the country I go and have a good swill. There's nobody to see you the
re now. It's lovely. And when the sun is rising over the sea it's the most beautiful time of the year, so if you ever come to Shetland again come in the month of June. We had - to see the summer dim. From my window like this that faces the North I can sit
 
like this and see the path of the sun in a clear night all night. And the most beautiful tints. Gold and blue and green as the time changes and the sun nears the horizon, when it's coming up. It goes down about eleven, out of sight at our house but it goe
s
 earlier in other places and it's up again about two o'clock in the morning. Three hours. And all that three hours you can see the light. The peculiar colouring that you never see during the day. And we had it for three weeks this summer. And last summer 
I
 never saw the dim. It was - it was misty and - rainy or blowing wind every - every morning and that's a fine time because you see the peerie lambs. Oh they're sweet. They arrive and their mothers looking after them and sometimes when she's got two she's 
not able to look after the first one, you go and pick it up and keep it safe for - until it's a sheep.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did you look after the lambs sometimes as a child?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 I did all - well - ever I was able to walk.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did the women sell the knitting to the shop?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Yes. And - they took it from the wool and made it into a garment. Some made shawls. Some made - vests and spencers.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did they get money for it or other goods?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh no, in the - in the days of the Truck Act you - exchanged it for goods. Because sometimes the merchant didn't have enough money and }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 beside}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
 money was so scarce. A woman who had a family of eight say sometimes they never saw a shilling from one year's end to the other. Her husband, you see, fished and if he could get the rent and enou
gh meal and flour then they had to try and provide the rest off the croft. And yet you see they never wanted. And - we always paid the money to the kirk, we paid two shillings a year for seat rent and four shillings for being a member. And that was all th
e money we give to the kirk. And - unless if you had money then you would give it as an offering. But - well they took an offering every Sunday and it was - if you had the eight you had to have eight ha'pennies. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 Smallest}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  coin. And sometimes they could hardl
y get it but you never liked to go without it. And you would get an egg and change it for ha'penny for the kirk. I didna have to do that, I had - my father provided you see and he sent us home money. But that was where you were poor and had a big family.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Were there any class distinctions between the people then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
Oh no. Well there was class distinctions - you say sort of to the merchant and - any - body in a position that was higher than yours you see, and you always }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 spoke}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  civilly and never said - 
never said in the shop - pennyworth of one thing or another but what you say please. And if you ask the request you say, please sir. And now when I come in the shop - place full of bairns and say, pound of sugar please, they think I'm a bit soft.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Who else did you call sir in the community, was the minister called sir?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 The minister was, oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did they have a laird up there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 There was a laird but there was no laird near us. We }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 paid}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  our rent to a laird but he lived in another part.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 He didn't come at all and mix with the people?;
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
Oh no, he sent a deputy. And it was a retired captain that used to come. He visited the peat banks and saw that we didn't - cut peats without laying down the sod, the turf on the - the grassy side up, so 
it could grow again. And - this is visitors that's lodging up here.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 You've got people coming?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 No, no. They're people upstairs. No, they're not nothing to do with me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 He used to examine the peats then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 He - that we didn't ruin the hills
 you see and see that we didn't put on more - more animals than the ground could keep. And if there was a quarrel about somebody having their fence down, we had to keep up our fence, then this - he was a Captain Pearson, an elderly man and he had - an ass
istant with him, a witness for everything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did the merchant have a wife and family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did they mix with the other people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh yes. They met - mixed. But - we knew that we didn't - didn't go to friendly on them you know. You went and - 
told a message but - we were just - well, my mother was pretty friendly with them, friendly with the minister and that, there was - there was poor folk and another section not so poor. Well-to-do people or what we call }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 well}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  doin' in Shetland and so - we al
l met together like at a - we gathered the bairns the together and had a picnic for everybody and - just the same as what is yet, you get some people that make the tea and - volunteers. And another one that carried on the races, usually the teachers. Race
s and games and whatever was. And the well' to-do people would give prizes, sixpence for first and threepence second and a penny for the third. For racing. Jumping and skipping.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Would that be connected with the church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Yes, usually the church. Well, the church and the school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did you have a Sunday school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh yes. Our Sunday school teacher remained her forty years.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did they have any temperance club or anything to encourage people not to drink or was that not necessary here?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Well 
- we had no temperance - society 'til - drunk became - oh well, what would you call it - rather too much. The boats came from a distance and brought it in. In this town we had every - country in the world, at this time of year, well it's passed the fishin
g time, but in the fishing time. They were Dutchmen and - Norwegians, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 Swedes}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
, all the Continental countries. They came to fish. And some of them brought in - their kind of liquor, like vodka down to the Russians, and - strong stuff. And when they saw that t
his was becoming oppressive they - the - made a rule that they were going to drive it out. And I was one of the great conflicters, trying to get votes. I had a cousin in the Salvation Army and they were quite - there were some of the men that - especially
 them that worked in fishing at Tavety. They would work all day and spend their money in the pub. That's when they got too many pubs. Earlier than that it - it was a sort of disgrace if you were }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 drinking}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  too much. You'd have refreshments as they called it a
t weddings and you danced and you would drink a drop of wine,; whatever kind was going, I never did take any so I don't know like it was but I was aye strictly teetotal and me mother was the same. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 And we thought if we could try Lerwick that this would make a great difference. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
You see, it had been cut off in the wartime, as they did in all the towns, you couldn't buy it. And we took up - we went from house to house and took a note of all the people and when we voted for it we had to get two thirds of the vot
ers on the voters roll you see, it was householders that voted, people over twenty -one. And we dried Lerwick. Now - there was - lots of drinking in the country here and there, wherever there were nests of invaders as you would say, people that had come i
n to work. And we got - Mossbank was dry, there was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 a license}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
 there. They did never get Voe dry and the silt area. But dear bless me, it's broken out now 'til it's appalling. There are far more }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 licenses}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  in Lerwick as - as ever should be.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 When did they start bringing the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 licenses}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  back again to Lerwick?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Well it just filtered in. I just couldn't tell you about the - well somebody had a hotel and they couldn't have carried on without a }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 license}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 . Until they got one and now they're }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 licensing}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  every place.
 Or mostly every place. U don't know if there are temperance hotel - man that wanted to get to a temperance hotel last year - couldna get. Couldn't get a place where there were no drink.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Can you tell me if you remember anything about elections in those days before the end of the first war, do you remember what the }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14303707\charrsid16215132 political}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  parties round where you lived?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh they were - we were always Liberal in Shetland, and we're Liberal yet. Old Joe's still carrying on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 He's a wonderful person isn't he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid598689\charrsid16215132 He}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  is that
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Your mother and father both were Liberal were they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh yes. We were Liberals. And -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Were any of the people round about Conservative?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 No, no. The - the merchants were Conservatives. There were quite a number of Conservatives. And - no, I don't -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 But the crofters and cotters weren't Conservative, or were some?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
No, they was mostly Liberal. The same in Orkney. But I don't recall - there's not much difference among them now. This man is just - the Labour government the
y thought that would be good but - Wilson seems to have got them under his thumb until they don't know what they are now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 There doesn't seem to be much difference really?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Very little.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Can you remember your father and mother voting, the women got the vote in 1918 didn't they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Yes, I don't know whether my mother voted, yes, I believe she did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 And she would vote Liberal would she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Yes, we Liberal - the voting - my father was away most of the time you see but I can mind him I think
 voting twice - two or three times after he retired.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Do you know if anywhere on Shetland people felt they had to vote Conservative to please the laird or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 No, I don't think they did - you wouldn't do it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 They voted the way they wanted to do, they didn't have pressure to vote a certain way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 No. No, the kirk would have stopped that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Were they members of a Liberal party, or you when you were younger?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 No. No, no. Oh no, they couldna buy a vote.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 But they did they belong to the party like you belong to the church and you pay something every year?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh no, they didn't do that. Oh no. No, everybody was free.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 When they had the police in the north mainland did the policemen visit at regular intervals or anything?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 No, he never seen you unless something - somebody reported something drastic.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 He wasn't sort of seen about the place like they are now?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 No, the first time I saw the policeman I - I fled in and took refuge. Under the table. It was - s
ome dog had had - come fair distance and worried the sheep and I said, oh dear here was - I had seen the policeman in the town. Here was the police. And my mother said, oh yon's just old Gifford. There's no much fear of him. He }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid598689\charrsid16215132 came}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  in got a glass of milk here. He was the Chief Constable for many years. He was - a cousin to the present Provost's father, he was Gifford Gray.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 At the school were the children all friendly to each other or were there some children who were sort of outcasts and lonely?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
Oh no. Oh no. They were - there were none of that. They - there were poor creatures that had no boots, somebody had a pair and give them a pair.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did the cotters have a harder time than the crofters?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 The cotters? Oh they had a harder time. They ha
d to go away and work more you see. But - they would come to Lerwick and work all summer and they just got eighteen and six }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid598689\charrsid16215132 a week}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 , didna matter what size their family was. And of course there was no extra money coming in you see, if they did that it would
 have been begging. But - when - somebody that had a cast off jacket. say a boy without one he just - the mother would say, would that be any use to you, say to his mother and he got it, or a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid598689\charrsid16215132 
pair}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  of boots that had grown too small. I usually had plenty and
 if I had a cast off frock well some other little girl got it. Just for the simple reason that I was alone. But - no, other folk was no hard like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Were there any families who people considered to be rough, in the south you often the distinction s
ome families are rough and others are respectable?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
Oh yes, but that is more in the towns. Well - there was - some of them maybe more rough than others but - in the country you didn't see that much at all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Were there any families who were very poor because they couldn't manage the money and the men drank and that sort of thing in the country?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
I don't know that I could tell you of one man in our district that ever drank his money to hurt his family. After the war there was man that learned to d
rink, he lost his wife in the war and he married again and he got a bonus see on a good bit and that man used to go to the shop, like while this bonus lasted, but he never troubled anybody. He just carried this bottle home and when it was gone he dry - he
 
was finished wi' it, when the money was done he didn't drink again. There was no - there were no - confirmed drunkards. They were two men that died outside and somebody said they had - like they were travelling from Lerwick, first - when there was years b
etween the one and the other. They said, he must have been drinking that he fell down and he maybe had heart trouble. But I can never mind anybody in the country. Not excessively drunk. No. Because we'd have been considered very - very low. }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid598689\charrsid16215132 And now quite well to do people is ruining themselves through it.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
If a child hit another child or hit you, perhaps that didn't happen round here, would your mother say you should hit back or say that you shouldn't do that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Well - I - she might have said that but - I had nobody to hurt me and - and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Were the children not rough with each other?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
Oh no. No. No, we had - after the Boer War we had what we called the Bengal war and we threw - we threw - lumps of earth, just imagine it, but - if we got our shoes dirty we would - very much }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid598689\charrsid16215132 
reprimanded}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 , we had to clean them up and - be ready for school next day.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 When you got home from school did you have to change the clothes and keep them nice for the next day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Yes. You had to keep them, you had a lot
 of - well, we crofters did - a lot of work to do, especially in the harvest time because - they took the lambs from the hill and fastened them up on tethers and we had to keep changing their - their feed and some-times you got wool sticking on your frock
 and that so you always put on an old frock when you worked with the lambs of the kye. And you never went to school dirty or -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 If you did something your mother or father didn't like did they punish you or did they just speak to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 They spoke to 
us, I never was punished. I me life and I've had three boys, I never whipped them once. No. I think you know, if you - if you slap a baby - bairn when - even when he's very little, suppose he scratches your face and you give him a slap on the hands, he'll
 do that to you. But if you say no, just look what you've done to my face, poor mammy's }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid598689\charrsid16215132 got a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
 sore face, and take his sympathy he'll never do it again. You see, I think slapping bairns is awfully bad. You make them gentle, keep them gentle. And if somebody 
hits you well, you go and reprimand that one. But - you just grow up as you're trained. And you can get - a lot out of bairns, especially if you're kindly to them. Live the idea more than fear you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 They never did like anything putting you in your room without your supper or tea?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh no.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Is it like that still in Shetland or did the people punish the children more now do you thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 I couldn't tell you but I cannot - would not - good lot of more rowdyism and that. But I never - all the 
way of course I teached country bairns. I never saw bad bairns that you couldna coutrol at all. No. You would keep them in ten minutes at night 'til the essay was finished or something like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 But that's different?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 When grown ups were talking were children allowed to join in the conversation?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
No. The - unless they asked them something. And I don't think that that was very good for them, it made them backward. You see, some - in fact, I had a woman in yesterday and she's a gr
anny and her two granddaughters driving the car, she was come here for - to see the specialist at the hospital. Now that woman would think twice of answering if - it was this position to be gentle and I think they were rather kept back by - because her ot
her sister that }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid598689\charrsid16215132 went}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
 to service, she speaks and she controls the - she control - she controls the family yet, the grandchildren and she since. But the woman that was the grand - she never say a word to any - they irritate her, she lives with the grandchildren you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 They imitate her do they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 They - they're quiet like her and very backward. Think twice before speaking.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 And swearing was not heard I suppose?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 That would be very bad would it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 A good lot of swearing goes on now I suppose. But I've never heard one swearing yet, father would - and he never punished them in his life.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did your father play a fiddle?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 No, he was the only one in the family, he played - he played an }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid598689\charrsid16215132 accordion}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  to get the bairns to dance on a Christmas night. But - they were all musical but himself, I had }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid598689\charrsid16215132 an}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  uncle that was very good at playing the fiddle. He died in New South Wales, Australia. And - and I had - well they were all singers, my father was a - a very fine singer. And - my granny was a 
great singer, she was with the Nicholson's of Fetlar.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 She was with them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
She - she was with the Nicholson's of Fetlars. Them that had the title. And - when she was in - she was ninety-two when she died and she could lie in the bed and sing hymns
 that you wouldn't believe that she was an old woman. The minister's wife went to see her and she said she were a world swinger. I can't sing now, I sang all me young life
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did you all sing together sometimes in a group?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh yes, we always had a si
ng-song on a Sunday night especially. And then - the neighbours would come along and we'd have a cup of tea and sing. And when we practiced it was in our house they always practiced. I was in the middle of the district and they would come from east and we
st and - maybe thirty of us and we had grand times. But that was before the first world war. There are a great many young people that went away to try and do better for themselves.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 And they never came back?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Never. As soon as the war broke out help
 Britain at war and they volunteered. They volunteered and - and a great many of them killed at the Dardanelles.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Were there books in the house for reading?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Books was very scarce. There was an old man who carried books - every month. They were all
 religious books and they were fine stories in them but - well they were just a penny apiece and you aye got a Horner's penny story when Old John came. But - books was what we really liked. We - we couldn't get them you see. They were expensive and yet th
ey were no - no price in those days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did you get them as school prizes ever?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Never got a prize in me life, there was no money for prizes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 They didn't have school prizes of books?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 What about newspapers and magazines, did they have that when you were a girl?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
We had - the News and the Times, two - two local papers. And - the News was given up not long ago. And - that was the Tory paper. And the Times was the Liberal paper. And we - we got them both. Well you see, the next door 
neighbour - we got the News and we got the Times and then we changed them over. And we got all the news that we thought we needed. And then when the first world war broke out we got - a war special. It was a daily paper, the first daily paper we had. That
 was a ha'penny each, and somebody always brought the special. Passed it round.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did your mother and father ever read aloud?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Not 'til they - 'til me mother turned blind. My mother was like me, she lost her sight. And - then father read to her. But
 they enjoyed reading to themselves. But do you know that in - when I was but a school there were several people that couldn't read. But there were none of old people that couldn't read. They -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 You mean older people who couldn't read?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 The elderly people. The generation above my father and mother. But my grandfather and grandmother upon both sides could read.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Do you remember any funerals and what they were like when you were a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Oh yes, the funeral was a great occasion. They met at t
he house where the person had died, and they got a cup of tea, sometimes they had to wait - walk miles. You see, it all had to be carried. And we were four miles from the cemetery. And the first funeral that was in the house was my grandmother. And - it w
a
s a sore day when she was taken, she'd died very suddenly. They came - they came to the house and got a cup of a tea and then they walked all the way, whatever distance it was. Sometimes a very long distance. And they took something to drink, wine usually
.
 A bottle of wine. And - some bread. And then they had their pipes, most of them smoked. I hardly ever kenned a man that didn't smoke. You see, they got the tobacco for the Dutchman. And a pennyworth of tobacco as the Dutch called it was just about a hand
ful of shag and when they went to sea they got }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid598689\charrsid16215132 plug}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  tobacco from the Continent, so my father always smoked all my life. }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid598689\charrsid16215132 But I never did see a woman smoking. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
But one that had asthma and she said that the pipe did clear her chest and she would get a loan of a pipe and two or three draws and we thought that was great fun. She was - she was an old woman like what I am now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 So they'd go off with the wine and the bread, would they have it along the way then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 They had it when they got to the cemetery, if 
they didn't need it before. But they parted at the cemetery and everyone went home you see, so - but they never - they didna have the Scotch fashion of coming home and having meal. They got their meal before they left. And it was as much tea as they wante
d to drink you see. And as much bread. Some of them had come miles in the morning.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did a lot of people walk to the cemetery, the neighbours and friends, with them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Yes. The men went. There were no women ever went. No. I think I was the first woman
 to go to the cemetery, I went with my father and mother. They were both buried the same day but - they had been going in the town you see before that time. Because we always followed the - well - the guilds women went to the - the women's funerals.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 The women went to the women's funerals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did they draw the blinds in the houses?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 They didn't darken the houses?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 They didn't darken the houses. They do now of course, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Do they still not do it up in the north mainland.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
I couldn't tell you. Well, some of them that have their windows, you see, in the old houses they were just small windows. There would be a window yonder and one here. That was when the tax was put - put on the windows. Now I can't tell you the date
 of that. But they taxed the glass. And some of the windows were closed, in fact in the little cottage where I lived there are what we call the blind window. And it was made into a press and we were always talking about taking it out and we never did. But
 - when we did - when we sold the house it was any by the windows in the front.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 You met at the bride's house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 And you walked to the kirk, to the minister. Sometimes it was to the Manse and sometimes to the church. Well usually to the church. And y
ou - paired off - the bride come out and paired you off. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid598689\charrsid16215132 The most likely man and wife you see and - the bride's brother would walk wi' bridegroom's sister and vice versa. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 And - when the ceremony was over - they - they played the fiddle all the while. And s
ometimes there were two fiddlers. And then they would have a gun. They'd - where they'd go - gun shot at Laura's wedding. We - they used to fire the gun wi' powder so that it would go about you like stars. It }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid598689\charrsid16215132 didna}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  only the stars picked out at up-helly-a. 
They used to come up-helly-a. Well - they would shot as they went and sometimes they would break out into song if the fiddler wasna playing. No more'n I live feyther and mother no }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid598689\charrsid16215132 more'n}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132  I live sister and brother, no more'n I live kith and kin and follow t
he faithful friend man's son. And that was the wedding song. And - when they walked back of course they would - that was the bride - assembled at the bride's house and the bride paired them off, the best maid and the best man. Oh you had the song. Well th
e best man met the bride on the way as they went to the minister. And then he gives her to the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid598689\charrsid16215132 bridegroom}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
 to walk back with. And - it's just the same - march that they go sometimes the fiddle playing and sometimes them singing the song. If the fiddlers kind
 of tired. And they come to the - it's usually a hall now, it used to be - the houses were pretty close together and they would cook in one house and eat in another house and dance in the other one. And that was a real Shetland wedding. And it was easier 
t
o attend them you see and the elderly people made the food and had the table set when they came back from the minister. And - in very olden times, I have never seen that done, they were - the bride's scone was - baked by the bride's mother usually if she 
w
as able to do it well, most of the women could bake a scone. That was an oatcake. And it was - baked whole in front of the fire, big open fire you see. Oh a thing that size. Put up in front of the fire and it was cooked very carefully so that it shouldn't
 
break, it was very bad luck if the bride's scone broke and they had to bake another one. That meant that the marriage wouldna last long and she would be married again. And - and when she come back her mother met her in the door and broke this over her hea
d
 and everybody scrambled for a piece. And they dreamt on that, you dream about your future husband on that. Now in those days when they made bread scone of course just cut the bride's cake when they came and that and drink their healths. But you know in W
h
alsay, they don't have the elaborate way that they have here. They come to the door of the house where they're going to have this meal and there's a man standing at the door wi' a bottle of stronger and a bottle of - of - what sweet - something sweet, coo
l
 drinks. And if you - want a cool drink you get it. If you - and you carry it in by and then you get the bride's cake when you're seated. And there's no -healths. They'd say - good luck boys, and everybody has their drink as they want it and the meal is s
e
rved and they start dancing. Wi' all yon frills it's just all - get's your goat. Sometimes it's more than an hour before you're finished with the dinner. But none of that in Whalsay. They just drink what they want, have a cup of tea on the top and get's t
he bride's cake and start and dance.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Were the dances Shetland dances?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Shetland and Scotch.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 Did they do ballroom dancing when you were a young girl?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 I never danced in me life for I always felt a fool if I started to dance.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3609828 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 You just watched did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2691702 L  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
I could sing and I could make a speech and I just - whatever was needed, see, well being a teacher well I'd just say something. And watched them dancing and usually helped to feed them. They had - they had weddings in the school. And 
- it was a very heavy night for me for I just were on me feet all the time, I'd no time to dance. I was - I think I danced one reel, the bride's reel. I was first ma}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid598689\charrsid16215132 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 d at the wedding and I danced that, but that's just like - I don't know what. To me to thi
nk of dancing. And Angus is the same. And yet John and Charlie like a dance, and their father liked a dance. But - stand and taking the floor for no use. Your legs pretty tired.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\ql \fi-461\li461\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid3609828 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid402781\charrsid16215132 
\par }}