{\rtf1\adeflang1025\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\adeff0\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang2057\deflangfe2057{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}{\f38\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f39\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f41\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f42\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f43\fbidi \froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}
{\f44\fbidi \froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f45\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f46\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f48\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}
{\f49\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f51\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f52\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f53\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f54\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}
{\f55\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f56\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden 
Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs20 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{
\s15\qj \li0\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext15 Body Text;}}
{\*\latentstyles\lsdstimax156\lsdlockeddef0}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid552205\rsid857977\rsid1795308\rsid2718234\rsid6580700\rsid7500533\rsid9654639\rsid13729350\rsid16391746}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 11.0.0000;}{\info{\title Int 194}{\author PRASAD3}
{\operator lhorto}{\creatim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min8}{\revtim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min8}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords8094}{\nofchars46138}{\nofcharsws54124}{\vern24613}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 http://schemas.microsoft.
com/office/word/2003/wordml}}\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1800\margr1800\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0\ltrsect 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\donotembedsysfont0\donotembedlingdata0\grfdocevents0\validatexml1\showplaceholdtext0\ignoremixedcontent0\saveinvalidxml0\showxmlerrors1\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace180
\dgvspace180\dghorigin1800\dgvorigin1440\dghshow1\dgvshow1\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\splytwnine\ftnlytwnine\htmautsp\nolnhtadjtbl\useltbaln\alntblind\lytcalctblwd\lyttblrtgr\lnbrkrule\nojkernpunct\rsidroot552205 \fet0
{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}\ilfomacatclnup0\ltrpar \sectd \ltrsect\linex0\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ltrpar
\ql \fi-461\li461\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid857977 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\ul\insrsid857977\charrsid16072257 Information about interviewee}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid857977 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid857977\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\ql \fi-461\li461\ri0\widctlpar\tx2057\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid857977 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid857977\charrsid16072257 Date of birth}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid857977    \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid857977\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid857977  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid13729350 1898}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid857977\charrsid16072257 
\par Gender}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid857977           \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid857977\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid857977  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid13729350 M}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid857977 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid857977\charrsid16072257 Marital status}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid857977 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid857977\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid857977  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid13729350 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid857977\charrsid16544153 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid857977\charrsid16072257 Occupation}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid857977 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid857977\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid857977  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid13729350 Grain broker}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid857977\charrsid16072257 
\par Geographic region}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid857977 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid857977\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid857977  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid13729350 Hassocks, Sussex
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid857977\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\qj \fi-461\li461\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid857977 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13729350 GH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 'I was born in 1898 ... in Stockport and I continued to live in Stockport, or on the 
borders of Stockport until I was 27 ... Where we were living I suppose you would call a pleasant suburb. Stockport is a manufacturing town and the centre of town is mills and railways and factories and round that, as so often you find, rows of small house
s
 and then beyond that again the suburban area where you get the professional people and the people with executive positions and things like that. House? 'Well the one I was actually born in I can't tell you much about as we moved out of it when I was abou
t
 two. But I have seen the house since. It was a semi-detached brick built house, I should imagine with two living rooms and possibly three bedrooms ... My father then was fairly prosperous. He was the owner of a cotton mill which came down to him from my 
g
randfather, might even have been my great grandfather, I don't know, but it was in the family. And I suppose he was doing fairly comfortably and we moved to another house in another suburb of Stockport which was an altogether bigger house. I don't know wh
e
ther it had more rooms ... there was a dining room and a drawing room as we used to call it and a kitchen, a big scullery and cellars downstairs for coal and things like that. Upstairs I think there were four bedrooms certainly three, and above that an at
t
ic. Typical of its kind, quite a large garden with a drive leading up to the front door, and a conservatory round it of course no garage because nobody much had cars and things ... I was the second child, the first one was a girl who died before I was bor
n ... and then my mother had a daughter, nine years after me, a long gap in between us and there were just the two of us my sister and myself ... a nine year gap was a big one, I don't know whether it was by design or accident.'
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid857977 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 Was your childhood then rather cut off?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13729350 GH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 
'Yes it was rather, partly because ... there was a very well defined sort of class structure in those days. Now my father and mother and their fathers and mothers and all my uncles and aunts and so on, because they were both from ve
ry large families, they were all professional people - solicitors, auctioneers, engineers and people like that, or else in the case of my father he owned this cotton mill. And they were all of that type. They were, of course, in a town like Stockport, ver
y
 limited in number ... you just didn't attempt to mix with those people, either higher or lower. All our friends were the same type. My father's greatest friend was also our doctor, two or three solicitors he was friendly with, the local clergy and the wi
v
es used to visit each others' houses and so on. But they never mixed with, shall we say, a successful shopkeeper or a mill-manager, anything like that. They were just that grade lower down ... and, I don't think anybody minded you know in those days ... A
n
d so my friends, I went to the local grammar school, my friends were really of two types: children of friends of my parents, and cousins, both families lived near Stockport, and friends which I made at school whom I didn't know otherwise. But there were m
y parents, as they would in those days, were very selective. If I came home and said 'I've, I like Smith'. Well, they'd make enquiries so to what sort of a home }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2718234\charrsid9654639 Smith came}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639  from. And if he came from a home like ours all right - we'll have him for tea. But if
 he didn't - well, don't think he's quite, quite the sort of boy we want you to be friendly with. It all sounds terribly snobbish now but that's as it was ...' Education 'First of all I had a nursery governess when I was six. I had her for two years. She 
u
sed to come in every morning, teach me right away, from the rudiments upwards, mainly the three 'R's, and take me for a walk and generally look after me for the morning. And I had two years of that and then they sent me to Stockport Grammar School at the 
age of eight and I was ahead of most of the other boys of eight because I had a few weeks in the lowest form and then I moved up to the next form. And I stayed at that Grammar School for the rest of my school career, went up gradually to the sixth.'

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid857977 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 Did you enjoy school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13729350 GH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 
'No, not particularly ... I didn't find them (school days) very wonderful. The things which was peculiar to us and which affected me in a lot of ways is that about two years after I'd started school my father's business collapsed
. He lost all his money, partly through fraud, partly because he was keeping out of the business his mother, his sisters and so on, which made a terrific drain on the business and there was one of the cotton trade's periodic slumps. And I was too young to
 
know much about it but all our little world collapsed in ruins around us when I was about ten. And it was put to me bluntly that I might not be able to say on even at the Grammar School. I might have to go to a county school but my one chance was that I m
i
ght get a scholarship so at a very early age I was faced with the idea of slogging away at homework whether I liked it or not as hard as I could and even at that age I realised that the only school in the neighbourhood of anything like that type was the s
c
hool where I was. And I did. I worked very hard and I was given the one annual scholarship which was awarded to the hardest working boy in the school ... I got that, and because I got it I was able to stay on at the Grammar School for the rest of my educa
tion. But if not I should have had to leave and go to the Education Authority School and of course in those days that was very different a very different education from what you get at a grammar school. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2718234\charrsid9654639 And so all the time I was at school I was pursued by t
his damned scholarship because if ever I skipped my homework or didn't do very well in one term or something like that I might be sent for by the head 'Look here Hampson, you were fourteenth in Latin this year, not what we expect from a boy with a scholar
ship, you know.' ... so that, and the fact of our suddenly having become very hard up at home meant there was a continual pressure on work. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 
This school, and I think it was perhaps typical of local grammar schools in those days, didn't think much about sport
. Work - it was good. Looking back at other people who were better off and went to public schools and so on I didn't do too badly, Latin French and science and so on, all quite good. But they just made you work. Sport hardly counted for anything ... I use
d
 to try hard at football and cricket but not particularly good and anyway I was always being pressed to do anything up to three hours' homework every evening and so on. And so school to me was a rather slogging effort ... It was the only school I went to 
s
o I have no standards of comparison but I wouldn't say unduly strict. We never felt that we were being treated too harshly ... some (teachers) were stricter than others and you had to behave yourself. You soon got a hundred lines if you didn't. If you wer
e }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2718234\charrsid9654639 persistently}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 
 obstreperous you were sent up to the head and about the second time you would get a caning which I, I was never caned ... but nobody thought very much of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7500533\charrsid9654639 it, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 nobody thought very badly of it in those last bit of gravy off your plate, all that 
sort of thing they were very strict about. And of course they did that thing themselves and one falls into the habit of it. It wasn't pointed out as much in strictness as much as in conversation you know ... and of course children imitate their parents an
d one took to it naturally enough.'
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid857977 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 Grace?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13729350 GH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 
'No, we never did though we were a church-going family. My father was churchwarden for many years and my mother used to do quite a lot of sort of church work and I was taken to church nearly every Sunda
y of my life. But rather gently led forward rather than pushed into it. And we never said grace except on Christmas day for some reason or other, a particularly large dinner perhaps, we said grace then but not at any other time.'
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid857977 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 Sunday School?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13729350 GH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 
'No, never. I am rather surprised that I didn't as, as I say, my parents were fairly closely connected with our church but at a fairly early age my mother took me in hand on Sunday afternoons and gave me what I could call Bible stories, no more than theol
o
gical instruction in any way and that continued perhaps getting a little bit more advanced but it was nearly all a matter of reading the Bible, getting me to learn sections of it, explaining any odd questions I asked but not much attempt ever to preach to
 me, so to speak. But I was taken to church very regularly and I didn't go to children's services, I went to the grown-up services and I do remember that very often the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2718234\charrsid9654639 sermons}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639  were miles above my head ... but I had to go and I had to sit still and attend, 
say my prayers every night before I went to bed. Gradually of course as you got older the services began to mean more. But after I went to school, apart from the fact that I'd had it drilled into me that I should go to church, every Sunday or nearly every
 Sunday, I wouldn't say that they were not interested by they left it really to my instruction at school and regular churchgoing rather than attempting themselves. In those days I think, again it's rather a question of class }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2718234\charrsid9654639 distinction;}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639  I don't remember my
 friends at our sort of social level going to Sunday School. Sunday Schools were very well patronized, Stockport used to boast it had the largest Sunday School in the world - children who went were nearly all children of the less well educated or working 
class people. I think the middle class people thought, rightly or wrongly, that they knew enough about it themselves to teach their own children...'
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13729350 GH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 Parents' social activities - 'That is of course one of the things which was greatly changed when my f
ather lost all his money ... In those days there was so much more leisure. Until this crash came we kept two maids, it wasn't a very big house .... I can't think what my mother did all day long, with two maids to do all the work, and a gardener one day a 
w
eek or something like that, and a washerwoman who came every Monday to do all the washing. So they had a great deal of free time ... Out of doors they both played tennis a good deal, my father used to play for the local club, and then in middle age my fat
her took up golf and he played for the local club in golf else. My mother by that time wasn't playing much in the way of games but in the big house we lived in we had, we hadn't got a tennis lawn, we had a croquet lawn, they used to play }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2718234\charrsid9654639 croquet}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639  with their 
friends at the weekends a bit. My grand parents had a big house with a tennis lawn, we used to go there to play tennis ... Indoors they played whist and bridge, I remember it sort of coming in, they used to have musical evenings too to some extent ... My 
m
other played the piano competently, my father sang a little bit, not very well. But they'd ask ... half a dozen friends in and they'd sit round the piano and take it in turns to sing a song, play a duet or that sort of thing. That used to happen during th
e
 winter. And a social custom which we were well in, which has gone right out now, amongst the married women of the place of the middle class was 'calling'. Every woman had her own day, her 'at home' day. I think ours was the third Thursday in the month we
l
l, on the third Thursday of the month the maid would have a clean bib and tucker and a nice tea laid on, everything like that, various other married women would walk in or be driven in hansoms or something like that. They'd all come in and they'd sit arou
n
d and chat and have tea and then perhaps go on to some other house. There might be some other person who also had the third Thursday and you'd do a round of them ... Mother had her book, called it her 'calling book' in which she had the names and addresse
s
 of all these friends and against each one was the name of their 'at home' day ... so about two or three times a year she would go to each house in turn but if you got a fair sized circle of friends that would fill in, if you wanted it to, two or three da
ys a week ... of course as a small boy I didn't see very much of it. I remember all these people being grandly shown in and putting cards in a silver tray in the hall and things like that and being ushered into the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2718234\charrsid9654639 drawing room}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 . Occasionally I was allowed i
n for a few minutes - 'this is my little boy Geoffrey' sort of thing. But that was a great feature of social life in those days ... there were strict rules as to whom you called on and whom you didn't. Intruders were I think made to feel a little bit unwe
lcome. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2718234\charrsid9654639 It had one advantage, if a newcomer came to the neighbourhood, someone would befriend her and put it round that Mrs. So-and-so is very pleasant and her At Home day was so-and-so. }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 And people didn't wait for introductions, they just called and handed i
n their cards. They might say conversationally - 'well, Mrs. Hampson called on you I believe and she asked me if I'd call as well' - and so on. So in that way a newcomer would soon make a circle of friends. It was all very pleasant ... On the other hand i
f
 you didn't speak the King's English ... you just didn't get any further, you didn't get brought into the magic circle at all. Then they used to, there used to be a certain number of rather formal dances during the winter which my parents used to go to. B
ut not a great deal of that. My father used to go at times to a men's club in the district - he wasn't a member but he knew a lot of people who were. They played cards and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2718234\charrsid9654639 billiards}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639  and things like that. They both read a good deal ... mainly I would say, th
e better class of novelists of the day, H.G. Wells, Arnold Bennett, Trollope. We had huge bookshelves with bound leather volumes of Dickens and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2718234\charrsid9654639 Thackeray}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639  and Walter Scott. Well, my parents had read all those I suppose in their youth and I was more or less 
compelled to read some in my youth ... some of which I liked and some I didn't. 'They were members of a library. W.H. Smith or something like that, and the better class of novels and biography probably ... and used to take books out (a commercial one) ...
 
Paper 'We were faithful adherents to the 'Manchester Guardian' as everybody would be although my father was a Conservative in politics - for business and for general new of course there was nothing to touch the 'Guardian'. "The Times", hardly circulated u
p
 there and if you took any intelligent interest in affairs at all you took the 'Guardian' ... You might as a Conservative hate it for its Liberalism but there just wasn't anything to touch it ... The evening papers were the 'Evening News' and the 'Evening
s
 Chronicle' neither of which was up to much - my father used to get them sometimes ... Apart from what I so to speak had to read I read a good deal of Dickens, a good deal of Walter Scott, H.G. Wells, Arnold Bennett. I think those were the ones that made 
the most impression on me, particularly }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2718234\charrsid9654639 Bennett and}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639  Wells. I think I read Dickens and Scott and a little bit of }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2718234\charrsid9654639 Thackeray}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 . }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2718234\charrsid9654639 Thackeray}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639  bored me stiff. I soon gave up }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2718234\charrsid9654639 Thackeray}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 
 but ... the other two were partly because, well, everybody read them. You weren't e
xactly pushed into reading them but you weren't educated unless you read those ... Kipling, I was given various volumes of Kipling for Christmas presents by aunts and uncles to bring me up in the right way of the time. I liked Kipling ... We were always a
t school given a book to read over the holiday which we were examined on afterwards ... very dull they were too. ?'}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2718234\charrsid9654639 Life of Nelson and that sort of thing. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 Those just had to be ploughed through but I don't think I enjoyed them very much ... I used to make an 
effort to play both football, cricket, lacrosse, which was a great game round Stockport, not very successfully but I kept struggling along. I was always very fond of cycling. I had an ancient rusty old bicycle at a fairly early age and I was always a litt
l
e bit of a lone wolf even at a small age. I used to go off by myself on my bike for half the day or get some sandwiches and go off for the day sometimes. And cycling then was a good deal safer than it is now but on the other hand the roads were totally di
f
ferent ... and after five miles you were simply white with dust from head to foot ... I got to know the beginnings of Derbyshire and right down to the other end of Cheshire all on my own generally ... Of course school was six days a week, we worked Saturd
a
y mornings so there was six days' homework to be packed in. Sundays there was church and Saturday afternoon very often I'd go out to friends or friends would come in to me and we'd play about in the garden. We used to play ball games ... and then when our
 financial crash came I had a very quiet time for some years after that because I just hadn't got the pocket money or the facilities or anything like that that my older friends had. It made rather a mess of things in that way. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2718234\charrsid9654639 We moved down to a tiny little
 house with hardly any garden at all and there just wasn't the money for hobbies, games and things and I think that's where my love of cycling was cultivated - it's one of the cheapest things there is ... I remember once going to spend an afternoon with a
 friend of mine, a school friend, about my level, we used to sit next to teach other at school always, and he had a nice house and garden and a paddock at the back with a pony. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 
And I said something about how much it must have and all, lot of things he used 
to have. And he said well, he'd like to have a lot more but he only had half a crown a week pocket money. Well, my pocket money was a penny, literally, a Saturday penny ... every Saturday I was presented with a penny. You could buy a quarter of sweets for
 
a penny but you didn't do much on a penny a week. So that was rather the position between me and my friends which made life a little bit difficult ... I had a very great kindness (after the crash) ... one family in particular used to take me to the theatr
e in }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2718234\charrsid9654639 Manchester}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 
, and the opera once or twice, and things like that. They even had me away with them for a week once for a holiday and things like that and never expected any sort of return. They realised perfectly well that there was nothing much I could do
, the other fellow was about my own age and used to come round to our house a bit sometimes. But there was nothing much for us to do at our tiny house compared to the big place he had. He had a tennis lawn and things like that. I did have in that sort of 
w
ay a lot of kindness from people who realised we'd come a cropper. It was perhaps fortunate that I think it was generally realised that my father's failure was not due to any, what shall I say, dishonesty or hanky-panky or anything like that, just due to 
bad business, perhaps to some extent bad }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2718234\charrsid9654639 judgment}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 
, nothing that he need be ashamed of and so, both myself as a child and them as grown-up, we did get a lot of help in all sorts of ways ... they had to give up outdoor things. I think my father gave up being 
a member of the golf club for some years. Eventually he joined again }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2718234\charrsid9654639 when}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 
 things were a little better ... and they just didn't attempt to go out socially for bridge or things like that because if one did it meant have people back again and they just hadn't
 got the money to do these things. We really were, for a few years, very hard up, very hard up indeed. I've known my father go out and, I remember him going out once and selling his watch in order to buy us some food. Well when you've been brought up as w
e were in the sort of comfortable middle class, when you get down to that sort of level, it makes a hard life. But during the war and immediately afterwards things got better but they were never very good.'
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid857977 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 Domestic help at this time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13729350 GH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 'No, for a
 lot of the time we didn't. Then I remember for a few years we did have one maid. But I think really because no-one else would employ her - I think she'd been into the local lunatic asylum once or twice. She was a big strong hefty woman. I remember quite 
w
ell, one big tooth sticking out of her mouth. Not at all intelligent, used to do the most appalling things sometimes through lack of intelligence, very willing and very loyal and she could carry big packets of coal and keep the kitchen clean, do the washi
n
g up and things like that. And we paid her, I suppose very, very little probably. I think for a woman in her position she was thankful to get a home. She was kept warm and comfortable and mother paid for her uniform ... I think she realised the rest of th
e
 world was a bit harsh and we had this oldish woman for quite a long time. But of course when we were better off we had two, what you might call well trained, maid, one was a cook and the other was called a nurse-housemaid to look after me and do the sort
 
of housemaid job. This funny old thing we had later was nothing like that but she did do the rough work and took it off my mother's hands. Of course ... even in this tiny house we moved into, had a cellar downstairs and an attic upstairs with a ton of coa
l
 down the cellar and coal fires everywhere. Three bedrooms and an attic bedroom as well where the maid used to sleep. There was a lot of rough work ... and of course in a town like Stockport everything got dirty ... all the factories were pouring out coal
 
smoke and I don't think people, particularly down south, realize what it was like then. And we were living in a fairly pleasant suburb - if you had your window open for quarter of an hour you had to go round with a duster afterwards to clean up the smuts 
and things like that ... curtains were being washed continuously ... and one's clothes, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2718234\charrsid9654639 handkerchiefs}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 
, collars and things like that were quite filthy by the end of the day. So the amount of work of that sort was very considerable.'
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13729350 GH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 Of the maids 'I th
ink if fact I'm sure they were treated kindly and considerately and were paid, I suppose sufficient, for these days, but they were the maids and my mother was the mistress and there was a great, great gulf between them. Not so much a matter of strictness,
 
it was sort of almost automatic on both sides. They didn't expect to be treated as anywhere near equals, they expected to be treated kindly and that sort of thing but my mother and father took a sort of interest in their personal affairs ... but there was
 no attempt to break down the big social barriers between them at all, they were simply quite separate.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid857977 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 How did they treat you as a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13729350 GH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2718234\charrsid9654639 'Oh, on the whole very kindly. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 
The one who was the nurse-housemaid used to take me out for walks in the aft
ernoon sometimes, things like that, play with me a bit ... I think she was sometimes a little bit strict but I suppose like all small boys I probably needed it. I was no particular paragon I don't think. She was quite kindly and the cook was a typical coo
k
, rather a fat old thing, I suppose living on all the titbits. She used to allow me in the kitchen, that was a great treat, and feed me up on a few bits of cake ... and, but of course although they treated me as a child if I didn't behave myself I was alw
a
ys to them 'the young master' ... I called them I think, 'nurse' and 'cook' ... I think my mother used to call them by their Christian names, but, I know the cook's name was Alice, I've forgotten what the nurse's name was, it was just nurse and cook to me
.'
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13729350 GH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 
'Until we were too hard up we used to go regularly for a fortnight's holiday, generally to North Wales, which is the sort of holiday ground for the North of England. Either there or to places like St Anne's or Blackpool on the Lancashire coast. I 
don't remember ever getting any further afield than that, generally North Wales, we went round there quite a lot. Of course we had no car - one or two of our friends had cars, mostly doctors who needed it for the job but we never thought of having a car e
v
en when perhaps we could have afforded it. So one went down by train. But during the hard-up period, well, I used to go occasionally and stay with uncles and aunts and things like that but we virtually didn't have a holiday .... we were unique in that way
,
 but we rather took it for granted that every household had a dog ... I think most of my friends used to have a dog too actually ... just one of the English habits. 'At the Grammar School of course I did meet a good many boys who were so to speak rather o
f
 a lower level socially and I don't think that amongst us all together at school that it made much difference. At school we mixed together very much on level terms. I could hear even at that age that they spoke badly and perhaps behaved roughly and things
 
like that. But if they were good sorts and friendly I don't think it was a sort of natural phenomenon at all. As I say at school in school hours, playing games, everybody was very much on a level. The boy who was looked down on was the boy who sneaked or 
c
heated or something like that ... in that was there was quite a strict moral school boy code, a schoolboy code if you like, but that was amongst ourselves ... but if you left all your 'h's out and spoke with a broad accent that didn't matter a bit. If you
 
played a good game of football or something like that you were a little hero. It was outside school where the differences came in. I suppose one of the biggest dividing lines at a younger age was actually speech, accent, because of course you know all the
 
Northern districts have a fairly marked accent ... my parents were very strict about how they spoke and I very soon learnt to pick Christmas pantomime occasionally, mostly in Manchester, Stockport wasn't very much. It had a theatre but it was a poor sort 
o
f place ... and I think there was a music hall too ... Manchester then had four theatres ... we used to go to Belle Vue regularly. Belle Vue in those days was much more of a zoological garden and less of a general sort of entertainment place than it is no
w
 ... I used to be taken there ... most summers. Once in the summer generally ... they used to have great fireworks displays in the evenings. Apart from that visiting friends, relatives ... If you hadn't got a car it wasn't so easy to get about, you could 
g
o by train but I don't think we ever did very much except for the seaside holiday or going into Manchester. I think people in those days were more self-sufficient, amongst our sort of middle class people, either in the individual household or by combining
 with other households as for example the musical evenings my parents used to have ... I as a small child used to go out often for tea with cousins and other boys and girls ... We made our own games, played in the garden.'
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13729350 GH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 Pets - 'We had a succession
 of dogs, we nearly always had a dog of some sort or another. And at one time we had a cat as well. I had some greatly beloved rabbits, for some years, I had a rabbit hutch just outside the back door. And a bowl of goldfish ... I never remember when we di
d
n't have a dog ... I don't know whether out those other boys and girls who didn't speak so well probably because their parents in their turn didn't either. And then of course as you got higher up in school, of course having a grammar school education did 
t
end to differentiate you a little bit from those who went to the other schools ... by the time I was in the Sixth I had quite a fair smattering of Latin, I could speak French moderately, things which just weren't taught in the technical schools, the secon
d
ary schools and so on. And in your conversation well, things like that cropped up. I used to read French books for pleasure ... well, if I mixed with other boys who didn't know a word of French well, there wasn't the contact ... It wasn't a deliberate cho
o
sing, it was just that you weren't on the same ground. And although I stayed on at school until I was in the Sixth, a good number of my friends who started with me ... left at the age of eleven or twelve and went to public schools. Two of my best friends 
w
ent to Charterhouse ... well, I still kept in friendly contact with them although I didn't manage to go to anywhere like that but there was all the difference in the world between meeting those people at the age of fourteen or fifteen and meeting the boys
 
from the local technical school ... The differences were, I should say, far greater than they are now. You see, the sort of grammar school I was at was rather different from the county grammar school ... it was a very old foundation that went back to the 
1
400's and apart from a few scholarships you only got in if you passed good enough exams. And I don't know but there may have been a certain amount of social streaming as well. You had to have interviews with the headmaster ... he may have picked as many a
s he could of the sort of middle class, but some of my contemporaries there were the sons of shopkeepers, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2718234\charrsid9654639 mill managers}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 
, senior clerks and things like that. I don't remember anybody at school with me who belonged to what I would call real working class, peo
ple who turned out to the mills at six o'clock in the morning ... their children just didn't get to the grammar school at all because they didn't get the preliminary education to enable them to pass the entrance exam ... So we were in the town a little el
ite among the children. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2718234\charrsid9654639 
Those who were better off, of course, went on to the boarding schools but those who didn't, if you were a grammar school boy you considered yourself just a little bit ... a cut above all the others.' }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 When the sister was born - 'I thi
nk it did make a good deal of difference, because of the big gap between us ... nine years ... And quite suddenly my mother and father who had been good companions to be were suddenly occupied for some years looking after a small baby. And I don't think I
 
was ever so to speak jealous, I helped to look after her and so on. There was a big enough age difference for me to help a bit, take her for walks and so on. And we were good friends ... but I was thrown even more on my own and for the reasons I mentioned
 
before I had to lead a rather lonely life anyway ... I think I could fairly say that the first two or three years after my sister was born I was more lonely than ever because I saw less of my parents because they were looking after this small girl and whe
n
 I did see them they were doing things with her ... when she was four or five I was thirteen or fourteen and if we went for summer holidays I would have liked to have been learning to play golf with my father - instead of that I was sitting on the beach m
a
king sand castles to amuse my sister and things like that ... I think it's a very difficult situation when you have a big gap between two children ... anything like nine or ten years. Id does create a little bit of difficulty in the family ... There was n
o
 diminution in their kindness and care for me, they just had less time ... they hadn't got time to play games with me ... they were busy with this small girl. We were always, I think, a very happy family. I recollect very few rows with my parents or anyth
i
ng like that, no more than I'm sure any child has to be punished ... we were always a very united crowd. But it did rather push me out on my own. And then I went to business very young. I was only fourteen when I left school and went to business. Looking 
b
ack on it now I'm quite certain that it was a mistake but a mistake in good faith. My father was a business man and his father before him and so on. And to him business was the thing unless you went in to the professions. And at the age of fourteen throug
h
 some friends I was offered the entry into a very wealthy and very good class firm of merchants (cotton) in Manchester. They wanted a youngster to go to them as an apprentice and they wanted him at once. Well, they knew something of my father through mutu
a
l friends, they also went to the headmaster of the school and said could he recommend anyone and he said 'well, there's a lad named Hampson' - or something like that and they said 'oh yes we knew of him already' - and so the two things converging settled 
i
t for me. 'Well, I wasn't given much option about it. My ambition in those days, my interest was in science, was to struggle along and get a scholarship if I could to Oxford or Cambridge. But my father came to me, and of course I knew what our financial p
o
sition was, and said - here you are, the opportunity of a lifetime, to start with a firm like that. You're made for life if you start with anyone as good as this and so on. I think you ought to go and you can't start too early, the more business training 
you have the better. And these people could train you ... And so I left school one Saturday morning and started work on the Monday morning and worked for fifty odd years }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2718234\charrsid9654639 after that}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 . But I think really it was too young ... I know lots of boys did ... but I t
hink for anyone with a background as we had, to leave school at fourteen was a great mistake. Perhaps unfortunately for me I'd reached the Sixth whereas most of the boys in the Sixth were fifteen or sixteen while I was only fourteen. If I hadn't got to th
e
 Sixth I probably shouldn't have been recommended for this job. So in fact my hard work and pushing on in that way rather let me down because it pushed me out into the world too young. It seem odd to think at the age of fourteen going off to Manchester in
 
a hard bowler had and a little grey suit and so on to start business ... and I continued with this firm well, till early in the 1920's. It was perfectly true what my father said, they were a first class firm. During all my career of course I've been able 
t
o say - well, of course I started my career with So-and-So, it's a firm everybody knows. And I suppose in a way that's some small advantage but like a lot of very good firms the mere fact of being there was looked on almost as an honour. So they didn't bo
t
her to pay you very much. The idea that you were going to get any money out of it was, didn't occur to them very much ... I went to them on a five year apprenticeship. There again this class system comes into it. If you were working for a firm as an appre
ntice, you worked for very little for five years and you were taught the business. And after that you than became a junior }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2718234\charrsid9654639 salesman}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639  or something like that and the way was open right up to becoming a senior partner if you were good enough ... If you went in 
as a clerk, you might become a senior clerk but a clerk you always were ... you never got away from a desk and books and things. You never had any executive powers, you never mixed with any other people, you were just an office man. And there you were the
 two separate grades.'
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13729350 GH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 
'If you went as an apprentice with all these dazzling prospects of what you might someday, they paid me special generous terms because I lived outside Manchester. So the first year I was paid }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6580700 \'a3}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 15, next year }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6580700 \'a3}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 20, next year }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6580700 \'a3}
{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 25, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6580700 \'a3}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 35 ... I think it added up to }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6580700 \'a3}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 125 spread put over five years and that was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6580700 \'a3}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 
5 a year than the other apprentices got, to cover me for my railway fare ... even in those days }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6580700 \'a3}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 
15 a year wasn't very much ... I was paid quarterly. So at the end of the first mo
nth I remember very tentatively and tactfully suggesting to some other fairly junior person in the office - 'when do I get any sort of pay' - 'End of the quarter'. And at the end of the quarter I got a cheque for }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6580700 \'a3}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 3.15 ... of course I didn't go anywhere ve
ry much, obviously my parents kept me at home and helped me out with the cost of clothes and things. But it was a very low level to start ... I opened my first banking account, at the age of fourteen, my father again, a business man, said - you ought to h
ave your own banking account ... so I was given an introduction to a bank manager in Manchester ... I think I used to pay for my own midday meal in Manchester which was I remember 10d., caf\'e9
 near the office. And then I paid something towards my season ticke
t but there just wasn't enough money to pay for it all and so I think my father used to make up the rest of that. I think they used to pay for my clothes because again, it was so little it just didn't exist. And I'd get a shilling or two a week pocket mon
ey and that was all.'
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13729350 GH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 
'The firm were a firm of grain and flour importers, an international firm in those days, with four or five branches in this country, branches in the Argentine, North America, India ... and they were one, they and another firm, w
ere regarded as two of the sort of jambs of the business. They were private firms, they weren't limited companies ... they handled millions of pounds worth of imports of grain and that sort of thing ... My first day, I think, I was given a typewriter and 
t
old I'd got to teach myself how to type, stuck on a lot of stamps, I was told to keep the fire going in the partners' room, like all the fires right throughout the office, and I was told it was told it was time all the ink wells were washed out and I got 
a
ll the ink bowls and washed all the ink bowls out. Everything was done in pen and ink in those days, letters were typed for other people and the first year or so I did very little except gradually I learnt to type. Everything that went out of the office h
a
d to be copied in an old fashioned copying press ... with a big handle you turn round and damp sheets ... I was given charge of the postage book, every penny had to be recorded in that. And I worked a small telephone switchboard. I added up columns of fig
u
res for other people, ran errands for the partners and things like that. I was the lowest thing in the office ... I never finished my five years because the war came but all the time I was gradually being taught something about the business. They were per
f
ectly fair - I certainly had to start at the bottom and really stoking the fires was about the most regular job I had. But as I say I was gradually shown and I was told to come and see Hampson how we do this, come and write a letter to So-and-So as you wo
u
ld write and I'll tell you how it ought to be written ... I was treated gradually as a youngster who was going to move up into the important positions in the firm. The next man immediately above me who was just out of his apprenticeship was a salesman. I 
used to go into his office and listen to him telephoning to customers, writing letters, to see how it was done. Well, if I'd been just a clerk I shouldn't. I'd have been out in the general office, entering up ledgers }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7500533\charrsid9654639 b}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 ut I was shown how. Once or twice to my
 great joy if he was off ill, I was allowed to do a little bit of telephoning myself and so on and gradually I was taught how a merchant business like that runs and I suppose if it hadn't been for the war I should have gone up the ladder in that way .... 
W
hen the war came my firm were made the agents of the British Government for the purchase of food supplied abroad ... and our business swelled up enormously ... we were importing wheat and flour for the whole country and so on ... and then I went into the 
A
rmy. When I came out, I came back to find what had been an office, of, I think there were about six of us, had about thirty or something like that. There was this huge expansion. Of course Government business came to an end and we gradually shut down to a
 
small private firm again ... Eventually I in my turn became a salesman though it was a wonderful firm to work for in many ways, the pay was so poor, I eventually left them and branched out on my own ... Although it was a fine firm there was no money in it
.
 'The firm consisted of, first of all, one of the partners who was partly based in Liverpool, he used to come to Manchester one or two days a week. Then there was a manager. Then this junior salesman and myself. We were in so to speak the top grade. And t
h
en there were two clerks, and eventually a girl ... who were doing clerical work. Well, the clerks showed me how to keep all the books and things. I don't think they particularly wanted to, they were told they had to, because part of my training I had to 
l
earn how to do the books, learn how to post ledgers and make up balance sheets. I was taught to do it and used to help them to do it although I was never given it to do as a full time job myself - it was their job but I used to help ... take on some of th
e
 work and so on. '... I think they were all very friendly, they may have thought, though they never said it, that this youngster's one day going to be our boss ... there was this differentiation. But they were always very friendly and nice. The man whom I
 
didn't get on with was the manager of the place. He was a bit of a swank really, he used to order me about as though I was a little bit of dirt ... I suppose it was just his manner ... The senior partner when he came down was very charming indeed. But of 
c
ourse one looked on him with sort of reverence, big noise like that. He was very kind ... There were all kinds of strictness about office life ... for example nobody was allowed to smoke at all till six o'clock. If you worked after six you were allowed to
 
smoke, six was the closing hour so to speak ... nine till six ... And if you worked after half past six you were sent out to tea the firm's expense, given one and sixpence and told to go out and have some tea. We used to work sometimes till seven and half
 
past. But hours were very strict. Again because I lived outside Manchester I was given a little concession I was allowed to arrive up to five past nine instead of nine, because there'd be a train that fitted for that. But if I came in at ten past nine the
 
question would be raised at once - 'Why are you late this morning Hampson? Train late. Couldn't you get here quicker?' - and they were very strict over lunch. My lunch hour was twelve to one but if I went to the bank with the firm's cheques which I very o
f
ten did, it was quite out of my way, I was allowed five minutes extra. But if I came in at seven minutes past ... I'd see the manager - 'Busy today, Hampson, busy at the bank?' - he was very strict on things like that ... very strict on the work too. I le
a
rned to type as I told you but nothing was ever allowed to go out of the office that had been altered ... I used to get away with it sometimes, I found ways of using a hard rubber with great care ... nothing ever left the office that was not quite perfect
 ...'
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13729350 GH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 
Spare time - 'I used to read a lot in the evenings ... go out with friends a bit, not very much because going out cost money ... the beginning of the pictures, very extraordinary flickering pictures in an old hall where you sat on a long wooden
 benches ... I used to go there at the cost, I think, of sixpence, when I could. In the summer I still stuck to cycling, did a little bit of fishing occasionally, walked, used to go long walks with myself and the dog. Occasionally got a little bit of tenn
i
s or a little bit of golf if someone was kind enough to sort of take me under their wing, but I wasn't much good as I didn't get practice and I couldn't afford to join the golf club. A lot of time spend very quietly really ... if you were hard up there is
n
't very much you can do really. I used to go to Stockport library and borrow books a lot, the Public Library, that was a great help because of course it didn't cost anything. I used to very occasionally used to go to the Halle promenade concerts, and it u
s
ed to cost and shilling to go and stand on the promenade, a great joy occasionally during the winter. Again you see if you have very little money it restricts you right away because if I stayed to go to a Halle concert I had to have some sort of a meal, n
o
rmally of course I went home and had my meal and it didn't cost me anything ... Anything that cost half a crown was an expensive evening out ... Most of my friends were still at school, that gave me another spell of, rather loneliness, cutoffness. Those o
f
 them that went to boarding school were away and some of my very good friends were at the Grammar School stayed on there a year or two ... And I soon found that going to business cut me of from them a lot. I don't mean internationally on either part but I
 
was suddenly transported into a different world though I used to go to classes in the evening for shorthand and accountancy and things like that ... I used to go in the winter one or two evenings a week to classes and things like that ... and so I began t
o get into a different world of my own.'
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13729350 GH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 
Outbreak of war - 'I was too young (to join up) ... I was only 16 when war broke out and they didn't take anyone under 18 ... there was very great feeling in those days about volunteering for the army, all wha
t you might call the best people, quite regardless of social class, the best sorts, volunteered to go, and I have had some unhappy moments because I suppose I looked old for my age when I was 17 and travelling up and down to business and looking like I su
p
pose a young business man. I was once presented with a white feather in a railway carriage. Unpleasant remarks about some people 'isn't it about time some people started to do their duty' and things like that and it was rather unpleasant ... And so as soo
n as I was 18 I volunteered, I wasn't going to be label}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7500533\charrsid9654639 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 
ed conscript ... you were registered and given a shilling. The King's shilling to show you were enrolled ... and then they sent for you when they wanted you and I was called up when I was 18 and seven 
months, something like that ... A lot of young men got commissions ... they got them without any military training at all, to begin with certainly ... A cousin of my mother's was colonel of the local infantry battalion and if I'd have liked to go to him .
.. I've no doubt I'd have got a commission quite easily but I was a bit }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2718234\charrsid9654639 conscientious}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 
 ... so I never pulled any strings ... I was demobilized in March 1919. (details) 'By that time my father was doing better, again I suppose because of inflation. He started
 again after his failure as a sort of merchant in a small way in the sort of things he'd done before, cotton waste and things like that. And I suppose he always carried a certain amount of stock and the effect of inflation was a rise in profits the whole 
t
ime. So in the early 1920's although we weren't very well off by any means it was a bit more comfortable ... and then of course one of the post war slumps came ... he was naturally the sort of man who bought everything at the top of the market and then wh
en the slump came he was very nearly ruined all over again ... on rising markets we were all right but on falling markets ...!
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13729350 GH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 I can give you a few recollections about the working-class people as I remember them as a child, but perhaps they will not 
be very important. The men and women about the place were just part of the scene I was brought up with (like the people in one of Lowry's pictures), and I probably took no particular notice of them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13729350 GH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 Certainly I did see some to and from school, but I 
suppose, in general, they went to work before I went to school, and left work after I did. The men wore heavy boots or clogs, the women clogs almost exclusively, with shawls over their heads. The sound of a lot of women hurrying along in clogs is an odd t
hing, quite unlike anything else.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13729350 GH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 
There used to be a certain amount of drunkenness. I distinctly remember having occasionally seen drunken women whilst on my way to school in the morning, though how they got drunk at that time of day I don't know. Per
haps they had been working night shifts, but where did they get the drink? Drunken men were not uncommon, especially on Saturdays.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13729350 GH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 I have some impressions about that sort of thing which may or may not be accurate or interesting. I feel fairly sure th
at there was more drunkenness in all classes in those days, but also a far larger number of strict abstainers than there are now (not many of the latter in the middle class, so the reasons may have been economic as well as moral). Nowadays, I am sure, the
re is much less actual drunkenness, but far fewer teetotalers.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13729350 GH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 
There was an element of class and church in all this. Middle-class people were usually Anglican, and not TT., though I remember a group of people (relatives by marriage) who were rather in
tellectual Unitarians and strict T.T. We looked upon them as clever, but cranks! In the lower middle class and better working class you were either Anglican and drank a bit (or too much!), or Non-Conformist and T.T. If Anglican you voted Conservative, if 
N
on-Conformist you voted Liberal, or if you were what we would call "leftish" you voted Labour. The lowest grade of working class, labourers, "navies" and such-like, contained a good sprinkling of Roman Catholics - Irish. They were noted for drunkenness, f
ighting and hard physical work, and of course were R.C. How they voted I don't know - probably they weren't able to read or write anyway.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13729350 GH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 In the days before bull-dozers and so on, one saw a great deal more work being done by hand - road-work and so f
orth. - Men doing that sort of work always wore corduroys with a leather strap below each knee. (Makes bending easier.) No collars or ties, of course, either an open shirt or if you wanted to look a bit more respectable, with a knotted kerchief round the 
neck. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2718234\charrsid9654639 Long skirts and thick black woollen stockings for the workmen.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13729350 GH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 
If trade was bad or if you didn't work hard enough, you just got the sack. I have an idea the pool of untrained labourers was virtually unlimited, but of course, if you had some skil
l, as some of the men and women in my father's mill had, you were sure of a job unless there was a general slump. This happened from time to time. My grandfather was Chairman of the Board of Guardians for some years, and I used to hear a bit about it. Eve
n
 if people went to the Board for help, I don't think it was particularly generous; just enough to keep body and soul together. I know my grandfather used to be upset at times, at the starvation and suffering there was, but there wasn't much that could be 
done, because the Board just weren't given the money. Many working class families had immense pride and wouldn't go "on the parish" until the last gasp, they would just, "clem". (A dialect meaning to go short of food, or warmth, or both).
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13729350 GH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 "Going to sc
hool" gives me some ideas as to contrasts. The houses we lived in whilst I was at school were, as it happens, all about 25 minutes walk from the school, which was in the centre of the town. - I did that walk four times daily, and so did everyone else. (La
t
er I biked). I never had dinner at school in the whole of my seven years. It just didn't occur to us that there was any great hardship in walking that much, with a bag full of books, but nowadays, the children have to have public transport or a school bus
, or else the papers are full of howls! School dinners cost 1/-, but the only boys who stayed regularly were those who came in by train from a distance.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13729350 GH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 I vaguely remember "half-timers", though I never knew any personally. "Half-timers" were boys who worked half a day in }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2718234\charrsid9654639 a mill}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 
 (usually a cotton-mill) and went to school the other half. They can't have learnt much, but of course they were learning a trade, got better jobs as soon as they were allowed to leave school. I don't know much about what they d
id, but I believe some were "little piecers", i.e. they watched the spinning frames and pieced together broken threads.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13729350 GH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 Children with bare legs and feet were nothing at all unusual, and one saw quite a lot of bow legs due, I suppose, to rickets. The 
death rate amongst working class children was high, so, of course, was the birth-rate. There used to be epidemics of diphtheria, which was normally fatal, and if you got scarlet fever your chance wasn't too good. I remember the son of our washerwoman got 
tuberculosis of the lung; it was just accepted fatalistically. He just stayed at home in bed, coughing, until he died. You would hear women talking about their children, "Ay, I've 'ad seven and buried three".
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13729350 GH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 I suppose the working-class children who w
ere going to and from school at the same time as I was were poorly dressed sometimes, but I don't think it made any impression on me. As with }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2718234\charrsid9654639 so many}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639  things, differences between classes, whether in clothes, speech, education or opportunities were accepted as normal. It is the abnormal or unusual which sticks in one's mind.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13729350 GH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 
Another feature of the street scene which one does not see now, or at any rate not often, was "tramps". These were men of no settled abode or occupation who tramped from one workhou
se to another each day. The workhouse was opened to them at a fixed time in the afternoon, they were given an evening meal, a bed, and breakfast, but then they had to move on, but not before they had done their "work" (hence the term "workhouse" no doubt)
. What this was I couldn't say with certainly, but I think rough simple work like that given in some prisons - sewing }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2718234\charrsid9654639 mailbags}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 
, chopping wood, shifting coal and that sort of thing. There was a workhouse in or near every sizeable town in the north, and the m
en had regular routes, I believe, which they followed. North of us they would go to somewhere in Manchester, south probably to Macclesfield, and east to Warrington. If they couldn't make it in a day, the just slept rough and begged food somewhere.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \ltrpar\s15\qj \fi-461\li461\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid857977 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13729350 GH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 B
egging in the streets was common, although I think they had to make a pretence of selling matches or bootlaces, which no one every actually took. As a small child I used to be given a penny sometimes to give to them, but I was strictly enjoined never to t
alk to tramps or gypsies. I daresay a lot of the tramps were harmless, they just didn't fit into society, but they were generally filthily dirty and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2718234\charrsid9654639 unkempt}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 . I remember I was thoroughly scared of gypsies, owing to stores that they kidnapped small children who were never seen again! Whether this had any basis in fact I don't know, but it was the sort of wa}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2718234\charrsid9654639 r}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1795308\charrsid9654639 ning story that was drummed into one about the age one was being taught never to touch matches or turn the gas on.
\par }}