{\rtf1\adeflang1025\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\adeff0\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang2057\deflangfe2057{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}{\f38\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f39\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f41\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f42\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f43\fbidi \froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}
{\f44\fbidi \froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f45\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f46\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f48\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}
{\f49\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f51\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f52\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f53\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f54\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}
{\f55\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f56\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden 
Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs20 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}}
{\*\latentstyles\lsdstimax156\lsdlockeddef0}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid1593454\rsid2321936\rsid3029804\rsid9136150\rsid12527977\rsid16721822}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 11.0.0000;}{\info{\title Information about interviewee}{\author PRASAD3}{\operator lhorto}
{\creatim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min9}{\revtim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min9}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords6553}{\nofchars37356}{\nofcharsws43822}{\vern24613}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 http://schemas.microsoft.com/office/word/20
03/wordml}}\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1800\margr1800\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0\ltrsect 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\donotembedsysfont0\donotembedlingdata0\grfdocevents0\validatexml1\showplaceholdtext0\ignoremixedcontent0\saveinvalidxml0\showxmlerrors1\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace180
\dgvspace180\dghorigin1800\dgvorigin1440\dghshow1\dgvshow1\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\splytwnine\ftnlytwnine\htmautsp\nolnhtadjtbl\useltbaln\alntblind\lytcalctblwd\lyttblrtgr\lnbrkrule\nojkernpunct\rsidroot9136150 \fet0
{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}\ilfomacatclnup0\ltrpar \sectd \ltrsect\linex0\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ltrpar
\ql \fi-461\li461\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid16721822 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\ul\insrsid16721822\charrsid16072257 Information about interviewee}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid16721822 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid16721822\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\ql \fi-461\li461\ri0\widctlpar\tx2057\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid16721822 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16721822\charrsid16072257 Date of birth}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid16721822    \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16721822\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16721822  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1593454 1903}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid16721822\charrsid16072257 
\par Gender}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16721822           \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16721822\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16721822  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1593454 F}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16721822 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16721822\charrsid16072257 Marital status}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16721822 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16721822\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid16721822  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1593454 Single}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16721822\charrsid16544153 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16721822\charrsid16072257 Occupation}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16721822 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16721822\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16721822  
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1593454 Housekeeper}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16721822\charrsid16072257 
\par Geographic region}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16721822 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16721822\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16721822  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1593454 
Isle of Burra}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16721822\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\qj \fi-461\li461\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid16721822 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Could you say your name?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 My name is Nan Mackinnon.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Were you born on Barra?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 
Yes, I was born on the Island of Barra, yes. Yes. And - when I was four years old my father and - the whole family, we came over to the Island. But we lived on the other side of the island at that time, and - I remember to this day the very first corn tha
t I saw - growing you know. Because - we were just on the rocks in Barra in Katangaval. They had just the house on the rocks. You see, it was so thickly populated. And they took possession of this island and they came over and - then built - they built th
e
ir house here, such as they were, they weren't up to much at the time because - times were very hard, and the poor people weren't looked after at all the way they are looked after today. So - my father and the family came over. To live on the island. And 
t
hen - when the island was divided into crofts my father didn't get a croft down there at all, he got it on the - just near - the place where the - where the jetty is. So we had to move out again, after being three years there, we had to move house again d
o
wn to the other - end of the island. But - that's - we lived in Coalis first and we had to come to Cargrich. Caragrich is - it's - Caragrich, it really means - the Kings fishing rock. You know how they fish off the rocks here. Well they - you've seen them
 fishing off the rocks - 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 You mean the lobster fishing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 
No, no. They fish with their - their rods. They fish off the rocks. They'd get quite a few and all. Specially at high tide. And - and that's what it was called. Really called but they just -
 cut it short and called Caragrich today, well that's where I spent the best part of my life. And the whole family was there, my brother, my eldest brother, he'd be about - twenty I suppose when we came to Caragrich, he was away at the - he was at sea of 
course, they all went there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 How many were in the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 
There were seven altogether in the family, and one girl died when she was seven years old. She died with the measles. That was when we were in Kentangaval, she died of the measles. There were seven altogether. There were - five girls and two boys.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Did your mother come from Barra?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 
My mother - came from Mingulay. She was born and brought up in Mingulay. But she married a Barra man, you see, they used to meet because - they used to come to }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9136150\charrsid3029804 C}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 
rowlie and that, and my mother was only twenty-two when she left Mingulay, came over to Barra. They married very young in those days. But in my day they didn't marry so young. But they've gone back to it again. Yes. I can see that the - the young 
ones here, they're going back to my grandmother's and grandfather's time. And marrying very young nowadays.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 You were one of the younger ones in the family were you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 I was the youngster of the family, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 What year were you born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 In 1903. December 1903, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 So you don't really remember the life in Castlebay?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 No. Very faintly. Very faintly.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 So the house that you had here had a kitchen and two bedrooms?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Yes, yes, kitchen and two bedrooms, yes. Yes. And three - three windows, two - windows at the front and one at the back.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Were the girls expected to help inside the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Well - you see - when they - when the girls were over school age, we left school at fourteen at that time, when the girls - the girls w
ere over the school}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9136150\charrsid3029804  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 
age they went to service. And - one after - gradually they were all going and - and what was - there wasn't very much to be done in a house really at the time because - you weren't as advanced as what they are today. There was the cows 
to milk, you know, and - and that and there was butter to be made and crowdie as we called it you know the whey - the - the - work up the sour milk and make it into crowdie. That was to be done. Washing the dishes, the whole - there was a whole lot of dis
h
es in that time - at that time, that - every dish in the house was on a dresser, you know. And - everybody had a big display of - of dishes. And these had to be washed every Saturday, so that they'd be shining on Sunday. That's the way I remember it at fi
rst, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Do you think that you and your sisters would have set tasks in the home and then the boys have different things to do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Yes. Yes. The boys had to carry the water of course. The boys had to carry the water and - and - they had to look aft
er the cow. Keep it away from the corn. And - the girls had to help wash up the dishes and - and keeping the pot clean. Putting water in the pot for the porridge and that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 At that time would the men help with the cows or just the boys?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 No. Men 
- never worked - along with - at the cows at that time at all. They did at the time of the harvest you know and - if the cow had to be - tethered or anything like that, or - or if the cow was - to be - when they started - getting them into the byre in the
 
wintertime. They used to help then. But as far as milking was concerned - they - they never fetched the cow on that day because - it - it was - thought to be - it protected the women. They were thought - thought to be a - a woman's task. But nowadays the 
men, they help a lot in the house nowadays.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Your father wouldn't help in the house then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Your father. No. Not him. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Not even if your mother was ill?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Well I - I don't - remember my mother being ill, without one of - my sisters being 
in the house. I don't know what he did like that - he did - once - now - I remember them telling - that once my mother took ill. When we were in Barra, it was supposed to be a - a sort of fever. And nobody goes near the house. And - my second eldest siste
r, she was only two month old, and he nursed my mother and he nursed the little girl and - oh he - he very nearly went off his head with the want of sleep. He couldn't let her sleep. I suppose he got his full share at that time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Would he help with the children at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh yes, he would, yes. Yes. But he was usually away from home you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 When he was fishing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Well, they used to go to the fishing in the summertime. And in the wintertime they went to Glasgow to work in the - in the gaswork
s. And how do you think, of this, when in Glasgow, they could neither read nor write, it's a mystery to me. Because - I had a job making my way there when I went there. I was - completely lost. I was as if in a dream when I went to Glasgow, I thought - bu
t
 you know, my father, I had heard him arguing with my - one of my sisters once. She was away for five years. Well, she wasn't - all the time away but - she was coming for holidays and - back and forward, and she was in Glasgow and Greenock and all those p
l
aces. And I - and I heard them arguing about - one of the stations in Glasgow. The railway stations in Glasgow. And it was my father that was right. Mind you and - and he could neither read nor write. But my mother could read and write, well - she wasn't 
very good at it but she could make an effort. Yes, well they had a - they had a school in Mingulay. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Were there many families on Mingulay then?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh quite a lot, yes. In my mother's time, yes. And I remember her telling us that when she was at
 school - the inspector once came to Barra, and - my mother and her brother and a cousin of theirs were brought to Borve in Barra from Mingulay, to be inspected. Just imagine. Those poor children coming all that way to Borve.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Would your father tell you stories?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 
Yes, he had quite a few stories about - Barra and the way they - the - there were Jackinnons on Barra you see, my - my - my - my grandfather and my great-grandfather and my great-great-grandfather, they were grazing the crofts to the MacNe
ils of Barra. And - my mother - my father - those tales about the Mackinnons of Barra and the things that used to go on at the time and all that, and - people he used to - to meet when he was away. He worked for a - for a good few years on the estate of -
 of - what do you call it now - some part in Argyllshire. It was a Mrs Burnley Campbell. What was it now? Colin - Colintraire. Argyllshire, yes. He worked for a good while there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Your father did?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 My father, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 What was he doing there then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 He was there as a handyman.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Before he married you mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh no, after he was married.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 In the winter was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 In the winter, in the summer, he just took a - he - he - that's - my - my cousin, she was a schoolteacher and she met 
this lady, and this Mrs Burnley Campbell asked if she could get her a - a man from Barra to be a handyman. Well she liked the people of - she came to Barra for her holiday and she liked the people of Barra. So - my cousin, he was her uncle you know, she g
ot him the job. And he went there. Of course I was - I don't remember him being there at all, because we were in Barra at that time. Then he went back to the fishing again.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 And worked the crofts?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Worked the crofts.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Was it your brothers more who worked the croft?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 
It was my father that worked the croft, at first. And then, when my brothers came on about - my - my eldest brother was at sea, and then when - my other - other brother was old enough to look after the croft he looked after the croft.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 How did you manage when he was away in the winter, who would look after the animals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 
We had to look after the animals ourselves then. Mind there wasn't very much to be done, just - if there was any - we - there were any cows, milked the 
cows, milked them. They were just let - let out of the byre and then - we went for them again. At the night and - tied them in again 'til the morning.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Did you have sheep as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Not very many, just eight. Eight, eight of them. We weren't allowe
d to have many because - you see there was - quite a - a lot on the croft you know. And there wasn't enough graxing - for everybody to have - lots of sheep.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Did you have any horses?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 No. Horses weren't allowed here.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 What about hens?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh we had a lot of hens, and ducks. Yes, we had ducks.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Can you tell me how you managed for washing, did you have to use the stream at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 There - there was no stream - down where we were. We had to carry the water. Had to boil it on the fire.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Seawater?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 
No, no. No. We had to carry the water from the well. You see, when the Department of Agriculture took over the island, they - they - they b}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9136150\charrsid3029804 u}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 ilt the - the pumps for us. Before that it was just - a well and you had to dip your - your 
bucket in the well. But - when the Department took over they looked after the water, they just - well it was a little better than what it was, but we had to carry it over, and we're still without running water here.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Would there be a regular washday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Yes, there was, usually Monday. Usually Monday, and if it was raining on the Monday it was left 'til the Tuesday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Could you tell me a bit about how meals were served at that time, would you all sit at the table?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh everyone was sitting at the table, you had to. To - well you - you didn't have it the way we do, you'd got to be back in time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 How was it served, was there a big plate in the middle?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 There was a - big plate in the middle, yes. The - the - potatoes usually - was - well 
at dinnertime we had potatoes it was in a big dish right in the middle of the table. And take out one or two, take a few. But - when the porridge was there - sort of - it wasn't a plate we had for the porridge, it was a bowl. I don't suppose you've seen a
ny of them. In those days there was quite a lot of - of - more like - like flowerpots now I think. And everybody had a lot of them, that's where the porridge was placed. There are smaller ones nowadays but they're not as big as the ones we had.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Were you allowed to talk during meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh yes. We got many a slap. Yes. We hadn't to remark - to pass a remark on anybody - that wasn't very -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Would that be your mother who would p}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9136150\charrsid3029804 u}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 nish you like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 My mother, yes, my mother and my father too.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Were you expected to eat a bit of everything or could you choose what you wanted?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 
Oh - there wasn't - there weren't many varieties to choose from I'm telling you, in those days as I told you already, times were very hard. And if the father wasn'
t working - all the family had - had to do without a lot of things. There wasn't - there was no Social Security in those days. The poorest people were - were the - well I meant, they - they weren't looked after as they - would be nowadays. Them that - hav
e big families nowadays - don't need to worry about working, the social security looks after them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Was there no help at all, even the Parish wouldn't help?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh no. No. Oh it was a come down. There was nobody in the - on the Parish in my day except
 - those that - were left alone, you see, there - there was no assistance for old women or old men or anything in those days. And if you weren't - able to work or bedridden or anything like that, you'd get it but - of course you couldn't - nobody else cou
l
d keep them for what they were getting. It was a very very poor existence. And - the older people - when - there was no pension, you see. And of course it was - in grand - my grandmother, she received a pension a - a while before she died, she died after 
w
e went to Caragrich. And before that there was no pension for the older folk. But the family took them in - one of the family took them in, or they stayed for a while from one - one person of the family could be there. That's the way the old people were l
ooked after in those days. There was no pension or anything. No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 And no way of saving, did you have sick clubs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 No. There was - there was no organi}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9136150\charrsid3029804 z}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 ations like that. No, no. No. Oh they're very rich now compared to what they were in my day.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Could you ask for a second helping at meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh certainly, yes. Yes. Oh certainly, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Were they strict about the way you sat at table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Yes, they were. And you had to say your grace. You had to say your grace and you had to say your pray
ers before you went to bed, and you had to say your prayers in the morning.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Was that family prayers, all together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh - family prayers, but - if you were late - say if you were sent for an errand somewhere, and if you weren't in time for the pra
yers - you had to kneel down and say your prayers. You had to repeat the - the prayer after your mother, or father. Even at school - if we were late, if we happened to be late for school - we had to kneel down and say our prayers at the door before we get
 - we'd get right in then. And - the teacher would say, kneel down and say your prayer.;
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Did you have to wait until everybody had finished and then say grace at the end or could, you go when you'd finished your meal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh we had to stay 'til everybody was finished, yes. And then - well the grace was said at the beginning of the meal, not after.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Did you have knives and forks, were they strict about that kind of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Yes. Yes, we had - yes. Such as they were, they weren't - they weren't -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Not every family were using them at that time were they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 No, they weren't - well my mother's day they - they weren't used but - there was - I think it was more advanced in my day. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Did you have to go to bed at a particular time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Yes. Yes. We had to go to bed.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 You put yourself to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Yes. We were big enough.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Your mother would say your prayers with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Would you say that as your father was away your mother was more of an influence on you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 
Oh yes, he went away you see. And - and it was always her that checked us. And yet if my father said one word we'd to - to - be as quiet as mice. We were afraid of my father somehow. And he never touched us. If there was any thrashing to be done it was m
y mother that did it. We were afraid of my father.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Because he was around less perhaps?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 That's what it was I suppose.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 How would you say your parents expected you to behave towards them as a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh well you had to respect your parent
s, you was always taught to respect your parents and - and you weren't to speak back. Unless you had something to tell them. You weren't to answer back at them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Was your mother an easy person to talk to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Would she show you affection?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Yes, she would, yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Supposing you had worries about something, would you go and tell her about them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Would that be less true of your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh we wouldn't say anything like to my father, no. No. I don't thin
k they - they had - so much time for the children as the mother you see. The mother was always there. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Did they care very much how you behaved towards your brothers and sisters?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh yes. Yes. Oh of course - we hadn't to fight, but in fact we did, I'll say.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 If another child hit you would they say that you should hit back or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 
No, they didn't say that but they would say, if you behave yourself - nobody would hit you. But nowadays you've got to tell them to him back because - child
ren are far more frank nowadays. I think that's what - I think that children nowadays - are - I said to Frank that came here - are what we were at sixteen, seventeen. Honestly speaking, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 What do you think that your parents hoped you'd grow up to be, what kind of a person?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 
Oh - they - they - they didn't care as long as you were - if you'd worked for a decent living, you know. And as long as you were respectable and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 What kind of things did they say were important in life?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Well 
to be honest - truthful and honest. And to serve your master. To be - to be honest - towards your - master's work the same as you were working for yourself. That's what you - we were told. Was drilled into us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Were you allowed to talk when grown ups were talking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 
No. Oh God no. No. If anybody - if any person came into the - we were told to go outside. Even the neighbours, or the mother of any of the - old ladies came, there was - talking of anything secret you know. Just you go outside. Come back
 when I call you. That's the way we were too far back I think. Children today are told - they're told the real facts. But - children in those days were taught a lot of imagination, just to keep them away from the real thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 What sort of things do you mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 
Well, I mean - as - as far as - as far as childbirth and that. We didn't know a thing about that. No. The children nowadays, they know everything. What they don't know is not worth knowing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 What did they think about cursing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Cursing, oh - cursing wasn't allowed at all. No. No. You see, we were brought up as very strict Roman Catholics you see. Ah yes. Yes.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Would your father and mother both go to church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh yes, they always went to church, yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Can you tell me about a typical Sunday at that time, how would the day go?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 
Well you see - when we came over here, as - the first month we came over to the island at first, there was no church on the island. And I remember very faintly when we came to Caragrich at firs
t - my father and mother going over there with the boat, they used to go - they - they - have you been to Curratown? There's a - a very narrow - narrow sound between Coalis and Kentangaval. You go - if you go down west through Aberstour afterwards, and - 
b
eing so near you - you see the - it's called the Narrow Sound, the - the Sound being so narrow they could easily go. Supposing it was a bit stormy they could go. They used to go every Sunday. And if - and I remember once - one of the priests had an issue.
 You know - a sort of vision. They used to go every night, and come back with - that boat in the darkness. The two of them, my - my mother was just as - handy in the boat as my - what my father was, because - she got used to it. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Would you go to mass in the morning then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh yes. Yes. They was - we didn't go because there was no church on the island at that time. No, but my father and mother went.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 When did they have a church on the island, was that quite a bit later?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 That - it was in
 1913 that the small church - you came past it I suppose, small church down there was built. It was Lady Bates that built that church.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Until then did you go to Sunday school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Yes, we used to go to Sunday school when - when the - when the - when 
the schoolhouse was built over there. I don't know when it was - I suppose it was built in 1912 or 1911. There was a school - built over there, it was a lovely building. It was only - wood and thick you know. And - it wasn't very reliable when the storms 
c
ame on, so - it was - another stronger building was built, the one you came past. They used to have mass there. The priests came over every now and again. But oh it was - just a big day when the priest come over, in those days of course - it was so very s
eldom you could get over. There was only priest in Castlebay at that time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 So the people here were very devout?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 They were, yes, they were. There was only one Protestant family on this island. This village. But there was another Protestant family 
down in Carragrich. She was - the lady was - a brother - a sister of the fireman that was here. They were Protestants. And the family that was - lived in that house, not this house, it was a smaller thatched house you know. My brother - was a brother-on-l
a
w got this - house. He's - this family - they left you see, the children were married. They were away and married. And the father was left alone. So he was getting too old to manage the croft. And - he left the croft to a brother-in-law, got it. But the c
r
oft. And they came to live here, he was at sea at the time and they came to live here. And it was my brother-in-law that lived here. And my sister - she died very suddenly the early stages of the last war. She was sitting - was just at the table there and
 
she just collapsed. So I - the youngest - the youngster - there were four - four children, two boys and two girls. One of them's the ferryman that took you over. Yes, he's my nephew. Yes. And - youngest, oh he's - he's as tall as yourself. He's married. H
e
 was only two - two years, so - brother-in-law, didn't know what to do. He had to go to sea and he had no one to look after the family. And so he asked me to stay. Well I hadn't the heart at he heart to leave them. And I'm still here, and they're all marr
ied now. One of them's in Australia. And she's got - three children, she's got a boy, two girls. And the other one's married in - the other girl's married in Glasgow, she's got two girls. And - Don and John's got two girls.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Were you away then before that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Yes I was. I was at service in - in Glasgow.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 When did you leave the island then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh I left the island when I was seventeen..
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Was there any feeling between the Protestants and the Catholics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh no. No, no, they were just lik
e - they were - they were just - the - the Protestant family that was here were just treated the same as the rest. No, there - there wasn't - they were very very friendly, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 We often find in England that the Protestants are much more temperance, is that true here?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 
Oh no. No. No. No, they were - they were very nice sort of - well, they - they weren't - treated as - as Protestants you know. We would just treat - if there was a wedding or anything in the church we went to it, yes. And - they all 
became Catholics. Well most of the family became Catholics. And the father and mother became Catholics before they died. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Did your parents think it was wrong to work or play on a Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh they didn't prevent us from playing on the Sunday, 
but - they didn't work on the Sunday. No, they didn't work on a Sunday, of course they didn't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Could you tell me the kind of games you would play as a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh we used to - to play at - pebbles. Pebbles. We had - three - three pebbles. And you 
whacked at the - these pebbles, oh I don't remember the - but we had some words for the pebbles and - we used to play that game sitting on the - on the ground. The girls, not the boys of course. Not the boys. The boys played games of their own.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 You played separately from the boys?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 
Oh of course we never would - it was a comedown to go - near the boys. Yes. We're not like the girls nowadays. They go to school holding hands now at ten years old. Then we used to - play - hide and seek and - blind man's buff and - all that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Would you go swimming?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh no. The girls - the boys did. But the girls never went swimming, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Walking, did you walk up on the hills?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Walking up the hills and - building castles and that on the sands sometimes during the dinner time and - we were over here in school.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Fishing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 
Well we didn't go fishing at all, the boys would. Fishing off the rocks, that was the first thing they did. When they were - eight or nine they used to get small rocks for thems
elves and - used to go fishing off the rocks. Caught quite a - quite a few and all mind you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Did you collect anything, or keep pets?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh we usually had a cat and dog. And that was all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 And there just weren't any entertainments that you could go to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh no. We had to be our own entertaining. Unless there was a wedding in the area. That was a - big event.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Could you tell me what a wedding was like?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh it was really very good. The - when they were married, I remember a few when I 
was a - a schoolgirl. And - brides were - the bride and - oh funny enough - the bride - and bridesmaid wore white and the bridesmaid, she wore a veil. The same as the - the bride. And - when the - when the farmhouse - people, when it wasn't - well I mean 
-
 I mean - when they left the - the farmhouse up there it was as good as ever. They used to have the weddings there. And then there was the kitchen for the food. And there was - one big room for the guests and another big room for the - for the table for t
h
e food and all. Oh they used to have tables as - long as the tables in Mr Campbell's house. And every - there was - wine, whisky, and all sorts of food. Biscuits and cheese and bread and - all kinds of chicken and - and meat. Every description. The childr
e
n were sent to the - the children got a separate table to themselves and the grown ups. And they surely liked that. The children was brought in, didn't matter how small you were. You had to go to the table and get your share. Oh it was a great event. And 
then there was the dancing going on in the other room. Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 How long did the dancing go on for then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh 'til three or four in the morning. Yes. Oh it was a great event, yes. And everybody in the island, all dancing, were there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Were people invited or did they just come?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh they had to be invited. Oh they wouldn't come if you hadn't invited them. There were no invitation cards, in those days, not here, no.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Would the young couple have a honeymoon at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh no. They just - go back - to the - the usual the next day. After the wedding.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 
That would be about the beginning of the first world war, would a young couple be allowed to go out walking together or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh yes. Yes. But not - not so open as they are nowadays you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 If you did go out walking with a girl did that show that you were really committed to her, were expected to marry her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Would it be a disgrace if you didn't marry somebody?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Yes, it would be, yes. Yes. It - it - did happen all the same. Very often but - still - it wasn't thought right. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 People tried to keep that sort of thing rather secret did they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Yes. YES? It was a secret, yes. Oh it has changed an awful lot. Yes. Oh an awful lot. Yes. 
They're more advanced nowadays and - and - got more like the - like the - like the people living in the towns nowadays. They adopted a style of the - of the townspeople here.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 At that time at what sort of age would a boy and girl start walking out together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Well you had to be at least eighteen. Eighteen was considered - young, to - to be going out with boys and - yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 There was now here to go I suppose?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Well nowhere to go.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Was there sometimes a dance?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 No, the dance - occasional dance here.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 There were dances on the island?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 There were, yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Up in that farmhouse again would that be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Yes, that's where they had the dances and then - and then they had - the dancing in school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Would you be given any pocket money as a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh no. There wasn't such a thing as pocket money in my day. There was nowhere to spend it anyway, there were no shops.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 So you couldn't earn any money while you were at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh gosh no, unless the - unless they we
re selling books or something in - prayer books or anything or something at the school bug - you wanted to buy, or a - or a - an article or programme, of course we did a lot of sewing in those days in school, if you wanted to buy that you had to ask money
 off your mother to buy - she'd give you the money, that was that. Money was scarce in those days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Did you ever find people would use eggs or something instead of using money, in exchange?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Well they used to take down - to - give their eggs to the
 grocers you see, get groceries for them. For the eggs, that's if they were plentiful.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 You never went off for a holiday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh - holidays were unknown to us. Holidays were unknown to us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Were there no special days apart from Sundays when you would take the day off then and enjoy yourselves?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh no. You accept the holidays of - holidays of the church.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Christmas and Easter, were there any others?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 No. No, not that I know of. Worked nearly every day except on a Sunday, or - on holi
days of obligation. Of the church. Good Friday, yes, Good Friday. You had to stop work at twelve o'clock on Good Friday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Did your mother make the family's clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Yes, every stitch. Yes. She - made every stitch of our clothing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 What about shoes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 
Oh they had to buy our shoes of course. Once it was - April or May. We were given - new boots. You were told - you weren't to wear your boots until October, late October. You had your bare feet all summer.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Did your parents take any interest in politics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 
Yes they did, yes. But they didn't know very much you see because - there was no - newspapers. Well, they weren't as plentiful as what they are now. You see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Do you know what their views were?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh, well I don't think they - 
they - they knew the difference between the Labour and - and the Conservatives, don't think there was such a thing as the Labour party at that time. No, I don't think so.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 They weren't Liberals then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh I don't know what - I don't know - don't think they knew themselves.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Would your father not vote at an election?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh yes, he used to vote, yes, yes. Used to vote.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Was he active in the Land Leaguing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Yes. Yes. Yes, he was - one of the first to come over here. But - but - he wasn'
t engaged - he wasn't active in it. He didn't get the tenants. He wasn't here at all when the - summons came round. So I escaped that. But - Mr Campbell's father, over the - at the airport - yes. Oh he was - one of the leaders. Yes, he was one of the lead
ers, one of - he was great, he was a good leader and all. He was offered a sum of money. Yes, to leave them, to leave everything. But he wouldn't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Would that be by Lady Cathcart?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 I don't know, really I can't say. But - he was offered a sum of mon
ey and - just told to leave everything. He said he couldn't do it. He was working for the - for others as well I think then. Oh he's a great leader his old father was.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Who were the other leaders of the community on the island before the first world war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 There was - Neil Macfee. And Donald's father. I think they was the - the two leaders weren't they.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Neil Macfee was a crofter was he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Yes, he was a crofter, he did all the writing and - and that. Donald's father - Mr Campbell's father c
ould neither read nor write. He was the leader. HE WAS - he could inspire them you know. YES.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Would there be meetings then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Yes. Meetings, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Where would they held the meetings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh - just outside somewhere.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 What sort of things would they be talking about then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 
Well they was just preparing what they was going to do you see about the island. Neil Macfee did all the writing. He was a good scholar, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Mr Campbell was saying the lawyer was very helpful.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Yes, he was. He was very helpful, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Then later there would be a schoolteacher who came?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 
Yes, there was a - it was another man we had as schoolteacher - as a schoolteacher. He still lives in Castlebay over there by Mrs Campbell. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Would he then become one of the leaders?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 
No. No, he never joined in. No. No. He was just - he was only - and it was after the island was - divided, when the people came over the school was put there. The first school there was was up in the farmhouse. That's what it was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Was he a good schoolmaster?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh very good.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 What sort of things did he emphasise as being important in his teaching?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh well - geography. And - arithmetic, reading, composition and dictation. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Would he emphasise tidiness and manners and things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh yes. Oh - and - tidy in school, like a new pin, all the time he was there. Oh he was very good to us really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 What would he do if a child was disobedient?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh - he'd give a good telling off and a good slapping.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Did you like it there as a school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Yes, I liked the school all right. Yes, but we had a - few that didn't like it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Why was that do you think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 I don't know but - I liked doing things at school, and - I liked reading and writing and that
 and - liked the school. I could do something to everything that - he gives but I couldn't do anything about drawing, it was the only thing I couldn't do.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 How long did you stay on, 'til you were fourteen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 I stayed on 'til I was fourteen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Would you have liked to have gone on to anything else afterwards?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 
No, not at that time. No, not at that time, I wanted - just to be done with school; and to get away from it, but the years after I was sorry I didn't - I didn't stay at school. But - there were no bursaries for the likes of us at that time. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 You had to start speaking English when you went to the school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 You didn't ever speak English in the home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 That must have made it very difficult starting school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 
Yes. But he spoke to you Gaelic, them that couldn't understand him - the wee ones, he used to speak to them in Gaelic, but we weren't allowed Gaelic at school. No. No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 At the school, I've been told that in Castlebay, because there were these
 different townships, there would be very much groups in the school, of children from each township?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 They would have these battles after school, would there be anything of that kind?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh not here, no. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 No rivals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 No. No rivals, no. I think there were eighty going to that school at one time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Children dancing in the streets at Castlebay has been mentioned, do you remember anything like that here?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh - oh no. No. They weren't taught dancing in the school - over here. No, not dancing over here. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 It seems a much quieter sort of life?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh it was very quiet here.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 When you were talking about these very poor people, were there any poor old people on the island or were they all young families who'd
 come over?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Well they were all young families, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 So you were all very much of the same sort of standard of living?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Yes, all - never - they had - mind you they had big families in those days. There were five and six and seven in every house. Oh yes.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 
We find in English villages that some people will divide up the families into the rough and the respectable, did you do that at all or did you feel you were all very much the same?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 They were all the same, yes, they were all very much the same, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 You didn't feel any divisions really?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 No, no. No. They were all alike.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 There would be no ways of showing respect to some of them? Just the elders?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 You had to respect your - respect your elders. We used to go to schoo
l, the - whole crowd of us and we - used to father. The girls - used to go together, the whole of them. And the boys - used to go in their group.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Could you tell me about your brothers and sisters, when they left the island what did they do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Well
 my sisters went to service. They all went to service. And my brothers went to sea. Yes. The Merchant Navy. The Merchant Service as it was called at the time. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Would they have gone straight after leaving school then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Not - not immediately, n
o. They'd be - they'd be at home a little - 'til they were sixteen or seventeen I suppose. 'Til they were old enough to - you know, to know - to look after themselves. Not immediately, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 They would work here until then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 They would work - about
 the croft and that and they used to go - fishing and that with their own small boat. Fishing for - for girls and that. And some of them used to - to work at the croft for a few years and then - they went away to - they went to Glasgow.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 How would the girls get a job as domestic servants?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 
Well you see, they all had friends in the town. And - they used to go to these friends houses and - they'd advertise for a - place and - they just said - see that they were the - that - they were just - green fro
m home that they weren't - used to domestic service. And then they'd get a place and - a while there they'd get on - that - in a year or two they might get a better place, that - they'd get home for a - week or two, holidays and that during the summer. Th
ey always went to work.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Do you remember the first day that you arrived in the city yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh gosh I do. I remember it quite clearly. When I arrived at Dover. Oh, I thought Dover was a - an awful big town.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 What things struck you most about it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 
Oh the cars. The motor cars. But when I went to Glasgow, gosh, I was scared. It was the tramcars in those days. This - the buses flying around the street. They used to say in big letters, Shawlands, Gorbals, Varhead. Used to say to myself, must 
be very smartly out of their way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 
Could you tell me about how the people on the island used to amuse themselves in the evenings, did you have caeligs on the island when you were a child?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 No. Not the sort of caeligs they have nowadays. But - the
re were certain houses where they used to - to gather. You see. At night and - the men and - a lot of women as well, and they used to tell stories of - olden days and - ghosts and all that. But there isn't such a thing nowadays.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Would there be music?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Yes. Or - oh lots of them, they could play the \{BLANK\} And then the accordions came on the scene, they got more advanced, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Would your mother ever go out to enjoy herself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Yes. She used to go to a - to the - people next door and that and - they used to gather.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Did they do the weaving here, would she join with the other women in the weaving and the singing or was that more Castlebay?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 The - well they did their own spinning. They - they did spin their - their own wool. Yes, and m
ake their own stockings and their own jerseys. Yes. But - they used to tell us about - there was no \{BLANK\}
 in my days you know, I've never seen a real one. But - but my mother knows of it and my - she knew all about it. And - and Jonathon's mother here, and they used to talk about it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Would friends come round casually or did they have to be invited?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 
Oh they - they - they had to be - invited and collected. The women - the - the best singers. The best singers, yes. They had to sing all the time. And - and everyone had to take their turn. The women, that's what I was told.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 On an ordinary evening could people just drop round and call on each other?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh yes. Any time of the day. You could go into any of the houses. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Would you say that your father had a separate group of men friends and your mother had women friends or did they share friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 They - they just shared their - their friends, and - they had no special friends in the village, everybody was the same. You could walk in
to anybody's house. If you - were in need - in anything, or if they wanted anything - that you had you could go and tell them. That you could share such and such a thing and then take it back.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 There was no bar where they could go and have a drink was there?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh gosh no. No. One bar in Castlebay, that was all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Were there any sports of any kind?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 No, no sports. No. No. No sports of any kind, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Did you have any books in the house when you were a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Yes. I remember the - we
ll we hadn't many books you see because - there - there was - I don't think there were any - any library, and - my - although my mother could do a little reading and writing, she - she wasn't - that capable of - of - of reading books you know. But I remem
b
er some of - one big - red book that - some of the girls got as a present - got as a - prize from the - from the school at Castlebay. And I remember one poem that was there. Don't know what sort of - it must have been mixed book whatever, something like t
hat. And I remember a poem in one of those. And it must be fairly - I suppose you've heard it, well that was one of the poems in that book, that I remember. I wish I had today. I could understand it better.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Could you tell me what a typical days meals would be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 
Well, we had bread and butter in the morning. Not - we - they couldn't afford bacon excepting perhaps on a Sunday. And potatoes and fish for dinner. And then tea again usually, and a cup of tea before you went to bed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Did you ever have meat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Yes, on Sundays perhaps. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Did you ever have any tinned foods?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh no, there was no tinned foods in my day, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Not corned beef?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 No. No. Well there was corned beef but - we didn't go in for that. No. We always had plenty of fish and - fresh fish and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Did your mother cook on an open fire?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh on an open fire, yes. There wasn't even a - a - a - a paraffin stove or anything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Did you have rabbits?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Yes. We had rabbits and - we had cormorant. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Was there anything special about a birthday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 No. I didn't know I had a birthday, 'til I was too old. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Did you have any presents at Christmas?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Oh yes, we used to get presents from - well our own family them that went away you know
 and - we used to have a big feast and - and - and Christmas we had - big pudding. All that. Well - remember - well in my day that was the only fruit we got. And an apple and an orange. Bananas were unknown - unknown in my time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 How did you get the apples and oranges, from the shops?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 You got it from the shop, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Your parents just grew potatoes, no other vegetables?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 They grew their potatoes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Any other vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Yes, carrots and turnips, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16721822 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 If somebody called would it be usual to offer them some refreshments?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1593454 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12527977\charrsid3029804 Yes - well we had no refreshments - at that time, a cup of tea. Cup of tea.
\par }}