{\rtf1\adeflang1025\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\adeff0\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang2057\deflangfe2057{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}{\f38\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f39\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f41\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f42\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f43\fbidi \froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}
{\f44\fbidi \froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f45\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f46\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f48\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}
{\f49\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f51\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f52\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f53\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f54\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}
{\f55\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f56\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden 
Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs20 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{
\s15\qj \li0\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext15 Body Text;}}
{\*\latentstyles\lsdstimax156\lsdlockeddef0}{\*\revtbl {Unknown;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid422000\rsid1253119\rsid1799754\rsid3412272\rsid3896193\rsid5659320\rsid6040488\rsid6362028\rsid8153771\rsid9589514\rsid16539070}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 11.0.0000;}{\info
{\title <anchor>Was there much employment around in the time before the first war}{\author PRASAD3}{\operator lhorto}{\creatim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min9}{\revtim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min9}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords23342}
{\nofchars133052}{\nofcharsws156082}{\vern24613}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 http://schemas.microsoft.com/office/word/2003/wordml}{\xmlns2 urn:schemas-microsoft-com:office:smarttags}}
\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl1800\margr1800\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0\ltrsect 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\donotembedsysfont1\donotembedlingdata0\grfdocevents0\validatexml1\showplaceholdtext0\ignoremixedcontent0\saveinvalidxml0\showxmlerrors1\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace187
\dgvspace180\dghorigin1800\dgvorigin1440\dghshow1\dgvshow2\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale90\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\splytwnine\ftnlytwnine\htmautsp\nolnhtadjtbl\useltbaln\alntblind\lytcalctblwd\lyttblrtgr\lnbrkrule\nojkernpunct\rsidroot8153771 \fet0
{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}\ilfomacatclnup0\ltrpar \sectd \ltrsect\psz9\linex0\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}
{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ltrpar
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid9589514 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\ul\insrsid9589514\charrsid16072257 Information about interviewee}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid9589514 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid9589514\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tx2057\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid9589514 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9589514\charrsid16072257 Date of birth}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9589514    
\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9589514\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9589514  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16539070 1900}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9589514\charrsid16072257 
\par Gender}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9589514           \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9589514\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9589514  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16539070 F}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9589514 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9589514\charrsid16072257 Marital status}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9589514 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9589514\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9589514  
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16539070 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9589514\charrsid16544153 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9589514\charrsid16072257 Occupation}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9589514 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9589514\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9589514  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16539070 Housework}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9589514\charrsid16072257 
\par Geographic region}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9589514 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9589514\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9589514  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16539070 London}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9589514\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\qj \fi-490\li518\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin518\itap0\pararsid9589514 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 
\par I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Was there much employment around in the time before the first war?
\par }\pard\plain \ltrpar\s15\qj \fi-490\li518\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin518\itap0\pararsid9589514 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well there must have been 
work. But work was bad because - as far as I can gather the tailoring - was always a poor trade. The boot trade was always a poor trade. The reason why because it was seasonable. For every season, you had different trades. You never had gown shops like yo
u have now. You used to go to a dressmaker. Go to a shop, there used to be big - linen draper shops, such as Wickham\rquote s, then my mother always used to deal to Owen\rquote s. And - she\rquote 
d buy rolls and rolls of material, because she had a lot of girls, and she used to take it to a dressmaker, we were all measured for frocks you see. Or else granny would - get something to cut - somebody to cut out something and she\rquote 
d sit and stitch. You see, work - work was - hard to come by. And you still couldn\rquote t get - work if you - if you - weren\rquote 
t dressed properly. I always say to be poor and to look poor is a very very bad thing. Because if you used to go after a job - and you didn\rquote t look decent, they\rquote d look at you and say - got no room for you. But if you put on a brass face and 
you\rquote re dressed properly, and you go in, you know, with that - yes, they\rquote ll take you. But they used to stick bills out, so and so wanted, so and so wanted. But when the men used to go after it they didn\rquote 
t want it, see, putting these sort of bills out used t
o take the feel of the trade. And these governors, in any trade - would know exactly what was doing, because the first thing they say to a man, where was the last place that you worked at? What were you getting? See, and this is how work went. It went in 
seasons. And I\rquote ve known the time when my husband\rquote s come home and he says to me, I\rquote ve got a job, and I said, oh that\rquote s good. But two weeks before Easter he\rquote 
s come home with his cards, they just wanted that little bit of work quick that they take anyone on, you see. And - to get that work out, and after they got that work out then you get the push. You get your cards. And that\rquote s how it was years ago.

\par }\pard\plain \ltrpar\qj \fi-490\li518\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin518\itap0\pararsid9589514 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did your father have many people working for him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 My father? At one time he had working for him - he had - twenty barrows, and he employed people - to go out for him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 This is in addition to the shop?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh yes. But then, \lquote course then that got too much for him, he couldn\rquote t - see to it, but - he sold them out.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 When was this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh - about 1916, 1917. See.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 So it was quite a big concern he was running?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Yes. YES. And I\rquote ve known my father to tell me - before he had the shop, he\rquote s walked from {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname 
place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}London{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} - to Epsom to the {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Derby{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
, to sell - ice cream. To sell hokey - pokeys, well you know what I mean by hokey-pokey\rquote s? It\rquote 
s this strawberry - and vanilla ice cream - wrapped up in paper, you know like you get the wafers now, but this was in the white - pure white paper, all cut - cut in blocks. And you put it in a freezer, and they\rquote d walk - the m
en with him would walk to Epsom. And if they sold out then they could ride home. But if they didn\rquote t sell out they had to walk home.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Is that about twenty odd miles?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well, you know where Epsom racing is today. It\rquote s a good - a good distance. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Was your father very interested in sports?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 
The only sport that my father ever liked was boxing. He used to love a good boxing match. Yes. If it was clean. And we used to have wonderful customers come into the shop. Now we did have one customer - it was a Lord Tredegar\rquote 
s nephew, a Mr Llewellyn. And - he told my father he\rquote d paid ten guineas - for a ringside seat. And he fight was over in a second, the first blow knocked the fellow out. Oh dear. Well - my father used to speak the old English. And - 
we were laughing upstairs today. About the way father used to talk. He didn\rquote t - used to say I heard that, he\rquote 
d say, heared that. See? And - you know, funny thing, and I - as we said this afternoon - if my father was - should be - happened to be eating, and anyone came in, father\rquote 
s first words were - will you join me? And the answer used to be - no thank you, much can I do you. Now listen what I\rquote m saying. Much good may it do you. So they used to - say it so quick, much may I do you. Well I tell you, I was re
ading a book - on one occasion, and I read this word - I thought to myself, what does that mean? I\rquote 
ve heard father say that. And then - in brackets, much good may - and I sat here and I laughed, I thought, well - father - now I know what you were talking about. And we were - that\rquote 
s what we were laughing at - upstairs - this afternoon. Much good may it do you. Much good - it took - it took us a long time to find out what that meant. And there\rquote s so many other words that I hear sometimes with the people that -
 is in the Lane, the old fashioned English people. And there\rquote s only a few of \lquote em left. But when they all meet, and you hear all these old words, you think back, you think to yourself, oh that\rquote 
s father used to say - say that. See? But we got - had a good laugh over that, much good may it do you. Took a lifetime - as I say, it took a lifetime for me to find out what that was. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Was he ever a member of any societies?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Only the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8153771\charrsid6362028 F}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 
orresters. That - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8153771\charrsid6362028 that}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028  was a sick society. That was a sick society, bu
t he never drew a penny. He never - thank goodness he never went sick. I think on one occasion - he\rquote d had a cold and he thought he would go sick. And of course in the}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8153771\charrsid6362028 se}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028  days they were very very hot - on people. If you were sick and you went to your doctor - you couldn\rquote 
t walk about unless you got a - what they call a walking voucher. A walking voucher to allow you out a certain time in the morning to a certain time in the afternoon. But if - these societies used to send a visitor round and you were out after
 that certain time - you was off the sick.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 You\rquote d lose your benefit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 
Yes. And I can remember my father saying, only once did he ever go sick because he had a - like a carbuncle on the back of his neck. You know what I mean by a carbuncle? You don\rquote t? You do? Yes. A - a collection of boils. And he\rquote 
d gone to the doctor. And the doctor told him - he was eating the wrong bread - bread.; And my father said, I was born here. And I hope to die here. And he said, and white bread - I\rquote ve always eaten. And w
hite bread I shall die eating. And the doctor said, you\rquote re eating the wrong colour bread, you want to eat the brown. He said, never. And he never did. And my father used to like the hot bread straight from the oven - oven. He\rquote 
d break it open, he\rquote d put a blob of butter in between, and he\rquote d crunch - it had to be crusty, and he\rquote d crunch that and he\rquote d enjoy that better than anything - all the luxury in the world. This is what he used to enjoy.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did your mother bake her own bread?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. No. I don\rquote t know 
what - used to go in the way of cakes. Because years ago - what I could gather - at the top there used to be in the open Mile End Road there used to be a - a b}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8153771\charrsid6362028 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 kers shop that used to take in the big trays - of cakes, you see. And I think for tuppence, they\rquote d bake them you see. But really and truly - the baking was marvellous years ago. They didn\rquote t buy - they didn
\rquote t buy - must - they must have baked because they didn\rquote t buy much shop stuff. The only thing that my father used to buy - or my mother used to buy - was pastries. And they used to come from {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Stoney Lane{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}, his cousin\rquote s shop, Silver\rquote s. And you used to get twelve beautiful pastries. For a shilling. And then father used to say - tell him you want the baker\rquote 
s dozen, and that was thirteen. See? And they were
 beautiful pastries. And - father always liked - a drop of whisky in the place. So that when his friends or relatives came in, you see, that was always there. And I can remember - when I was fourteen, I left school on the Friday, on the seventeenth of May
 I left school, and I went to work - over at Morris\rquote s here in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Mansell Street{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
. It used to be a cigar place. And mind you I only worked - barely two weeks there. But when I used to come out of Morris\rquote s, father used to say to me - in the morning, take this jar, it used to be a stone jar, with a handle. He\rquote 
d put it in one of his big peg bags, and say, take that to work with you, and when you come out of work go into Coate\rquote s, that was a big distillers - in the Whitechapel Road, here, and get a quart of the best s
cotch whisky, for seven shillings. That was three and six a pint.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did he often have people coming round?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh - always - always had friends. And father could sit all night playing cards.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 When would he find time to do that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 When - if - if friends came in - he\rquote d say all right, I\rquote ll come at {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname time}
{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Hour}{\xmlattrvalue 10}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Minute}{\xmlattrvalue 0}}}ten o\rquote clock{\*\xmlclose}. See? And if he closed at {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname time}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Hour}
{\xmlattrvalue 10}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Minute}{\xmlattrvalue 0}}}ten o\rquote clock{\*\xmlclose}, his friends would settle down - to a game of cards, solo, he could play it all night. They\rquote d have the whisky.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Where would they play, in the parlour?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 In the shop parlour. The shop -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 There were two parlours were there, the shop parlour?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 
No, the parlour upstairs - was for - like weekends when friends and family used to come. But for his friends he used to sit in the shop parlour. It wa
s a nice size room. We had a table - and a few chairs, he had a nice fire - fireplace in. My father was one for fires. I\rquote ve known in - in - looks like its raining, there\rquote s an umbrella up - I\rquote ve known a time then when father - said it
\rquote s chilly in June and he\rquote s lit the fire, he\rquote s had a big fire. And then he\rquote s gone and stood in the shop because it got so hot. See? But he - he used to love warmth. But father would play all night cards. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Would your mother ever join in on those card games?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. No. No, card games, them days, was only for men. For men.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 What other kind of things would your mother and father do to amuse themselves when they weren\rquote t working?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well, mother always had plenty to do, although mother was only a young woman when she,
 died, mother was only fifty when she died. See? But - with granny and my elder sisters you see, they all - helped. See? But - there wasn\rquote t - much that he could do really after that. Because - his partner had gone.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 He was in partnership was he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No, no, mother. Mother died you see. And of course - the boys never played cards. No. And my father never smoked on a Saturday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Why not Saturday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 He was a Jew. He used to say, work, I\rquote ve got to work, I\rquote ve got a big family to keep. But what I don\rquote 
t have to do I don\rquote t do. And he never allowed my brothers - to smoke either. He used to say, this is your day - that you don\rquote t do. Because in them days - you didn\rquote 
t work on a Saturday. This was the idea I think - when they used to say - well, with the - for the Jewish people, they don\rquote 
t work Saturdays. Then Sunday they can open the shop. Now my father opened Saturday and Sunday. There was only one day a year that he would close - and that was the day of Atonement. The day of the Fast.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 When\rquote s that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Round about September time. And if he closed his shop early - on the afternoon before - all the King\rquote s horses he wouldn\rquote 
t have served you. That was that day of Atonement. And that was it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 That was the only day of the year the shop was shut?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 What about Bank Holidays, did he not shut?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. Was always open. Always open.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did you have Bank Holidays and things in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No, he used to like going racing. And then it was only - and then it was only either the {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Derby{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} or the {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Ascot{\*\xmlclose}. The {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Ascot{\*\xmlclose} races that he would like to go to.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Was he a betting man at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Not much. Not much. He - he\rquote d have a flutter. But - he used to say, I\rquote ve got to work too hard to get my money. And I\rquote 
ve got plenty to do with it, see. But - no, gambling didn\rquote t - attract him very much. And if for instance he\rquote d had a - bet, and it come off, he\rquote d say, well I\rquote ll play that up, and after that then I don\rquote 
t spend no more of my money. See, he got to - and I think I\rquote m the same. I\rquote m a bad gambler. Show you what\rquote s happened. Sitting here Saturday morning.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 You said your father was a member of a sick club, was he a member of a boot club or a savings club?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 He was a wonderful - organiser of - a loan club. A Christmas club. And - they always used to say 
that - and the customers used to bring money in to him - for so many shares - and every week, I think it used to be on a Saturday evening, in New Road down here, there used to be a public house, and - my sisters and my brothers used to go and pay this mon
ey in. And Christmastime it was a glorious time when it all got paid out. Yes. Christmastime was wonderful. Everybody got their}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8153771\charrsid6362028  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 
money. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did you celebrate Christmas yourselves?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh we always celebrated Christmas. Father - father - always had a turkey. We never knew any different. {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname 
place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}Turkey{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}. Christmastime, yes. Recognised thing. He\rquote d buy it alive. He used to like to see his poultry alive. Then he\rquote 
d take it to the killers. The same with us. In my married life for instance, my brother - he\rquote s dead now,
 but my brother and sister-in-law, my friend and her husband, my husband and myself used to be six of us, Christmas Eve - used to get on the bus and go to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Smithfield{\*\xmlclose}
{\*\xmlclose}. And we\rquote d all come home with turkeys. And twenty-five pounders at that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did you have many people round at Christmas in the old days or would you have it just with the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 
Family. But in my married life - see - it used to be a family gathering. At my in-laws. But dinner - Christmas dinner I always liked in my own place. But - Christmas - evening - we always had together, and Boxing evening.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 What about before the first world war? Would you go out over the Christmas period to peoples houses?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No, we had people come in - to celebrate Christmas.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 What kind of people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 
Friends. You see, having a big family - all their friends used to come in. The same as my in-law. All the girls there, and the boys, and the boys at that time used to - go dancing and all that you see. They\rquote 
d bring in girl friends, bring in girl - boy f
riends, and we used to have a real - well, when we lived in Aberavon Road - they - see my - mother-in-law had a piano, and they - used to say, go on Anne, get on the piano. Well it used to be a recognised thing, Sunday afternoon and Christmastimes, we use
d
 to go - we used to be all night. They used to be all night affairs. And we all used to club together - to get the food, and the drink. And from the public house that we used to buy the beer - they used to let us have forms. So that we used to get rid of 
all the chairs and used to put forms all round. Used to have real good times.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Was this the same in your schooldays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well I don\rquote t know because we were in bed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Even on Christmas does?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Yes, we had to go to bed because - father Christmas was coming and if we were up we\rquote re not - he wouldn\rquote 
t come. You see, this was a good gag years ago. But today you can\rquote t do it so easy.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 What about Christmas Day itself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh it was lovely, Christmas Day. And the decorations, it was lovely, really lovely. And the toys that we used to get Christmas Eve, we
\rquote d sit and play for hours.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 You\rquote d get them on Christmas Eve?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Yes, we used to hang our stockings up.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 You mean you\rquote d hang them up and get them on the Christmas Day itself?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh, they 
used to be at the foot of the bed. All our names on our stocking. A few dates used to be stuck at the foot. Oh used to have everything. Yes, used to have lovely Christmases. Games and toys you know, everything like that. All stuck in the stockings.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Would you ever go anywhere on Boxing Day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 
Well Boxing Day was a - more - of like a leisure day, you know what I mean, you were tired from the Christmas festivities - of Christmas night, so you practically was - lazy - Boxing Day. And you never cooked B
oxing Day, because you had the remainder of your turkey and your beef, you see, for lunch, and for your supper. And when the friends used to come back - for the evening, there was another celebration. And this is how it used to go. See? Christmastime was 
l
ovely, and it used to be - I can remember as a child - that we used to go round look - 'cos father always decorated up And he used to have the most wonderful decorations. And he was a man that used to take care of his things. That when he used to take the
m down, you know, he\rquote d dust them all and put them all back, put all the chains back properly, and all the bells and all the birds and everything, he\rquote d put \lquote em all away, stack \lquote en all in a pot - in a box, and tuck \lquote 
em all in with a blue tissue paper and put \rquote em up on a shelf, he said, they\rquote re ready for next year. Always. And we used to go round to different shops, and we\rquote 
d say, oh look at this. The same as Guy Fawkes night. See, they - they were the days that - we used to celebrate.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Where would you go for Guy Fawkes night?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 
Well we always had a bonfire in the yard and we used to have friends in. And when I got married - we had a bonfire in the garden, and we had friends in, and my - tenants, with their children they used to come down and I used to do
 on - guy Fawkes night, I used to roast potatoes in their Jackets, now you know what I mean? Used to scrub the potatoes up, and pop \lquote em in the oven, so while we\rquote were having - enjoying ourselves outside - we\rquote 
ve got these - potatoes cooking, so that when they - of course it\rquote 
s November, everybody come in cold and miserable, we used to stick a fork - through these potatoes and used to split them, put vinegar and salt on, and the - all the kids used to - well we used to enjoy it ourselves, we were grown ups, and
 the children used to enjoy it you see. And have a hot drink, and then - they we used to go to bed. And that was - Guy Fawkes night. But I always used to say, no fireworks \lquote 
til Guy Fawkes night. See? And - the boys used to save their money. I used to go with them to buy what they want, but it was only the day before. Buy Fawkes day. Not -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 When you were young would you play more with your brothers and sisters than you\rquote d play with neighbours children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well we all played together. We - we all - we w
ere all allowed to have a friend in, you see. And of course as I say there was a lot of us, there was three - three - four young ones. See, my sister, this one. And - three others. You see. And - holiday time we used to be over Victoria Park. Our friends 
used to come as well. See? We were - we were no nuisance to any neighbour. In fact -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Would you play indoors more when it wasn\rquote t holiday time, or where would you go to play when it wasn\rquote 
t holiday time, you said you weren\rquote t allowed in the streets?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 We weren\rquote 
t in the street, we had our back yard. Yes, or else if it was wet we used to be downstairs. You see. And as I say the servant used to put on little plays for us for the weekend. Then the - other boy, we used to get - one Sunday - night over in ou
r place. You see, and - the following Sunday this boy - he\rquote s a stone rich man now, he used to do the magic lanterns. And he used to tell us stories. Don\rquote 
t know what - what he used to make up. But he used to relate stories, to us what he was showing, the slides that he was - used to be glass slides with little teeny pictures on it, used to put through.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Would he come round or would you go to his place?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 We\rquote d go to his, because - he had a place where he could put the sheet up on the wall you see. And
 we had the servant used to play love in the sack. You see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 She\rquote d make you do it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No, she\rquote d do it. Shed do it. And she\rquote d recite poetry. And then we\rquote 
d all have to - say a nursery rhyme, I was saying rhymes - Monday over in this launderette to a l
ittle girl. She said to me, do you know - Humpty-Dumpty? I said, yes. She looked at me. And a woman from round the back, she come and sat in front, she said, golly, she said, it\rquote s years since I\rquote ve heard that. I said, well they don\rquote 
t teach the children these things today. Nursery rhymes, yes, Humpty-Dumpty. I said to this little girl, do you know Wee Willie Winkle? Oh yes, she said, I do. I said, do you know Miss Muffet? Oh, she couldn\rquote 
t think about Miss Muffet so I told her Miss Muffet, and - Little Jack Ho
rner. I said, you see, this used to be how we used to pass our time. Then there were certain games. You see this book, we never had books like this. We never had books like this. But used to have a newspaper, for one ha\rquote 
penny. A newspaper used to cost a ha\rquote penny. And used to be pictures. Well we\rquote d save these pictures, we cut them out, and then we\rquote d get a big book, a thick book and we\rquote d put all these pictures in different pages, and we\rquote 
d start singing, when our friends was all in - we\rquote d start singing - a pin
, a pick, a jolly good pick. Why? Why was it a pin a pick? Because we all had pin cushions and when granny was making things she wanted pins - for pinning the - things together. So she used to say, cut out some pictures and put \lquote 
em in a book and go and - g
o and play, pin a pick. See, well we used to give granny the pins. And - all these - this - these were our games, and then - used to come a time when the boys used to have marbles. And their peg tops. And their whip tops. The girls used to have - gobs and
 bomsters when we used to sit on the kerb. Well we wasn\rquote t - as I say, we wasn\rquote t allowed in the street so we\rquote d sit in the yard, on the step, and we\rquote d have the children in and we\rquote 
d play these gobs and bomsters, you know. And we\rquote d have ball. We\rquote d have a game wally.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Throw the ball against the wall?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Yes. And of course we didn\rquote t have much room to run in-the yard. Or else we\rquote 
d play off ground - off ground touch. You see. Skipping. For the girls. Every season bought its own games. Then the boys used to h
ave a game of buttons. A boy used to take his cap off and put it in the street and another boy had to stand, say by the kerb, and had to throw an button, but he had to have his own button, you see, and throw it. If he got \lquote 
em in the cap - that was his back again. But if he didn\rquote t, whatever fell on the floor was the one that - cap belonged to. Used to be murders over that. Murders over that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Where did he get his buttons from?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well I suppose their - everybody had buttons. I\rquote ve got a box of buttons here now. A huge big box of buttons I\rquote 
ve got here, I keep \lquote em. If anybody - anybody says, here, have you got any buttons, I say, I\rquote ve got plenty of buttons but I don\rquote t know if it\rquote s the colour you want.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 How did you get the servant in the first place, did you advertise or was it somebody local or what?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Servant? Oh we advertised, put a bill in the window, the side window.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did you know her before she moved in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. But - the servant always had a room on her own. See? And - my aunt as well had a servant.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 What hours did she work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well she was - always there. You see, that\rquote s why I say a servant\rquote s job\rquote 
s never done. See, she was always on call. But no, a certain time in the evening - she was finished. And whatever was wanted, whoever wanted it had to do it, you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Would she have a day off and things like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh yes. Yes, she used to have I think - one Sunday off, one Sunday off I think - every third week. Sometimes she\rquote d take us over to 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Greenwich{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} to her people. Lived at {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Greenwich{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
. And - I remember getting a good hiding - when we came home, because she\rquote d taken us somewhere - and we had to go under like a - subway. And in this subway she got us to sing. She\rquote 
s singing this song, all along the rails, and what a lovely game. And when we came home my mother said, have you been good when you\rquote ve been out with Lizzie? I said, yes, and we\rquote ve been singing. My mother said you\rquote 
ve been singing? I said, yes. So she called Lizzie. She said, the children been singing? So she said, yes. She said, well don\rquote t teach my children to sing in the street. See? Yes. I remember that song plain.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did she used to eat with the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh yes. Yes, yes. She -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Was she a young girl?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh yes, she was only young, yes. And you know - you - 
you talk about memories, I was getting my little boy home from school - on one occasion, one - the elder one used to go to another school, he was capable of coming home on his own, and - coming home - coming up the street, I just got to my door - and some
body called my name. And my Lesley said to me, mummy, someone\rquote s calling you. So I looked across the road. I said, well I don\rquote t know who it is. So she said, you are, Hannah aren\rquote 
t you? I said, yes. She came over. I said, Lizzie Cable? That was her surname.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 How long was that since you\rquote d last seen her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 
Oh my God, I tell you, I was only a - youngster - when she - left to get married. I must have been about - nine years old when she got - left to get married, and she recognised me. And she was living i
n the next turning to me. And she said, who have you got to do your work? Oh I said, Lizzie, I do it myself. She said, you weren\rquote t brought up that way. I said, it doesn\rquote t matter Lizze. I said, I do it. She said, I\rquote 
ll come and do it for you. I said, no thanks Lizzie, I said, I\rquote ll carry on myself. My husband was out of work. But when I told her - so she said, I don\rquote t want any payment, she said, for old time\rquote s sake she said I\rquote 
ll come and work for you. It\rquote s the same as - as - a Jessie Barnet lives over there in
 Lullsworth buildings. She was a servant to my sister-in-law. And she run away from my sister-in-law and she came to me. I said, Jessie, I would willingly have you. She said, let me stop here with you. She said, I\rquote 
ll do all your work. I said, look Jessie, I couldn\rquote t take you like that. My sister-in-law would accuse me of taking you. I said, but if you want to stay here you can stay, but I said I\rquote ve got no money to pay you. She said, I\rquote 
ll work for you for nothing. I said, but I don\rquote t - wouldn\rquote t want you to work for me for nothing. See? Nobody - nobody\rquote 
s entitled to work for nothing. You see, and this is it. And she only lives over there. And many a time she used to say to me - oh - I always wanted to come and live with you. I used to say, yes, but it couldn\rquote t
 be. See? Yes, times - times was hard. See I had hard times when I got married. I think that's John - ticking the kids off. Yes. I - I had times when I got married for the simple reason - my husband -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 What year did Lizzie leave?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Don\rquote t know, I must have been about nine years old.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Before your mother died?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 
Yes, just before my mother died. She left to get married you see, and - then we had Mrs Lincoln, a char lady. She used to come in from Mondays to Fridays, regularly. Clockwork. And - m
y mother died in 1912. Now before 19 - before that - Lloyd George brought in this scheme for the - National insurance. And - Mrs Lincoln had to pay - I think forpence a week, and father had to pay the other fivepence. I think the stamp at that time was ni
nepence. Insurance. 1912. That was just before my mother died, my mother died 1912. And Mrs Lincoln was carrying on - she said her husband didn\rquote t think it right that she should have fivepence stopped. My father said well I\rquote 
ve got to - fourpence stopped - father said, well I\rquote ve got to pay fivepence. See? The stamp was ninepence. And I think you were entitled to - sick benefit. I don\rquote t - I - I - of course I don\rquote t remember m}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid8153771\charrsid6362028 u}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 ch about that. But - there it is. That I can remember. And - years after - she had two 
children. Years after when I first went to the blind club from the Tower Hamlets, I became a registered person for the blind club, and they took me to Key Close. Now Key Close is along Mile End - Road where the Assembly Halls - the Assembly Hall is, it
\rquote s like a church place see. And there\rquote s - there were at the time, old sailors cottages. And I used to go through there to this - big place. Key Close - bought you out in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Cambridge Heath Road{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}. Well I never knew my way round that way, in fact I was taken so I - I didn\rquote 
t know, I was taken to - that entrance and we used to walk through. Now - funnily enough - when I walked in, there was a man and a woman sitting there. And the woman got up and she come over to me, she said - you\rquote re Hannah? I said, yes. So she said
, do you recognise me? I said, no. She said, I\rquote m Mary Anne Lincoln. I said, good gracious me. She said, and this is my husband. See, he was blind. And she\rquote d come as a guide to him. And it was this very char woman\rquote 
s - daughter, youngest daughter, from all them years ago and she recognised me. See? It\rquote s funny you know. Funny how things work out and come out. You don\rquote t know who you meet in the course of a lifetime. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 What about Lizzie, did you just call her Lizzie?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 We called her Lizzie. Lizzie Cabl
e was her name. What we used to say, Lizzie Cable sat on a table, the table went pop and Lizzie went flop. Oh I remember that we used to say. And she used to start us off, she used to say, come on now, Lizzie Cable sat on the table. And we used to say it.
 Kiddyish voice. Lizze Cable sat on the table, the went flop - the table went pop and Lizzie went flop. She used to say, yes, now you can have a sweet. See? That\rquote s how we used to spend our time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 What would she call your mother and father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Mrs. And sir. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did your mother ever give any moral guidance to her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 To who?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Lizzie.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh that I don\rquote t know. That I don\rquote 
t know. I remembrance - I remember once - she went with a man. The one that she married, and he was in a shop in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Mile End Road{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
, housed to sell - all these gardening tools. And Lizzie had taken us along {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Mile End Road{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}, \lquote cos there was wonderful shops along 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Mile End Road{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} at the time - and she was talking to this man. And when she came home, I remember her saying to my mother -
 everything is fixed up, and I\rquote ll be leaving you. And my mother said, you\rquote re leaving? She said, yes, \lquote cos I\rquote m going to get married. Always remember that. But as regards guidance I don\rquote t know. Couldn\rquote t say.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did Lizzie give you baths and things like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No, no, there was my mother. No. Oh no, she never had anything like that to do with us like that, not with us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 What kind of things would she do then, just general housework?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 The housework, yes, and see that - the table was laid properly and - all chairs was all polished.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 She\rquote d take you for walks, you say you went to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Greenwich
{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} with her, but would she take you for walks?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 She\rquote d take - yes, but then father used to give her a - giver her her fare, our fares. You see, and she - we u
sed to ride to Greenwich - and coming through Blackwall Tunnel last week, last Monday - I said, this always puts me in mind - I don\rquote 
t like tunnels, this puts me in mind, I said, of Greenwich, when our servant used to take us to Greenwich and I used to be terrified because - there was water. I don\rquote 
t know now if it was water underneath our feet, but do you know, through that very thing I don\rquote t like piers. I - I - I - I go on a pier with a - with a bad heart. And if for instance - from the blind club we go to Brighton, I hate 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Brighton{\*\xmlclose}. And we have to go on a pier, I\rquote m terrified. I don\rquote t like it, from - all them years ago, I just don\rquote t like the water under my feet. I\rquote 
m sorry but - they say, well it won\rquote t hurt you. But I don\rquote t like it. And I\lquote m always frightened - I remember once I was at Southend and - to oblige the kids I go on the train, on the pier. I don\rquote 
t know about the kids hanging on for dear life, I know I hung on for dear life, and I swore never - never in me lifetime will I ever go again. And I haven\rquote t. I don\rquote t like it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did you ever go for holidays with your parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 We never had a holiday. We never had a holiday, all we used to get was one day outing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Was that with your parents?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. From like a school we used to go to, we used to get one days outing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Where would you go for that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Theydon Bois.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Where\rquote s that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Chingford way. {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Epping Forest{\*\xmlclose}
. And then we used to go round to all - all our brothers and sisters, all the aunts and uncles to collect. Used to get a penny each. We thought - we used to think we were Lady Rothschild\rquote 
s. Yes. But we always bought mother a present back. And our warning was - when we were going out, now don\rquote t you spend your money foolishly in bringing anything back home. But that\rquote s the first thing 
we did. The gipsies used to come - be there with all the big baskets, all little knick-knacks. And we always used to buy something for mother. And she used to prize it. The same as what I always prize everything that my boys bought me. See? And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 It\rquote s natural to buy things when you go away somewhere isn\rquote t it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well you want to. You see. But this was our warning, don\rquote 
t you bring anything back. But we did - always. And - well my granddaughter went to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Margate{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} last week, and I gave her ten shillings. 
In fact I give her five shillings each week, but I gave her ten shillings \lquote cos she was going. And she said to me on Sunday - she said, I had a nice day at {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Margate
{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} gran. So I said, did you, that\rquote s good, did you enjoy it? So she said, yes. I said, what did you go on? She said, I didn\rquote t go on half of what I wanted, I didn\rquote 
t have sufficient money. I think she went out with three pounds, for spending. She said now - I said, well if you never have more than for that for spending - I said, you still didn\rquote t have mo
ney for the shows that you wanted to go on. She said, we went on the - scenic railway, and we went here and we went there. I said, did you go in to Dreamland? Because I didn\rquote t think Dreamland was there at {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Margate{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} anymore. It\rquote s more like a leisure place. You know, fun - and all that. So I said to her, did you go in the - house, with all funny mirrors? She said, I didn\rquote 
t have sufficient money. I said, I\rquote ll cry for you. So she said she went into the - haunted house. That I didn\rquote t like \lquote cos the floor used to go away from under my feet, only went in that once. No. I\rquote 
m a coward at heart. I like terra firma.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 So you didn\rquote t really go many places?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. We never had any holidays, no. And that\rquote s why when I grew up I was determined that my boys would have holid
ays. And - I used to pay in for country holiday fund. Couldn\rquote t afford to take them myself. See? But I used to send them away from the school. Country Holiday Fund. And that was the - either the first two weeks of their month\rquote 
s holiday, or the last two weeks. Well I used to give \lquote 
em the last two weeks, because it was still fresh in their memories - for going back to school. Because when you got back to school you had to write about your holidays. See? You had to write a dictation - about your - holidays. And
 I used to think to myself, well that\rquote s the best - the first two weeks I can put up with them. But this is how I used to work it, I used to say - you help me - and then I\rquote 
ll take you out for the afternoon. But any - used to queue up for hours. But it wasn\rquote t a continuous performance. There were certain houses. You see. Until -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 What kind of films would they have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh - cowboy pictures, and - they used to have serials. And you know - we - he used - if he used to go on a Sunday - to the fair, picture
s for a penny, and we used to see Pearl White, and she\rquote d be hanging to the to the roof of a train by her teeth. And another train\rquote s coming through, we\rquote 
re all cringing, and then it would come up on the sheet, next week - you see, you see the continuation next week. And we were all - tensed up you know. And - Harold Lloyd.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 What day of the week would that be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 
Well it - any day you could go, for a penny. And over this fair for a penny. Mr Forest, he was a big burly man, and he always lived in a caravan. And it was a most beautiful thing that I\rquote 
d ever seen. See, and father used to serve him with stuff, and father used to say - you take the order over to Mr Forest and ask him to let you go through that caravan. This is a thing that you want to see. They
 had bedrooms. They had a most magnificent steel cooker. They had everything there that a house could have. In these caravans. One caravan was kept for - sitting and eating. And the other caravans, I think there was three in the grounds, were bedrooms. 
\lquote Cos he too had a big family.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Where was this now?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 
Over in the fair. You know Mile End station? At the back of Mile End station was known as the fairground. During the winter there was all sideshows, but - Mr Forest had this - first of all he used t
o go under a tent. They used to call it the fleat pit. Used to be a ha\rquote 
penny. But when he had it built it was a penny. See, and you used to go in, and you used to get a card. And - and it was a lucky number. If you had a lucky number on it - you either won
 boots or a sack of coal - or - you know, some - articles of clothing. See, the - what this man used to buy for prizes. And it used to be chock-block full. And used to sit on forms. And although it was chock-block full they\rquote 
d still say, come on, shift up there, shift up there, we were all huddled together and when we used to get these serial pictures you know - and the hair raising stuff that they used to do - we\rquote 
d all cringe and cringe and cringe, and the kids - and - and people at the back used to say, look behind, look behind, he\rquote s behind the door, he\rquote 
s behind - of course it used to be silent pictures. Look behind the door. And then it used to come up, continuation next week. And we\rquote d say - aaaah. Will you come next week, will you come next week? Yes, if 
we can save our farthings. We used to get a farthing a day - for spending.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Your dad gave you that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 
If we were good, we used to get a farthing a day. And we used to go to the little tuck shop by the school. And we - we used to get - a farthingsw
orth or sweets. Now - you used to get one ounce of sweets for your farthing. Sometime two ounces. And I used to send my young boy - on a Saturday and Sunday to Woodham\rquote s for a ha\rquote 
porth of mixed toffee. And I used to say, tell Mr Woodham I want a piece of banana split in it, because if you don\rquote t - if he doesn\rquote t give it to you you\rquote re going to take \lquote 
em back. And when I used to go in Monday - with - my boy, going to school, he used to say to me, did you get your banana - banana split? In your mixed toffee. Used to say, yes - yes thanks Mr Woodham. See? Or used to get a ha\rquote 
porth of stick-jaw. It did stick to your jaw but it was lovely coconut. You used to dribble - dribble down with all the juice of it, really lovely. And I was - as I was saying again - we used to stand for hours in the {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname 
address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Whitechapel Road{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 watching a man make the sweets. He had a stall, and he had a huge big cauldron. You used to see him tip the sugar in. And he must have been spirit stove underneath it, \lquote cos it wasn\rquote t coal, you know what I mean? And
 this sugar used to boil, and then he\rquote d take from certain bottles and put in. He used to make the paragoric sweets, the peppermint rock, the pineapple drops, and you\rquote 
d see him - mix it all on his board, you see. And then had - used to have a big hook on the side of the stall, he\rquote d throw it up to this hook and bring it down and he\rquote d keep on repeating that, and for all the coloured stuff that he\rquote 
d put in, so you\rquote d see the different colours come through on this - it was a wonderful fascination. And there\rquote s a place in Folkeston today that does it. You don\rquote t see it out, it\rquote 
s done inside. They make their own rocks, they make their own clove sticks, they make their own cough candy, the twists. They make all their own homemade sweets. But it\rquote s made in the back of th
e shop. But this was done in the wide open space - in the - {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Mile End Road{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}. Just outside Wickham\rquote s, that big - now it\rquote 
s a - a superstores. And - they used to stand there for hours watching. And you'd see - he'd get a little machine and he - put this sugar stuff through it. As it hardened - he\rquote d lay it - first of all he\rquote 
d roll it out, on his big trolley. And he\rquote d let it stand, and he\rquote d talking to you and telling you all what went in it, and then all of a sudden he\rquote d take it and he\rquote d roll it up and he\rquote d put it
 through this little machine and he\rquote 
d turn the handle. And it all come out in little squares. That you could - pick it up and just break it, it all come in separate pieces. See, but never had wrapped sweets in them days. See? But for hours we used to stand and watch.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did you ever have anything like muffin men?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 
Muffins? Well Sunday afternoon it was a recognised thing, the muffin man. Used to come round with a huge big tray on his head, and used to ring a bell. Oh, everybody knew when the muffin ma
n was - muffin and crumpet man. I think they used to be - seven for threepence, them days, muffins. And then we used to have a man come round the street - with - winkles, watercress - shrimps, cockles, mussels.;
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 This is the area of Tubby Isaacs round here isn\rquote t it?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No, no, no, Tubby Isaacs was always up this way. Yes. Talking about the {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}East End{\*\xmlclose}
. And - but not only round the streets where I lived, all round the {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}East End{\*\xmlclose} there they used to come round Sunday afternoon. And then we used to have one 
man, he used to sell fish. All the week. Come round with fresh fish. And - that was - that was quality that you used to get, and he\rquote d knock no my door, he used to say, Anne - got some nice plaice. Don\rquote t want it today Harry, I\rquote 
ve got no money. All right, I trust you to the end of the week. I said, I don\rquote t want no trust. So I\rquote d fish out a shilling, I\rquote d - go out and I\rquote 
d say, how much? Used to say, here you are, for you - three pound for a shilling, I'll have five pound for a shilling. And I bought \lquote em on one o
ccasion and they were still alive. They were - small plaice. And I said to my eldest boy, Mark some and look at these, look, they\rquote re still breathing. He never touched fish for donkey\rquote s years after that. He said, mum - I couldn\rquote 
t. I just couldn\rquote t. And if I was to buy - a live chicken, he wouldn\rquote t eat no chicken.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 And yet you say when you were young your father made a point of getting live poultry?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well we did. We did, but we didn\rquote t see it like that see, everything was served up to us. But - this is
 how it used to be years ago, and this very man that used to sell fish all week - on a Sunday he\rquote d come round with celery. All washed. And wiped clean. And I could never make out what he was calling out. He\rquote 
d call out, teppy all white, teppy all white. I went out to him one day, I said, Harry, what are you calling? He said, teppy all white. I said, that\rquote s celery. He said, that\rquote s right. I said, you mean celery all white. I couldn\rquote 
t understand what he was saying teppy all white. See, so of course we had a good laugh over that, then there was a man used to come round with peas. The green peas. See, when they were plentiful they\rquote 
d go late market, come home, they used to go round the streets. See, you used to get - get them ever so cheap. But on one occasion, we had a man from Romford, he had his own farm. And the government wouldn\rquote 
t pay him the price that he wanted. And he used to come up to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Aberavon Road{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 with a horse and cart and sell direct. And all the neighbours took it in turn every week regular to make him a mug of cocoa and give him chunks of bread and butter. See, because he\rquote d come all the way from Romford. Now Romford - now is only a stone
\rquote s throw, see, but we used to think it was miles, it was country - all countrified you see. Yes. Yes, I can -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Were there any theatres or music halls around when you were young?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well, see I don\rquote t remember them but there - there was the - {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname 
place}}Olympia{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}, there was Shoreditch, I remember the - Hackney Empire. I remember the Hippodrome that used to be in Poplar. Then there was the Stratford Empire. There was quite a lot of music halls.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 You didn\rquote t go to them when you were young?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh yes we did, there was the Paragon, and in my father\rquote 
s shop - he used to have like a - frame. And in this frame it used to advertise 
what was showing at the Paragon. Through him having that - to advertise, he used to get two free tickets every week. And my mother used to take us in turn. With her. Se one ticket admitted two. So mother would take - one child and herself. To the Paragon.
 
And we used to - all take it in turns and we used to see Ernie Lottinger, and Little Tich. You see, all the old music hall stars we used to see. And when we come out, of the Paragon, if it was a bitter cold night there used to be a hot potatoes Johnny sta
nd outside, with the hot potatoes in their jackets. A ha\rquote penny and a penny. Mother used to say, well we\rquote 
re walking home so you can have a penny one. And we used to dip our fingers in, you know, with the vinegar and the salt. Used to be lovely. See? They were all little treats, if we were good.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Would you ever go out with your mother very often on her own?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 
No. No, because mother never had time. As I say, we - this - this was on - rare occasions, when we used to go like for this - nice outing you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 You say your father would be busy all the time, he wouldn\rquote t take you out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Yes, well perhaps father would take one - father would take one of the boys, mother would take one of the girls. See, they\rquote 
d take it in turns, with the tickets, you see. Of course some of the big ones was already out at the theatres. Well do you know - in my time - we used to book a seat at the Palladium, {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Argyll Street{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}, for one and seven. Mind you, it was in the gallery. But we used to have a wonderful seat. {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Olympia
{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}. And there was one down - {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Commercial Street{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} here. Now it\rquote s a factory. But you can see it\rquote 
s got the - appearance of a theatre, an old theatre. You see, I think it\rquote s on the corner of {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Quaker Street{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} I think. Down there. \lquote 
Cos I once said, that looks like an old theatre. They said, it was a theatre, then they made it into a picture place but it didn\rquote t pay.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did you have any hobbies in your schooldays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Hobbies? You didn\rquote t have much time for hobbies. But I tell you - come home from school, we used to go to - h
ave our tea, have a little play. We had books. We had crayons. We had the game of ludo. See? I still got game of ludo. I\rquote ve still got draughts. And I\rquote ve still got Monopoly. And many a time I've thought - I\rquote 
ll give them away, oh no, children don\rquote t appreciate them today. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did you ever collect things, like stamps or cigarette cards or things like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Used to collect tram tickets. And we used to swap colours. And swap numbers. Used to be lovely. The boys used to collect - I\rquote 
ve got some - pictures now in my pocket - the boys used to collect the - pictures from the cigarettes, you see. And then they used to play blowings or flicking. You see, there used to be so many - silly little games that you could do. Then -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 What was this flicking game?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 
They used to get the pictures - see, and they used to toss up first. If it come down on the right side, that one that had said - he goes first. And if it come on the picture side the other one used to go first. This is how they used to toss for it. T
hen they used to flick the picture up, stand a certain way away, flick the picture up - and if the other one\rquote 
s picture used to touch it, this one used to take it. And so they used to play - used to play for hours. And then there was another game collecting all the cherry stones.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 What would you do with them, tinker, tailor type things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well they used to play with \lquote 
em, the boys used to play with pen. They used to get a cardboard box and make so many holes - in it, you see, and used to have so stand
 a certain distance away and throw. Whatever went in the box was the - the one who the box belonged to. See, and if they went out, you - picked them up and had another go. You see, all these games, they cost nothing. But this was what used to go, this is 
what pleased children years ago. And boys tops used to cost a ha\rquote penny. The whip tops used to cost a ha\rquote 
penny then. Used to make your own whip. Get a piece of wood and tie a bit of string round. You see? And then you used to un - untie the - end of the stri
ng to make like more of a lash so that you could whip the top. But the girls used to play that as well. But the boys used to play the peg tops, now that was a dangerous game. And the game of tip-cat. The boys used to get a piece of wood about that size an
d point it both ends. You see, they put it on the pavement and they\rquote d - crack it, with a piece of wood that it used to jump up. Well anyone passing it used to catch, and if it caught in the eye you\rquote 
d lost it. See? They stopped that game and they also stopped - they stopped another - another game. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Were you allowed to get dirty when you played?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well we did get dirty, healthy children always get dirty.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 But you weren\rquote t told off or stopped?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. No, no. The only - the only thing I - I - ever got ticked off for \lquote 
cos it was on a Saturday, see, and as I say we had a wonderful - table, father always kept a wonderful table. Somebody reading the - notice. And - we had a wonderful selection of fish. And granny didn\rquote t fancy the fish. She said, I w
ant you to go round, she said - take a plate and go round to Aunt Becky, see, that was her sister, granny\rquote s sister. It was my great-aunt. And she lived just round the next turning. Ask her if she\rquote 
s got any plaice. So - when I went upstairs father said to me, where are you going miss? So I said, I\rquote m going round to Aunt Becky for granny. She wants to know if Aunt Becky\rquote s got any plaice. So went out in the yard and he called down - 
\lquote cos we had a big window that opened you see, he called down, he said to granny, you haven\rquote t got enough fish here? You\rquote ve got to send the ch}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8153771\charrsid6362028 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 ld out for fish? So she said, I fancy plaice and you haven\rquote t got plaice. We had soles - we never had haddock. That was out. That was a common fish, that was out. We had all prime fish. And a sel
ection. So father said to granny, you haven\rquote 
t got sufficient selection then? She said, I fancy plaice. So of course now - father said, all right, og. So I went. And when I went round - my uncle was there and he always said prayers Saturday morning. And - I couldn\rquote 
t butt in, I had to wait. And when he\rquote d finished my aunt said to me, what is it you want? So I said, well Aunt Becky, granny said have you any plaice? She said, yes. Is that what you want? And she put a piece of plaice on this plate. Now - she put 
some greaseproof paper over it, she said, are you all right now to go? I said, yes granny. She said, mind the road. I said, right. And walking along - and - as I walked along, you see, there was a men\rquote 
s urinal belonging to the pub. And it was all wet. I didn\rquote t - I don\rquote t bother my head about that, I\rquote m trotting on, I\rquote ve got the plate, I\rquote m holding it. And I\rquote m walking along, I got across the road all right, didn
\rquote t think anything - didn\rquote t think of looking. And when I got into Grove Road - where I lived, I thought, I\rquote d better look to see if I\rquote ve still got the fish, and when I looked I\rquote 
ve got no fish. So - I ran all the way back, and there it was, all in this water. So I picked it up, and I\rquote ve got a big white pinafore, all goffered. You know what I mean by offering? You see work - work was wonderful years ago. I\rquote 
ll tell you about the goffering in a minute. I got this fish, I picked it up, I wiped it down my pinafore. Stuck it on the plate, put the greaseproof over, and I held my thumbs on the fish. And granny enjoye
d every bit of it. Well she says to me, what have you done to your pinny? So I said, I don\rquote t know. She said, I suppose, I said - she said, you\rquote ve wiped your hands down there, so I let it be at that, I didn\rquote 
t say yes or no. But with these - pinafores, they 
had big frills. And we used to have the goffering iron. You see, and the servant used to do all the goffering, the ironing and the goffering, you see. And there used to be all like little teeny baby pleats, all in this frill. It was wonderful work that wa
s done years ago. People will never never work like the old people years ago. I can remember - in my mother\rquote 
s kitchen we used to have a big chest of drawers - and you could see your face in it. The polish. And - used to have a white honeycomb drawer cover -
 over it. And on this cover - every kind of glass that was in creation was on there. And every week regular those glasses was washed, dried and polished. There. It was all routine work. See? Then there was the huge big dressers that used to take the whole
 
side of the wall. She used to have hundreds of pieces of crockery. As I say, we never bought anything practically off the peg, we - everything was made to measure, and I can always remember my mother saying to - her mother - granny, well mother, the end o
f May, the children won\rquote t want their winter coats any more. We\rquote ll brush them, steam them and brush them and we\rquote ll hang them. They were hung in the - big cupboards that we had upstairs in the - like wardrobe cupboards. Well that
\rquote s what I say, we used to have winter - and summer, spring and autumn. But here you don\rquote t know where - where you are. It\rquote s all mixed up.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Would you have any second hand clothes or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. No secondhand clothes, no. Father always abhorred - secondhand clothes. Used to say, if you can\rquote t have your own don\rquote 
t have anybody else\rquote s. You see, this was the idea, he used to say - if you save your money - you could go to any shop and have your selection. But when you\rquote d got to take what somebody else has left off, somebody else has had it. It\rquote 
s not you. And none of us - none of us liked that. We don\rquote t - we don\rquote t - if we got to a jumble sale, we go for a look. You see? Wemight pick up little oddments - you see, that we think, oh well, we\rquote ll give that to so and so, they can 
do with it. But for ourselves, no, never.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 How often a week would you have clean clothes to put on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 
Well now - every Friday - we had - the girls used to wear two chemises, that was one in pink flannelette and one in white. We used to have clean k
nickers. - Two petticoats, one in flannelette and one - top one, white. The boys always had their clean underclothes, twice a week we used to be changed from top to bottom. Every day socks and stockings. But we never had slippers, because wee weren
\rquote t about
 the place. Never had slippers. See? But - we had to be washed dinnertime - before we went back to school. We were never late at school. In fact, we were held - as - prize children, you know what I mean, for being - having people in business, we were neve
r late. We were there waiting for the school to come round. The school time was ten minutes to nine you had to be in. We were there -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Was the school very far away from where you lived?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Not so far. I should say from about - here to the bottom of t
hat turning to get to the first turning and then about this distance to the top of {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Commercial Street{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}. See? Not very far.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 How old were you when you first went to school, about five?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh I - I think I must have been before five. All the children went to - before five years ago.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Was it a board school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. No. It was a council school, the {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceName}}L.C.C.{\*\xmlclose}
 {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceType}}School{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} Board. Yes. You see, and - we were never kept away. But should you stop away from school - the School Board man used to come after you. And 
you had to give a jolly good reason why you were away from school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 You say your mother died in 1912, you would still be at school then wouldn\rquote t you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Were you away from school for that period?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Just for that week. Only for a week.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Do you remember the funeral?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 
Oh yes. I can remember the night she died, it was Good Friday, I was in the London Hospital, my father had taken me up. We were all there. And she died from appendicitis. \lquote Cos they didn\rquote t know what it was. And we
 always had a doctor in the house. Father always paid for the doctor. And he came in - and he didn\rquote t know - why my mother was getting such terrible pains.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did they know about appendicitis in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 They didn\rquote t know. And the first one - that
 ever had a successful operation - for appendicitis - was King Edward VII when he was Prince of Wales. Now, in St Pauls there\rquote s a plaque to commemorate that first successful operation.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 So people just died before?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Yes. Of course, they died with peritonitis, like my mother. Because it\rquote 
s an abscess that forms on that certain part of the gut. And the worst thing in the world for appendicitis now as knowledge has come forward is - no heat. But the doctor ordered hot flannel - for my mother. And then a
fter a week my father said to this doctor, Doctor Ewer, he said, well now, he said, you\rquote 
ve been in attendance for a week doctor, I want higher advice. And he got another doctor. And the other doctor as he came in ordered mother away. They operated on her s
traight away when she went in, and - on the Thursday and she died on the Good Friday. From peritonitis. See, it was too late.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 What kind of funeral did she have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 She had a most wonderful funeral. And being Jewish people you see we don\rquote t have flow
ers. But she had a ton of flowers. From neighbours. And neighbours that didn\rquote t speak to us, because opposite father\rquote 
s shop there was a cantankerous old man, he had so many houses and because we were Jewish people he thought we were foreigners. And he stopped the people in his houses from coming to us. And - if they knew - if Old Roy knew that they\rquote 
d been shopping in my father\rquote s shop, he\rquote d get \lquote em out, he\rquote d give \lquote em notice to quite. But when my mother died, he came over to father. And he apologized. And from
 that time - a better friend nobody had. They were fast friends. You see, people say about anti-semitism, it\rquote s always been and it always will be. Where the ignorance of people - don\rquote 
t realize that all countries - and all creeds are all the same when it\rquote s all boiled down. You see, I don\rquote t know if you heard me say to that Lil this afternoon upstairs, say your prayers. \lquote Cos her son-in-l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8153771\charrsid6362028 o}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 w is desperately ill. And this is what it boils down to. And I say like this, when people start about religions, and colour - no, we\rquote 
re all in the world, we\rquote ve all got to live. And the quicker - people get sense to realize that we\rquote ve all got to live together - the better for everybody concerned. But until that time comes it\rquote s always going to be upheaval. It\rquote 
s like somebody saying, my father\rquote s bigger than your father. My colour coat is better than yours. It\rquote s the same silly thing. It\rquote s ignorance. And I\rquote m afraid - instead of it being more enlightened - it\rquote 
s getting worse. But see, they make stipulations, they make so many stipulations of different things. And as I find out - well - as I say, I - I\rquote m seventy-two. But in my lifetime I\rquote 
ve got on with all people. I had one woman say to me during the war years - oh Myers, you\rquote ve got a lot of money. I said, I\rquote ve got a lot of money? How do you make that out? All JMews have got money. I said, well I\rquote 
m one of the few that hasn\rquote t. See? And all silly ignorance in these silly - silly points. That - that - and it caries animosity with it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Do you think you got your values, tolerance?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 This is what people\rquote s got to learn, tolerance. Tolerance for everybody.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Do you think you got these values from your mother and father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. I think I\rquote ve got my values from being the end of a long family, And looking back - I thought to myself, well if they\rquote 
d have done so and so, they wouldn\rquote t have been at loggerheads.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 What kind of things do you think your parents brought you up to believe as important in life?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 To help each other. Help your neighbour. If you can\rquote t do good don\rquote t do bad. And if you can\rquote t talk good don\rquote 
t talk bad, keep your mouth shut. This is what I call - religion. I\rquote ll help anybody, colour or creed. And people used to say to me, when I lived round the corner, I lived on the top of the Buildings before I come here, and peop
le used to say to me, oh Mrs Myers - you\rquote re going to have coloured people next to you. I said, so what? Oh you won\rquote 
t like that. I said, how do you know what I would like? Well I had Cypriot people. But when I said to my neighbour when she was going out, when you move let me see who\rquote 
s coming in please - and they were only a young couple. And one night - she knocked on my door. So I said, can I help you in any way? She said, please. She told me she was going to have a baby. I said, what, now? She said, no, I\rquote 
m going to have a baby. I said, good for you, and her husband was there. She said, you don\rquote t mind? I said, look, I had mine. I didn\rquote t ask anybody\rquote 
s permission. I had my children. Go ahead, you have your family. And from that day up to the time - she moved, and she had two children then, her little girl lived in my house. In fact they used to think it was my grandchild. And with Margerita - she
\rquote d do anything for me and I\rquote d do anything for her, and so would he. And then they moved out, they bought a house at - in Alexandra Park. I said to them the same as what I said to the people before. Let me see who\rquote 
s coming in. Well there was four Indian men come in. I said, no women? They said, no. All right. I used to do a bit of writing for them when they couldn\rquote t understand or read to them if they couldn\rquote 
t understand a letter that they got. And helped them in that way. And they were very good to me. You see, comes a time when help comes. Colour or creed don\rquote t count, you\rquote re glad of anyone\rquote s help when you\rquote re in trouble. And I
\rquote d fallen and broken my ankle and foot round there. And - I\rquote d been to the hospital and I\rquote d been in plaster, and when I came home I wanted to go to the toilet, and I had a little teeny step to get up and I couldn\rquote 
t get up and I fell. And I laid out there on that landing for over an hour, my husband couldn\rquote t help me. And in the end - I wiggled myself on my back back into my kitchen. And my husband said to me, let me see if I can get you up. I said, you can
\rquote t get me up, I\rquote m a ton weight, and what with all this plater, I said, I can\rquote t get up. And that was on the floor. Then all of a sudden I got a knock. It was Rhaman. May I come in? I said, yes certainly. He\rquote 
d seen me on the floor. Oh, he said, you fall? I said, yes. He came round the back of me, he put hi
s arms under my armpits and he just picked me up gently and put me in a chair. I said, thank you Ramon. So easy. When he had the flu and a couple of the others had the flu I went in and out. I held their keys. When I thought that the agent was being funny
 with them I came round to the Citizens Advice Bureau for these people to come and see to them. You see? Nobody knows in the course of a lifetime who wants who. And what you want them for. So people mustn\rquote 
t talk. These four men - were as good as gold. They used to knock on my door especially when my husband used to be like late turn, when he was at work. I\rquote 
d say, what is it Ali? May I come in? Yes, you can come in. May I sit down? They never took a liberty - in stepping in as I opened the door, because as yo
u open the door, you was in my kitchen. They never took that liberty. They never sat down unless they asked. And I\rquote d say, did you want me for anything particularly? Used to say, I lonely. That\rquote 
s why. I said to him one night, are you a married man Ali? He looked at me. I says, the truth. He said, yes. I said, how many children? He said, four. I said, where are they? He said - in my home town. Don\rquote 
t exactly know where they come from. But he told me had property. They grew everything. He had three houses. I said, why did you come over here? And he only said one word. Freedom. He said, I go to work. I talk to a friend. I don\rquote 
t get molested. I don\rquote t get arrested either. I can meet friends. A friend can come to me. He said, you\rquote ve been very good to me. You let me talk. I said, you\rquote re good to me Ali. You help me. It\rquote 
s - so it cuts both ways, and this is how we got on right until I come away. See?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Going back to the time before the first world war do you think your parents were very religious?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. No. They weren\rquote 
t religious. As I say, may father was a market man, he used to say, what I do out I do out. See? If you wanted a meal he\rquote d go into - the caf\'e9 here. If he wanted bacon he\rquote d have it in the caf\'e9
. And the funniest part of all was, when my mother wanted bacon - she\rquote 
d bring it in. But her mother never knew - because she used to pop it in the oven - while we got washed and dressed Saturday morning and she used to say, now look, if your grandmother asks you what you\rquote ve had, just say a fried egg. But we used t
o have egg and bacon. She said, don\rquote t mention that. See, this is what we used to have.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did you go along to the Synagogue at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. The only time I went into a Synagogue was when - I got married.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did you have anything like Sunday schools?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Yes. Hebrew classes. And I\rquote 
ll tell you something. My father was a member of Stepney Green Synagogue, for years, all the years of his life. In fact this sister that you saw today, still carries on his seat - in there. I\rquote m a member there too. But thes
e are my - the reason why I joined, because over funerals. It costs such a terrible lot of money for a funeral today. So we pay into the Synagogue for - to cover that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did your father did that in his time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh yes. Yes. And you see, he never went. He never went. But one day, on the day of the Fast, he - he was a man for walking. He\rquote 
d put his hands behind his back, and he could stroll for miles, and he walked into the Stepney Green Synagogue. \lquote Cos he\rquote d got his number of his seat, and he said to the man, he said, you\rquote re in my seat. He said, you\rquote 
ll pardon me, he said, this is mine, I\rquote ve had it for years. So father said, you might have had it for years but you don\rquote t pay for it. I pay for it. He said to father, oh no you don\rquote t. So father done no more, h
e went over to the - clerk there you know who sees to all the things, and he went over and s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8153771\charrsid6362028 poke to him. Oh, he said, it\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6362028  }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 great to see you here. So of course he came over and said, yes, he said, you\rquote ve got this gentleman\rquote s seat. He said, well I\rquote ve had it for years. He said, unfortunately he doesn\rquote 
t come. See? But, this is the only reason that we keep - the Synagogue. For that sort of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 What were your parents like about things like swearing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 My father could swear. He was a market man. My mot
her never swore. But my father always drew a line - if there was children or women about. And I can remember - we used to have a - a certain woman come into the shop, and my father used to say to me - I want you to go inside into that shop parlour and don
\rquote t come out until I say it\rquote s all right, And I said to him on one occasion, why? He said, \lquote cos there\rquote s a certain party coming in here - and I don\rquote 
t want you here. All right. And if father said so we had to do it. As old as we were. So - this woman came in. A
nd this woman went out. So afterwards I said to him on one occasion, father why is it, I said, when Mrs Costing comes in, you wont' let me be in the shop? He went - no good to you. He swore, but not in front of us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 What did they think about playing games, I don\rquote t suppose it would apply really?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 I\rquote d play a game of cards with father.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 What about playing games on Sundays or the Sabbath day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well - he didn\rquote t play games on Sunday. Sunday was Sunday. Sunday was - Sunday was reserved. And this Sunday that\rquote 
s just gone, and the Sunday before, I heard church bells, and we were sitting outside, I says, it\rquote s lovely to hear the church bells. It is really lovely. And you know, it\rquote 
s a big - problem to me, that that Whitechapel church - there used to be a church there, been pulled down, and every Christmas Eve the carols used to ring out from them. And it was beautiful to listen to. And that bell foundry, is along 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Whitechapel Road{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} still. Still makes bells for the church. And they are - years and years - hundreds of years old, them. And they still make -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did you ever do things like carol singing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well we done carol singing up here.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did you in those days before the first world war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh no. No, because we used to - used to go to Hebrew classes. We used to come out of Hebrew classes and go into 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceName}}Holy{\*\xmlclose} {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceName}}Trinity{\*\xmlclose} {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceType}}Church{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 to see a magic lantern. See?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 What kind of things would the Hebrew classes be, would they just be scriptures and things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Scripture. Yes, the Scripture.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Would that be every Sunday or every Saturday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No, we used to go Saturday, Sunday and Wednesday evenings. Used to go from ten \lquote til twelve Saturday. From ten \lquote 
til one Sunday. And {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname time}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Minute}{\xmlattrvalue 30}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Hour}{\xmlattrvalue 17}}}half past five{\*\xmlclose}
 to half past seven Wednesday evening. And that was the only time we were up late. And then a brother of mine used to - wait for us outside the school. Used to be in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}
Malmsey Road{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} school, see. And do you know - I went up to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Leeds{\*\xmlclose}. I was in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Leeds{\*\xmlclose}
 the early part of the war, this last war. And I went up to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Leeds{\*\xmlclose} on one - can\rquote t say I can read it. But I remember because what you learn in childhood you don\rquote 
t forget. And my friend said to me, golly. She said, that\rquote s more as good as what religious ones up here can say. I said, Betsy, I learnt that when I was a child.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did you ever have things like family prayers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did you say grace before meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 
No. No. But we learnt them in Hebrew classes. You see. But this uncle that I went down - round to, he always done his prayers before - his grace. And that\rquote s why you couldn\rquote t interrupt him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Were you taught to say your prayers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh yes, we always - we always said prayers of a night.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Who would teach you that, your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No, we learnt it in the school. You see? And then when the three of us used to get
 into bed, the eldest one used to say - after she told us these fairy tales, or we\rquote d say prayers first in case we fell asleep, see, while she was telling the fairy tale. We\rquote d say our prayers. In English. See?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 How did your parents expect you to behave towards your brothers and sisters?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 In every respect. We couldn\rquote t call each other a liar. And we couldn\rquote t say you were rotten. Used to say, there\rquote 
s no rotten people here and there\rquote s no liars. And don\rquote t let me hear that again. See, we were always pulled up - at the spot. And this is what I say and I carried that through.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 What would they tell you go do if another child hit you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Hit \lquote em back. We had to fight our own battles.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Would you say you received the ideas how to behave from both your parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Or was one more responsible than the other?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Both. Both. Both. Both.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 You say your father often used to eat separately in his own room?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Yes, shop parlour, \lquote cos he had the shop to look after.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 You didn\rquote t have any livestock or anything, you used to go to the markets for that, you didn\rquote t have chickens or anything?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Can you ever remember seeing your mother having less food so the rest of the family could have more?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Didn\rquote t have to. There was always full and plenty.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Would your father have more than anybody else?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. No. But - there was one stipulation. Father, the head of the house was always served first. Granny next. Mother last. And up \lquote 
til - present day, my husband always come first. Unless we\rquote re on holiday. And we\rquote ve got an odd person. And I say, I\rquote 
ll play - shall I play mum? Then I give the guest first, I always apologize to my husband, I go Alf - the guest comes first? He goes - O.K. Satisfied.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Could you choose what you wanted to eat from what was cooked?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Or did you have to eat a bit of everything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. It was there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 What would happen if there was some food left uneaten on the plate?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 What was left on the plate - got thrown away. But was - wh
at was left over, if there was - say for instance, potatoes left over, they would go in a dish in the oven. For such as times as if we felt peckish - we would come in - and we\rquote d have these potatoes, and they\rquote 
d be all lovely golden - tops to them. Nothing got wasted. Nothing got wasted.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did you ever have any pets or anything in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 What would happen if there was something on the table that you wanted, like salt, could you just take it or would you have to wait?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. We were never allowed to take. It was there. If we asked - may we have? And the same goes today. If my grandchildren come and I
\rquote ve got a stack of fruit on the table - gran, may I have - I go, it\rquote s there, take it. They\rquote ve asked. But when I see children come in and they take things and they don\rquote t ask may they - it\rquote s wrong.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Were you taught to hold your knife and fork in a certain way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Could you leave the table when you wanted?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. No, we had to ask. And we had to wait. If we finish
ed first, well we just simply sat there until the others was finished. See? And then the - the eldest, if they\rquote d finished - may I leave the table, well once one started to leave the table may we - may we go? Yes, you can all go if you\rquote 
re finished. You went.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Could you ask for a second helping?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh - as much as you wanted. Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Where would the younger - ones sit before they were old enough to sit at the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 High chair.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Who would feed them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 That would be me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Would your mother feed you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 
Well - the - I suppose I was the same as every other child, you wanted to get hold of you, and if you upset it - well this is how you teach yourself. We always had a big feeder. You see? It\rquote s like - only today, Miss Wagstaff said she\rquote 
d upset gravy, I said, you should have had an overall on, you\rquote re handling food. See? No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Can you remember what would happen on a birthday, would you celebrate birthdays in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well - we used to celebrate birthdays, wish each other many happy returns. But we didn\rquote t send many cards to each other.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 What about presents and parties?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well, if we had money or we wanted to buy anything - we could, but - we never had parties. We never had parties. We weren\rquote 
t up for parties. See, nobody ever realized the family that there was. See? No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Would you have anything special to eat on a birthday? A birthday cake or something?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. No, no fuss was made. No fuss whatsoever.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Was there anybody in the family who sang at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Sung?
 We all did. We could all kick up a row. Well - see, that was it years ago. You made your own pleasures. You just made your own pleasures. See? Now - sometimes a person come in - and - father would say to me - she\rquote 
s got a lovely voice, take her upstairs. So he arranges to take this person upstairs, see? And perhaps a couple of other people, and we used to have a sing-song upstairs.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 What kind of things would you sing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 All the old songs, you heard Ruby sing - today, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did your parents play any games with you at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 What about newspapers and magazines?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh father always had newspapers. And - what - what book did I used to buy - the Girls Own.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Do you remember whether your father ever took any interest in politics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. He never took any interest in politics but he always gave a vote.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Do you know what he voted?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 It wasn\rquote t Tory that he voted for. He was a worker.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Was that Liberal or Labour?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No, there - there was Radicals wasn\rquote t there. You see I didn\rquote t understand politics then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did you ever take any interest yourself later on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Me? I am. I - I\rquote m hot on it. Yes. But I wouldn\rquote t enter any arguments with politics. \lquote Cos everybody\rquote 
s entitled to their own views.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Were you interested when you left school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. It didn\rquote t - we didn\rquote 
t have an earthly chance to be interested in anything, because what our parents said went. You see? But the thing is this - as you grow older - you get your own fixed opinions, and your own ideas. And I always 
found out in my life - I could never live under the Tory rule. You see, they reigned with a rule of iron. This is for me. You\rquote re not used to it. So you have to put up with it. But today the tables are turning. You see? But we\rquote 
ve got a Tory Government in at the present time, and if the workers think they\rquote re going to rate them - they\rquote ll bring \lquote em down. They won\rquote t break a Tory. They - they\rquote 
re having a good go. And I say Thank God this has happened because - the Tories got in, to me, under false pretences, and 
who got them in? The housewives. With their votes. When he sang out their wonderful praises, the young housewives never roughed it like we roughed it in the 1930\rquote s. They don\rquote t know - the young people don\rquote 
t know hardships. I say to my own daughter-in-law - you don\rquote t know what hardship is, Lesley\rquote s always got a living and a good living for you. And you say you can\rquote 
t manage. I had to manage. I used to get at one time - twenty-seven and sixpence a week - unemployment money. That was my husband was unemployed. But if he hadn\rquote t paid the insurance stamps he couldn\rquote 
t have got that. When he come home he used to give me twenty-seven and sixpence. I used to give his mother downstairs, \lquote cos his father was a docker, half a crown. Left me with twenty-five shillings. Used 
to give Alf half a crown for his pocket. Left me twenty-two and six. I had eleven shillings rent. I had two children to keep. It was hard. But I never got into debt. \lquote Cos I had to learn what I couldn\rquote 
t afford I had to leave alone. I - if I couldn\rquote t afford it it didn\rquote t worry me. You could have it. You could afford it, good luck to you. See, I wasn\rquote t avaricious. I used to think to myself, time\rquote 
ll come - when I will be able to afford it. I used to go down the {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Roman Road{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} late - Saturday afternoon. Had a baby in
 a pushchair, and walking, and I - And this man says to me - me can you ask - answer me a question? I said, I don\rquote t know what the question\rquote s going to be. He said, what have they done with a hundred and forty of our pounds? I said, you
\rquote re a better man than me Gunga Dhin, you tell me. He said, they\rquote ve robbed us. I said, well of course they\rquote ve robbed - best country to live in.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Before 1918 people used to divide society into different groups or classes, can you tell me if you had any idea what they were wh
en you were young?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 
Well - you - you were either rich, middle class or poor. There were three classes. If you were poor you were - you were really poor. And there was no help. But if you were middle class you just sailed along merrily. But if you was 
rich - you had more than abundance. And they didn\rquote t know what to do with it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did you see yourselves as belonging to one particular group?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Yes, I reckon we were middle class. Of course father always got a living. And where a man had - always got 
a living he could always pay his way. You see, and father never got into debt. He used to say to me - and I say today - get into debt is the easiest thing in the wide world, you can be in the lap of luxury, if you don\rquote t pay for it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Do you remember any
 families who had money and then who suddenly went down, was it possible to move from one group to another? Either up or down?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. No. But - poor people - have gone up - into the rich class.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 In those days even?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Even in those days. And when
 they did that and they moved out to servia - to the suburbs, to what they call they suburbia, you know, and all the - all these - posh places, what we call like the new areas, the new built up areas, you see. And I can remember driving round the 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}East End{\*\xmlclose} in a pony and trap. And I\rquote ve got an old dear that comes to the {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Beaumont{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 club, in fact she phoned me - the other night. She\rquote s in her eighties. But her son-in-law - was the boy that I used to drive about in our pony and trap. Andrew. In fact it was Andrew th
at answered me, he said, is that - he said, is that you Andrew? He says, yes, is that you Anne? I said yes. I said, where\rquote s your mum? See? And I used to drive him round, I used to drive him all round the streets, all round 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Tredegar Square{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}. See?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Who would you say were the most important people in the area you lived in?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 The workers. The working class.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 In what sense were they the most important?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 In every sense. There was more feeling, more sincerity amongst people. And more truth amongst people. There wasn\rquote 
t much - but - if they worked - and they had a penny - they would willingly share that penny - half with you. But today it\rquote s grab, grab, grab, grab.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Were there any distinctions between the workers, between craftsmen and general labourers or unskilled workers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well - you see - now we\rquote 
ll take the dockers for instance, it was all unskilled labour. And I can remember my father-in-law, he was a docker, and opposite there was another man, he was a comfortable man. He could take the 
ganger out from the dockers - to a pub of a night and buy him as many drinks as he wanted. This man and my father-in-law would go to the dock gates, this man gets taken on, my father-in-law not. The ganger takes him on, he\rquote 
s brought him his beer the night before, which my father-in-law couldn\rquote t afford. That\rquote s how the docker\rquote 
s work was done. Then came - what they call a splinter group. My father-in-law was a - blue card worker. And at that time anybody - could have taken a chance and gone down to the docks to get a day\rquote 
s work. But when once they held a blue card, they were putting the bar up. If you didn\rquote t hold a blue card you couldn\rquote t get no work. And you\rquote 
ll see in time to come, when they show you films where the dockers where they used to hold up the blue c
ards to prove that they were blue card workers. Because we had a neighbour and he opened a - a - he - started off - a splinter group of dockers with a white cards. A white union. White union cards. See, it was a splinter group. This man himself was a dock
e
r. But he got so many with his talk, if you've got a glib tongue - you can get away with anything. And some people will be led by the nose whether it's right or wrong. While other peoples talk. But, as I say, this man, he was a docker. And he belonged to 
this splinter group and he\rquote s came to my father-in-law - on one occasion, he said, would you like to join - the white card workers? My father-in-law said to him, get out. He said, all my life, he said, I\rquote 
ve been a blue card worker, and I shall remain a blue card worker. You see, and this is how - you get a little bit of Communism in here, see? We\rquote ll give you this, we\rquote 
ll give you that. No different to what Hitler said. Hitler said he would give the people this and that. He would have done. He was a good leader at one time. He got the workers going. He got them work. But when he started interfering with different people
\rquote s religions, that was his undoing. Because there\rquote s no - to - in my opinion - there\rquote s no race in all the world - that will be wiped out - by another human being. We\rquote ll go back to religion, there\rquote 
s one blessed God Almighty for everybody, for all creeds and colour. That\rquote s my belief, that\rquote s my faith. See?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 What would the status of people like clergymen or doctors or teachers be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Clergymen, teachers and doctors was revered. They were looked up to, to lead the way And what they said went. We\rquote 
d no more - than flying in the air - back answer the teacher. And it was always politeness when - if it was a woman teacher - we used to stand. Good morning Miss. And she\rquote 
d answer, good morning children. We all assembled in the hall for prayers. If the Jewish children didn\rquote t want to sing the prayers we used to go out but we didn\rquote t sing, that\rquote s the only thing.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Can you remember if there was anybody used to be known as a real lady or a real gentleman in your area?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well - I knew a real gentleman, as I say, he was Lord Tredegar\rquote 
s nephew. And he was a real gentlemen. And he told me - I never forget the shock that I first had when I went into his house, 
and I was only a youngster. He had all nude models all round his house. And that was a thing in the past that you never saw, nude models. In fact, it used to be an offence - for - a shop to have a nude model - of a woman in the window with nothing on. No,
 ordinary dress shop. They\rquote d be in trouble if they had - a model in the window with nothing on. Like I saw this morning down the Lane here. I thought to myself, well that used to be a - an offence years ago. But you see, we\rquote 
re supposed to be broad minded, we are broad minded. Just like the television. We\rquote 
re broad minded enough to know all the swear words. But we don't have to have these things thrown at us from here, to pay our seven pound licence to get all swear words at as. There\rquote s only - there\rquote s half a d
ozen shows on the television - that they - that every minute - men and women come out - with all the swear words. It don\rquote t call for it. But it\lquote 
s not reality, we - we know what it is, we know what goes on. We know what people say. We can do our share. I - there\rquote s - I - there\rquote s nobody in the wide world that can\rquote 
t do their share. And when people approach you - with all the bad language, and you take it lying down, they\rquote re going to tread on you altogether. But you come back - in that bad language to them, they pipe down, because they\rquote re - you\rquote 
re on their level. But we don\rquote t have to pay to have it done. And it\rquote s sickening.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 You say that in your day your father didn\rquote t want you to hear that kind of language?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. Father was a market man, father used to swear. But not in front of children, not in front of women.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Can you remember being brought up to treat people of one sort differently from people of another?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. We always had to have respect for people. And if we came in the shop - and there was a
 customer in the shop and we wanted to get past, we had to say - excuse me please. And then go round the back of \lquote em. Because we were interrupting a conversation.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Was there anyone you called sir or master or madam?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. I didn\rquote t. But boys had to call - sir for the teacher.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Do you remember anyone calling your father or mother sir or master or madam?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 
Well, the - the - the servant. Or a customer, a good class customer. See, what I call a good class customer, a customer that could well afford - good fruit. You see? And they talked to father. And then - in - father would talk to him, and they\rquote 
d say, well sir, it\rquote s very nice talking to you. See? Father always used to say to me you\rquote re in business. If the sun\rquote s shining gloriously and a customer comes in and says, isn\rquote t it cold, agree with \lquote 
em and say, yes it is cold. Never get into hot words with your customer. Agree with \lquote em. And that\rquote s the policy of today, you\rquote ve got to agree with \lquote em. You know the old old saying, if you can\rquote t fight pem you jo
in them. But at the same time you can still lead your own life. You don\rquote t have to do their - have their life. And this sister of mine, she\rquote ll say to me many a time - if I was you - I\rquote d do so and so. I go, well I\rquote 
m not you. And that\rquote s that. But now she approaches me and she goes, I know what you\rquote re going to say, you\rquote re not me. I said, that\rquote s quite right. I\rquote m not you. Well I was only going to say. I go, well that\rquote 
s all right. If you\rquote re only going to say, but don\rquote t expect me to do it. See? But - no. Because - If I don\rquote t want to do it - many a time she has said to me, I wouldn\rquote t speak to that person, and I wouldn\rquote 
t do anything for that person. Never. I said, well the difference with you and me, I would. See? And I\rquote ll tell you on one instance, in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Leeds{\*\xmlclose}, she came 
home from work and she said to me, Mrs Wong wants a jumper made. Don\rquote t make it. So I never knew that was Mrs Wong. I said, now then, don\rquote t tell me what to do. She said, well, she goes to me, I know you\rquote ll say, I\rquote 
m not you. I said, that\rquote s all right. So long as you know that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 In that time before 1918 did all the families in the working class have the same standard of living?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh no. Oh different standards. The same as today.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 In what sense?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Look - the working class - and the - I won\rquote t say 
working class, the ordinary people, because out of the - ordinary people - there was lots of people that couldn\rquote 
t get work. And they were as good as me and as good as you. But - there was a class of living. Some people liked to live on the cheapest of stuf
f. And a class of people, liked to live on a little and the best of the stuff. There was always class - distinction amongst every grade of people. That\rquote s how I think. And when I hear, even today - they say, bacon\rquote 
s gone up. I think to myself, well I can get something cheaper for my breakfast than pay the price for bacon. I could have an egg, I\rquote m satisfied. I\rquote ve eaten. You see, I don\rquote 
t have to bow down to these sort of people. And people say, oh I must have it. Well if you must have it and - and you want it you\rquote ll pay for it. If you want it bad enough you\rquote ll pay for it. But if there\rquote 
s no necessity to you - for you to have it, you don\rquote t have it. See? No, and we all - as I say, we always had - a - a nice class of customers, my father respected all customers. So
me used to come - come in you know a little bit - funny. And - father used to humour them you know. And then - they used to walk out and next time they come in they used to apologize and say, I think I was a bit funny the last time I was in. Father says, 
I didn\rquote 
t think so. You know, and take it so casual, take the wind out their sails - that they were all right. But it never happened again. Whereas if you pull these people up, say, here you caused a - trouble when you came in the last time - you see, it doesn
\rquote t pay. And it\rquote s the same today, I find. People say to me - oh - she\rquote ll do for you, and she won\rquote 
t do for me. I go, but why? What makes you think that. You ask that person that question - to - oh do something, ask you to do something - if it\rquote s possible she\rquote ll do it. I\rquote 
m no favourite. Ask the person. What do they want, me to go and ask - I can\rquote t talk for anybody, I don\rquote t talk for anybody. Everybody must talk for themselves.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Do you think in certain respects one group would feel superior to another group amongst the ordinary people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. No. We shouldn\rquote t be.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 But before 1918 did you feel that some people did feel superior to others?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well the middle class - the middle class -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 I was thinking in terms of the ordinary people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 The or
dinary people - had as much as each other. But one was no higher than the other. But with the middle class - where the middle class got a living - and they poor people couldn\rquote 
t get a living, they were the superior ones. And for a person to have - say a man for instance to have a job - as an assistant in showing materials in these big general stores in the drapers - he gets a good living. He\rquote s a gentleman. Why? \lquote 
Cos he\rquote s got a living? You see. And this is how it was graded. You see?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Were certain families though of as being rough?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well there was - there was certain families - very rough. Very rough. And there was certain families were - see I don\rquote 
t know that myself personally. But from talk - people used to say - you couldn\rquote t walk down that turning 
- where Miss Wagstaffe was only telling me the other day. When was it, yes, yesterday, when we were sitting there. She was in the locality, and she said - she couldn\rquote 
t walk down the street because the people started - you know, funny thing - business. If you walked up straight - that was wrong, they\rquote d pick holes in you. And they\rquote 
d start taunting. Different things. If you walked along and you took no notice, you\rquote d still get it. Until you turned round and give \lquote em exactly the same medicine as what they\rquote re giving you. Well it - it\rquote s the answer today.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Do you think your mother saw herself as belonging to any particular social group?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Who? No. My mother - my mother, was a - a busy person. She had a family. She had friends, and - this was her life. She ne
ver looked for anything - different. And women didn\rquote t look for anything different, not until we first got the vote.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did your mother ever take any interest in politics at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. No, \lquote cos women in them days didn\rquote t have any interest in politics. Not until Sylvia Pankhurst\rquote s time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 That was about that time wasn\rquote t it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 In the 1912\rquote s. See?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Do you remember seeing a policeman around where you lived?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No, but I remember the - Sidney Street Seige.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Was that about 1910?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No, it was later than that. I\rquote ve got that in a book here.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Weren\rquote t there any policemen around?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Yes, the police and I saw the troops all laying on their tummies and I couldn\rquote 
t understand why they were laying on their tummies - with the gun. But I got a good hiding when I come home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 You actually went down to see it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Yes, because I went with some schoolchildren - and my job was to go to school and come home. Show yourself. And I didn\rquote 
t. See, and I\rquote d broken the rule. And I got a good -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 You can\rquote t remember them saying they\rquote d call a policeman when you were naughty?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh no. Didn\rquote t - father never had to - threaten us. Of course father\rquote 
s word was law. Nobody argued with father. He was father. And many a time, and I - I\rquote ve been married years - when he was in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Leeds{\*\xmlclose}, it\rquote 
s something he said to me once and I answered him, he said, well I\rquote m your father. See? \lquote Cos the others couldn\rquote t - I said, you might be father. But you\rquote re not right. I\rquote 
m entitled to my opinion as well as you. You see, and this is it. It\rquote s so free and easy that there\rquote s no - no control over anything today. And it\rquote s not right. It\rquote s not right. It might be a very permissive society, but we\rquote 
ve done it. And I\rquote ll tell you another thing that I think is very very bad indeed. We get cheap fares. But if we get on a bus - and a child is sitting, a child can\rquote t get up. Now I said, can\rquote t - get up. There\rquote 
s many a child would get up, but the conductor will turn them off. Why? No standing. And a child\rquote s entitled to a seat, although they - they only pay part fare. Well now it comes to boil down - that we only pay part fare, so we\rquote 
re on the same level. But the thing is this, a child would get up for an adult - but the conductors are not nice. They ring the bell and turn them off. See, no standing. And thi
s is the undoing of all the - the values of what you used to know years ago. If you saw a person on the - on the other side of the street, you\rquote d acknowledge them with a nod, and a man would raise his cap. Now they couldn\rquote t care less. See, it
\rquote s - to me it\rquote s all - it\rquote s all wrong. I only say one thing, thank God - and I thank God a thousand times - that when people talk to my sons - they say to me, Mrs Myers, you\rquote 
ve got two gentlemen. I go, well thanks very much, so they ought to be. No more than they ought to be. See? They\rquote re willing - now look, my - my son and daughter-in-law went to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname 
country-region}}Bulgaria{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}. See? So - the lady next door -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Can you remember whether your house was rented in those days or was it your own house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Rented, no, rented.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Who was the landlord, was he local?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Local landlord, name of Causell Brothers. And we used to have the estate agent, a Mr }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid8153771\charrsid6362028 B}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 evan, that was the agent there. See?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Was the shop part of a chain of shops or was it just your own shop?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh own - own - own shop. 
And - we had good convenience in them days, because upstairs had - toilet - and sink, and taps upstairs you see. That - as we came out the bedrooms we could wash. Come down clean.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Can you ever remember your mother being ill.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. Never. Mother - this was her first illness. This was her first illness.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Can you remember whether your father and mother would go out much apart from having friends in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No, no, they were - they were all - never apart, only - it used to be father\rquote s - pl
easure, to go to the Derby, that was on the Wednesday. But - if he went to the {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Derby{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
, mother used to go to the Oaks on the Friday. See? Racing. And - if father went down by coach mother went down by coach. See? Because in them days used to be the horse bra
kes. But father never allowed mother to go by horse brake, it always used to be the coach.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 If friends came to the house would they have food and drink?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Yes, yes, oh yes. And they took full and plenty down. You see - when mother was going to the Oaks - she was very fond of duck. She\rquote 
d buy a couple of ducks and she\rquote d pluck them and roast them, and she - now, they take their own picnic. You see. And they take all the stuff with them, because the coach - had a boot that - what they could put their st
uff in. You know, they used to sit - you know, in their own little group, and enjoy - not the racing, but just the day\rquote s outing. See? \lquote Cos it wasn\rquote t - wasn\rquote 
t much to do, only to go to these - brake outings, you could go to Southend. {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Margate{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} - {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Margate{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} was out the question. Too far. Too far for the horses. Used to go to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Epping Forest{\*\xmlclose}
. Or Seven Kings. Now, I can remember Seven Kings - when I was a - a young woman - well, young girl. And we used to go for rides. We used to go for a ride to Seven Kings. Umpteen 
times I used to go out with boys used to take me for a ride to Seven Kings, was all open fields. See? Or go -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Was this on bikes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. On buses. Used to be the open top buses, see. And then - you could for a ride to Dorking. And at - you see - in 
relating these stories, and after talking to my daughter-in-law, I say, well when we get off at Seven Kings probably there was a cottage, and they\rquote d have a card up, teas supplied. We\rquote d go in there and we\rquote 
d have tea. What did we have for tea? Bread and butter. Jam. Piece of currant cake. And a small pot of tea. And on another occasion we\rquote 
d have bread and butter, water-cress. And my daughter-in-law will say, golly, do you call that an outing? I said, but that\rquote s - well that was an outing. And if a fellow paid for that - that was a good tea that he\rquote 
d paid for. You see? Money wasn\rquote t plentiful in them days like they - they it is today. You see, and this is what we used to be grateful for. We\rquote d go off with a Johnny and taking us - we made an appointment, and we\rquote ve 
gone out for this - and we\rquote d have tea, and we\rquote d come back. Or perhaps we\rquote d go to the pictures. You see?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did your life change an awful lot after you left school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Yes, well because - I only went to work for a - barely two weeks. Then I was at home in father\rquote s shop.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 You went to work at Mansells for a little while?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 I - no, I went to - I went to - {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Mansell Street
{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}, yes. Yes? {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Mansell Street{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}, it was a big cigar factory. And there used to be a boy that lived in - 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Calvary Street{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}. Now I used to get - tuppence - a penny to ride down to - it used to be a penny - from {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Burdett Road{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} to Aldgate. If I rode down to work, I had to walk home. \lquote Cos the other penny went for a cup of tea, lunchtime. Always used to take sandwiches. \lquote 
Cos there was always a hot meal to come home to. Now, I used to meet this boy. And - he used to get on at - I used to get on the tram at {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Burdett Road{\*\xmlclose}
{\*\xmlclose}. He used to get on at Stepney Green. And we went to work - together. He used to be in the boy\rquote s room, like the mens room, I was in the girls room. He used to say to me - walking home Anne? Used to say, yes. He says, I\rquote 
ll walk home with you, And he would persist in holding my arm. And I never liked it. I used to say, if my father comes along and sees you holding my arm, not alone he\rquote ll clout you he\rquote 
ll clout me. See? He says, ah he won't find us out. You see, and this is how it used to be, he got killed in the first world war. He was eighteen when he was called up. He got killed in the first world war.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 But you say you only worked there for about two weeks then you went into the shop?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 I went into father\rquote s shop.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 How long did you work, there for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh up to the time I got married.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 You got married in 1920?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Yes, I was twenty. I got married on the twentieth of June was I was twenty on the seventeenth of May.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 How did you get your first job, the one you had for two weeks?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 
Well - see people had to ask for you. See, and a customer used to come in the shop the foreman of the mens department. And father said to him, do you think there\rquote s any vacancies \lquote cos I\rquote 
ve got a girl leaving school. And he asked the foreman of the womens room. This is how I got in. But I never liked - tobacco. Because I used to suffer with quinsies. And that laid me up with sore throat. Father says to me, don\rquote 
t go to work no more. Stop home. And I did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 How many hours did you work during that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 All the hours God Almighty sent.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 How much did you get paid for that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Yes, half a crown a week. Pocket money.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did you get half a day off or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 I had to because I had the inspector in on one occasion.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 You mean you got him in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. I opened the shop, father was at market.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 I was thinking of the tobacco place before you went back to the shop?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well I left it. I - I left. Because if I\rquote 
d have stayed there I would have had to be apprenticed, you see. And that was for seven years}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8153771\charrsid6362028 . }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 
See, you always had to serve an apprenticeship in these }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8153771\charrsid6362028 trades}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 . You see and in after seven years }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid8153771\charrsid6362028 \{ILLEGIBLE\} }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 what they call the}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8153771\charrsid6362028  \{ILLEGIBLE\}}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028  that was your - your papers that you were qualified. You didn\rquote t get them \lquote 
til you come out. But the heartbreak that I saw in that fortnight I used to come home crying. We used to see the foreman break all the cigar of the people - if they didn\rquote 
t suit. See? But - I - I never wanted to go back - back to work. I never went to work - any more, until the war came, this last war came. When I came home from {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Leeds{\*\xmlclose} - from 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Leeds{\*\xmlclose}, my age brought me out. You see, because they were calling the women up. And - when I went to the Labour Exchange - I said to them - they said to me, oh we\rquote 
ve got a nice job for you in an aircraft factory. I said, no, I said, I don\rquote t want to go. I said, look, I said, let me have a job - and I didn\rquote t mean it for insolence. I said, let me have a job like you\rquote 
re doing. Clerical work. I said, and you have the job in the factory. So she said, don\rquote t want you to be cheeky. I said, I\rquote m not cheeky. I said, I don\rquote t want to go in a factory. And when I came home, this sister of mine said to me, I
\rquote ve got a job. I said, where? She said, at a baker\rquote s. Well I\rquote d heard on the radio if you got a job in food - in the food line, you was exempt from being called up, so that\rquote 
s what I done, I went out the next morning and I went to Bethnal Green Road and I got a job at - Barton\rquote s the bakers, serving.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 That was during the second world war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Yes? The second world war.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 But between 1920 and 1940 you didn\rquote t work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well I was married - I didn\rquote t work, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Have you done any work since?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Yes, \lquote course I\rquote 
ve done work since. During the war. After the - after the early days of war was over I worked at - Fishmonger Hall. And I worked at Memorial Hall.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Doing clerical work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 In the - civic restaurants. See? And then I - took my training - at {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceName}}Westminster{\*\xmlclose} {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceType}}Palace{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}, the {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceType}}College{\*\xmlclose} of 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceName}}Domestic Science{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
, and then I passed out - and - I came out on the first day of - the eighth of May when V.E. Day was declared. And I came out to Northumberland Rooms. I done there for a fortnight, see
. First week I had to get all what you call the numbers, and that is - It said at the top of the paper - History that had been made in my lifetime, but afterwards it came out that it was an essay that was wanted, see? And I wrote some - history - that I g
ot a letter back to say the history that you supplied will be used at a later date, I thought to myself, now - I know very well it will because it is history. And I\rquote 
ve got that history in black and white. You see, although I can remember certain things - I\rquote ve got history that\rquote s black and white, and I\rquote ve been going to throw this book away for ages. And every time I\rquote 
ve looked at it I thought myself, no I\rquote ll keep it, I\rquote ll keep it. And I\rquote ve still got it. It\rquote s marvellous you know to - to go back.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Is it what you wrote yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 
Well - what I wrote and I sent in, but I got my history in my lifetime, part I could remember what took place and part well I quoted from the book, you see. And it\rquote s all happened in my lifetime, in seventy years of my lifetime. T
hat this kind of history has been made, it\rquote 
s really wonderful when you come to look - look back. Well I can remember the horse trams, I can remember - see we had the shop in Grove Road, I can remember just by the Archway, there used to be the - what they c
alled the tramway yard. And two horses always used to be brought out from the tramway yard and stand so patiently at the corner of the street, and when the horses - the horse tram used to come along the tram used to stop, two horses was taken out, and the
 two fresh horses put in. But them horses knew, like my father\rquote 
s horse, when he used to come to market, he knew exactly where to stop. And when father used to bring him back he knew exactly where to stop at the shop. There you are. And he used to come right
 out the road onto the pavement. And that horse would not get back - on - into the road until I - he used to see that I\rquote d got the carrot in my hand. I couldn\rquote t give I to him on the pavement \lquote 
cos people was frightened to pass, but used to walk along to the kerb, he\rquote d follow me right the way round, and take the carrot and he was satisfied. And he\rquote 
d stand there for ages. And only up here this afternoon I was saying, I can remember horsetrams. They came off - of {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Grove Road{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 1914. The year of the war. August. 'Cos the first world war was - the August the fourth, the Queen Mother\rquote s birthday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 How many hours would you have to work in the first job you did, in the tobacco factory?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well in them days you worked - you worked from Monday to Saturday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 What time would you have to start in the morning?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Eight o\rquote clock.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 And finish at night?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Six. Six o\rquote clock.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 How much would you get for that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well I got the large amount of three and sixpence a week.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Was that a lot in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well you - well - see, I was going to be apprenticed and where you get - you\rquote re going to get apprenticed you don\rquote 
t get good money. When you come out you can claim anything. Now I had a sister at that time working up there at Morris\rquote  and she used to make
 the big Corona Cigars. You know the big Coronas? And she used to - make the samples, and price them, on the time that it took. And it was all handwork, not - not machine work. You understand the making of a cigar? You get - you get what they call the 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Havana{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} bunch, that\rquote s all like the - all the small parts of the - but it\rquote s all the best quality - {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Havana{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} tobacco. And - she used to get that into her hand, and there used to be like a machine that they used to have, like a cutter. Used to get that, all it in - 
on a - a rough piece of tobacco. And that used to be rolled. And used to have to roll that and put it in this machine, you see. And then they used to clip off the ends, you see, take the - mould out, and roll it in leaf. And there\rquote 
s big leaves, they used t
o have strippers for that, and they used to get hold of the tiniest end of the tobacco leaf and just do it over their - it was miraculous. And they never tore the leaves, the leaf used to come just in two halves. Well, see the cigar maker used to have to 
cut the shape, and after she\rquote d made the - bunch she used to have to roll it. And there couldn\rquote 
t be a crease or a crack in the roll. And then she used to have to do the top. They were very very particular with the top of a cigar. And yet blow me as a man goe
s to smoke a cigar - he cut - cuts the top off, the right way - the correct way is to cut it off. You see, and for the labour that goes into that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 What were the employers like on that job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh the employers was lovely. They were real - real jolly people. Yes. Jolly people. \lquote 
Course they used to sing at work. And - I remember, I said - I wasn\rquote t there barely a fortnight. I remember the foreman coming along and he used to say, come on, come on - less singing, less singing, more work, more work. Of cou
rse the foreman was always on you for more work you see. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Was it the employees who were happy or the employers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No, the employees was happy.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 What about the employers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well he was a miserable old so and so. The foreman. Used to hav
e a foreman there. And - I can always remember, see, being in the - in - in business - when the foreman said to me, go up and ask for number two {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Sumatra{\*\xmlclose}, that\rquote 
s a kind of tobacco - to come down. See, the men used to bring it down to the women. So - going along - I said, all right Mr Harvy, {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname State}}Ill{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 go up. I went up and when I got to the mens room - I was all blushes - and - of course and what with that boy being there - he used to do these - filling up of the - baskets - I said to him, Mr Harvey wants too tomato
es. Well - I never lived that down. Because he always used - he - as he came along the hall - like the big room, he\rquote s got a huge big ba}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8153771\charrsid6362028 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 ket on his shoulder. He said to me, Ann, here\rquote s Mr Harvey\rquote s two tomatoes coming up. I thought to myself, the man\rquote s daft. He means two tomatoes, don\rquote t mean two {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname 
place}}Sumatra{\*\xmlclose}. But I\rquote d never heard of it before. And I always used to say - if ever I was called on Wilfred Pickles, what was my most embarrassing moment I could have said that. Because I felt terrible, I thought to myself, he doesn
\rquote t know what he\rquote s talking about, two {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Sumatra{\*\xmlclose}, he means two tomatoes. Yes, that was it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Was there much distinction between employers and workers in that job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 The foreman - the foreman as on the workers to carry on get the - \lquote course - if they were piecework he didn\rquote 
t have to worry, but if they were week work - they used to take their time \lquote cos at the end of the week they were going to get their money, whereas at piecework you see - they used to wire in because the more they done the more they earned.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Was there much distinction between the trained craftsmen and the other workers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh yes. You see - the - there\rquote 
s what they call the machine work and the hand work. Hand work was always well paid. See, handwork is when you make everyt
hing for - of a cigar by hand. Whereas they used to have like big - like machines, and they had like grooves. Well the people used to put so much tobacco in, then they used to be packed up and go on a press. You ever seen a Hoffman press? Well they used t
o be stacked up and this press used to come down to press them. And used to have to leave them there for so long a time until the shapes was pressed into shape. This was machine made work. But you still had to roll the tobacco in it\rquote s leaf. That
\rquote s all the handwork with that. But with hand work, everything was done by hand. See? And this is why hand work always got most money.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 You say you left that after two weeks and you went to work for your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 But let me tell you, before you came - used to come out of tobacco place - you were practically searched, you had to empty your pockets, 
\lquote cos you had to wear the pinafore, had to empty your pockets to see that you didn\rquote t have a - a crumb of tobacco on you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Why by, the employers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh yes. And the foreman would stand there. To see that everyone that went out, that you - you weren\rquote 
t taking any tobacco out. Even if it was a crumb, you had to turn your pockets out and shake them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 So you noticed a difference of interest between employers and wo
rkers in that sense in that job? Did you feel that employers and workers had the same interests or different interests?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh the employer - the employer didn\rquote t want to know these workers, all he wanted his - his work out. Because his guv'nor was on him
. The Guv\rquote nor wanted the work out. You see? So the foreman was on - there was nothing - nothing in common between the foreman and the guv\rquote nor - and the worker. Nothing. You see, and today - this is it. The fore - but I - I - I still say - it
\rquote s a bad thing - when they take a man that you\rquote 
ve been working with at the bench all your life - and they pick him out to be a foreman over all the others. You know all the tricks of the trade. You know all their little - fallacies and faults, what they do, you know exac
tly what they do when they want to go outside for a smoke, because in a tobacco firm you couldn\rquote t smoke, otherwise you went out in the toilet. You see, but when that man becomes a foreman over all his workmates - he can\rquote 
t be a workmate and a friend to you if he\rquote s working for your guv\rquote nor. See, so today you\rquote re all on a level. And that\rquote s why they stick. One gets he sack they\rquote re all out. Unless he\rquote 
s reinstated. You see, well a lot of people can\rquote t see that. You see, there used to be such a vast difference between the - the foreman or the manager and the work people.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Was your father like that towards his employees when you went to work for him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well I was the only one there. No. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did you enjoy working in the shop?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh I loved it. I loved it. I loved -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Were you doing it when you were still at school, part time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did you do any part time jobs while you were at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Nothing. Nothing at all. No. Oh in them - in them days you didn\rquote t.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Would you have preferred another kind of occupation to what you actually did?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No, I love business. I love business. I love people. See now father had a way - he\rquote 
d only buy prime, and father used to say to me, what\rquote s here is the same as there. And my argument is, if you can satisfy the public that this is the same as that, you\rquote re - you\rquote re clever. You can\rquote 
t satisfy the public. So I used to get - father was at market and I used to get the City workers coming through. And in those - the days I\rquote m talking about - was before 1914, or - just after 1914. Well take the 1914 year. I\rquote 
d get the fifty workers come in and they\rquote d say, could I have that peach? Please? Yes. You\rquote re going to pay for it, you can have it. So, when the customer goes out I take one from here and I put it there. 
So that when my father came back - his window was intact. But the money was there. In them days we used to sell seedless oranges for sixpence each. My father used to sell muscatel grapes for twelve and sixpence a pound.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 That\rquote s a lot isn\rquote t it?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Y
es, that was a lot. And this very woman that was up there this afternoon, her husband only said to me last week, can you remember when the hot house grapes used to come in, they were in the big hampers and inside that hampers was a baby basket with all co
t
ton wool. And every bunch perfect, all laying separately. It was an - eye opener to see how fruit used to come in. The grapes, the Armelia grapes used to come in barrels in cork dust. The loveliest of bunches of grapes. And father used to have the bias, h
e never handled fruit. And God help any of us if we touched a grape with our fingers. He used to say, you\rquote ve got scissors, cut. And there\rquote s a shop round here today - in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Brich Lane{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} here, just at the top, a furiterers. And I went in there like - in the winter
. And - I saw him pull a grape, I said to him, my father would kill you - if he was to see that. He said, yes, I should have had a pair of scissors. I said, that\rquote 
s it. He says, oh, he said, you belong to the high class furiterers. I said, I think so. See? 
And in them days when grapes was twelve and sixpence a pound, we made two ounces. If people only wanted two ounces, perhaps they got five graps, they were satisfied, because every grap was like that, they - it was marvellous fruit he got. He only bought t
h
e prime. Beautiful fruit. We had one customer, a Doctor Spooner. Father used to save all his damaged fruit for. And we used - for a customer that had like a good bit of fruit we had half a peck bags and the peck bags. And Doctor Spooner, was a moneyed man
. Used to have a liveried - driver with a cockade in his hat, because his guv'nor had so much money. This is when they used to drive in the open landaus. And Doctor Spooner used to get out and when he left my father\rquote s shop he\rquote 
s got two huge peck bags - of fruit. All damaged. And you know what he said to me? I don\rquote t but it \lquote cos it\rquote s cheap. That\rquote s the best. It\rquote s over ripe. And that\rquote 
s the best. You see, when anything gets over ripe it gets damaged. You see, well - good class stuff you can\rquote t - work that. So Doct
or Spooner used to have that. And he was a doctor of all scattered homes years ago. See all the - like the - orphan people, people that couldn\rquote t keep their children. Used to be scattered homes. And they were in the East End.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did you do any apprenticeship, you say you would have had to for the tobacco, did you do it for anything else?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No, didn\rquote t want anything else. Didn\rquote t want -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Were you ever a member of a trade union or a professional organisation at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 The - it - it was the biggest union, the Cigar Makers Union was the biggest union and the best union in them years.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Were you a member of it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. See, I\rquote d only just started. But had I been apprenticed I would have had to join the union because they wouldn\rquote 
t employ without you\rquote re a union, see? No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Do you think that full time work changed your attitude to life in any way when you were working in the shop for your father?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well I didn\rquote t go out until I came back - 1943. 1943 when I first started work again. You see, and
 then - as I say, I went to Bartons. And my son and my husband was away. And - my young son, I used to leave a list at the weekend, what to get. And when I used to come home, I never used to leave off \lquote til six o\rquote 
clock. See, and that was from eight o\rquote clock in the morning \lquote til six in the evening. And - when I used to come home Lesley used to say, mum, I couldn\rquote t get this and I couldn\rquote t get that and I couldn\rquote 
t get that - I said, well all right, don\rquote t worry about it. I\rquote ll have to do the best we can and see what we can get on Sunday. And I said to my - little supervisor - the - bakers, I said, look - I\rquote 
m willing to work Thursday afternoon if I can leave off at twelve o\rquote clock Saturday. Oh no, she said, you can\rquote t do that. I said, well - if I can\rquote t do that then I mu
st give notice. And when the - manageress came in I asked her, she said, no, no, no, Thursday afternoon we close and everybody has Thursday afternoon. So I handed in my notice. Then I went in - to the - Educational Offices in 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Harford Street{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}, and I asked for a job. And they said, well - we can - put you at - Fishmonger Hall, that was {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceName}}London{\*\xmlclose} {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceType}}Bridge{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}. But we don\rquote t know about a five day a week. I said, well if - if - if it\rquote 
s more than five day, I said, I just can\rquote t cope with it. I\rquote ve just given a job up because of that. So they said, well go to Memorial Hall. If they\rquote ll take you on for five days a week all well and good. Which they did, \lquote 
cos staff was short. And I was what they call - like a - oh crikey what\rquote s the name of it - like a vegetable hand, used to do th
e potatoes, and greens, you know, get all the vegetables ready. Well we used to do - over a thousand dinners - of a day there. And then I left there and I went to Memorial Hall. And from Memorial Hall - I went to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Fairclough Street{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} school. And from {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Fairclough Street{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 school I took training. And I went to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceName}}Buckingham{\*\xmlclose} {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceType}}Palace{\*\xmlclose} - {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceType}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}
College{\*\xmlclose} of {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceName}}Domestic Science{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}. {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Buckingham Palace Road{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
. And I had a month\rquote s training there. And then as I say we came out, I came out on VE Day to Northumberland Rooms. Then after that I was sent to another school in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}
Roman Road{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}, to get my numbers. And to carry on. And so - until I came here to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Deal Street{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
. And I took charge of a kitchen here. A school here. And I was there for two years and a half. And I got all the people in the union, and the supervisor didn\rquote 
t like it. The council was asking for all workers to belong to a union. And the supervisor didn\rquote t believe in unions. And she said I\rquote d asked for an exchange and I hadn\rquote 
t asked for an exchange. But they put me over into another school the week before Christmas. Fancy going into a place the week before Christmas. I\rquote ve never felt so sorry in my life - as - what I was for that poor cook there, \lquote 
cos the cook never knew anything at all about it. And when I went in - she said to me, can I help you? I said, well I said, I don\rquote t like to have to say it, but, I said, I\rquote ve come to take over. Oh, she said, I\rquote 
m perfectly happy here. I said, and I can assure you I don\rquote t want your job. So of course when the supervisor from there came in - she said, I\rquote m perf
ectly happy with this one. I said, well you get on the phone, I said, and ring Mr Viney, and of course when she got on the phone she was told that I had to take over. So of course now - she left and I took over. And it was the week before Christmas, that 
the headmistress come down. And she said, I\rquote m ever so sorry, she said, that our cook\rquote s left, she said, because I wanted certain things made. I said, well how do you know that I couldn\rquote 
t do it. She said, can you make our Christmas cakes? I said, I hope so. S
he said, can you make biscuits? I said I think so too. So she left it at that ... well when I came home on that Monday I went into Woolworths and I bought - a box of shapes for stamping out different shapes of - pastry, biscuits. I had a - rabbit, and ele
phant, a teddy bear and a duck. And I worked overtime at this school in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Luckland Street{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
. I made the cakes. And I - I done all what had to be done for a Christmas cake. Iced it and put all - it - it wasn\rquote t the - hundreds and thousands, the little sweets, but
 it was all wafer, looked like hundred and thousands, and it turned - they turned out marvellous. And the biscuits that I made - they were marvellous. Well so much so - they invited me to the party. But having - he boy to come home to, you see - I said I 
couldn\rquote t stay - for the party, but I appreciated it. And on the Friday when I went in the headmistress came down - and she said to me, there\rquote 
s a little gift and thank you very very much, and the children gave you three hurrahs, for a wonderful party. I said
, well so long as you were satisfied. Well then, you see, I only last - I only stayed there - 'til the February, and then I left because the boys came home, and my husband came home, and I just couldn\rquote t cope with work at home and work out. You see.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did you used to have parties like that when you were at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 
No. No. We never had school parties. But what we did get - we always got an orange and an apple from school and a few sweets. Christmastime. And I can remember I was ever so upset. That when my boy was at school - and it - \lquote 
course mind you it was war time, I didn\rquote t think that far, and - he never even got - they never even got an orange, the children. And I said so to the teacher. And the teacher said to me, do you know, we always had to bu
y that out of our own pockets, because the Council only allowed us sixpence for each child. I was amazed. I thought the council provided that. But you see, as the years go on you can see the council don\rquote t give much away.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Can you remember whether your parents used to meet the teachers when you were at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Never had that. You - parents never come in contact with the teachers, unless - there was trouble.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Would they ever visit the school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. There was never open day. Not when I was a 
child. But when my children - was at school there was open day. In fact - you could go and talk to a teacher. Which our parents never did. See. You could go to a teacher and you could say - how do you think my little boy\rquote 
s getting on at school? You didn\rquote t wait for a report. You see. But - in - in my schooldays our parents never visited the school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did they ask you what you did at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. No. They wasn\rquote t interested. Because - all they knew - we went to school, never played truant and we came h
ome straight from school.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 What would happen if you did anything at school that the teachers disapproved of? Would they punish you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well the teacher would punish us. Teacher would punish, you see. And the only consolation we got when we came hom
e if we told - we said anything, well you must have done wrong. And if you do wrong then you must - take your punishment.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 How did the teachers punish the children in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 They had pointers. That was a cardboard - in the place of a cane. S
ee? It was long like that, about a yard long. A point - it point - it was like a - that much - that round at the top and then it tapered down you see, and \lquote course used to - it was - terrible disgr}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid8153771\charrsid6362028 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 ce - to get a hander with the cane.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 What kind of things would you have to do to get punished like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Talk in class.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Was it the same punishment for the girls as well as the boys?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well then - no, the boys used to get the cane. The girls used to get the pointer.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Was it a girls school you went to or was it mixed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well - infants was mixed, and then we used to have a junior mixed. That was boys and girls. But of course as you got olde}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8153771\charrsid6362028 r}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028  there was the girls and the boys. See?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Were there any gangs or groups in the school you went to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Not in my day. But in my childrens day there was gangs.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Were there any children who were left out of things in your schooldays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. No, because - for the likes of us, we didn\rquote t argue with any - anybody we didn\rquote t we - we weren\rquote t brought up
 to argue, if we were told we had to go to school - and if we had to come home we had to come home. And we were never encouraged in going in}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid422000\charrsid6362028 t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 o childrens houses. Anybody could come into ours. But we couldn\rquote t go into theirs.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did the other children come from similar homes to you or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh yes. Practically all on the - on the level. Practically all on the level. And it was a nice part of the 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}East End{\*\xmlclose}, at that time. And that was {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Grove Road{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} - which is now Rhonda Grove, used to be 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Cottage Grove{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}. It was a wonderful turning. It was so picturesque. It had lime trees on either side, and at the bottom - had - Holy }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1253119\charrsid6362028 Trinity}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028  church. There was any amount of postcards taken and sold of it, it was beautiful. Then there was the two Tredegar Squares. They were the -
 the upper middle class that lived there in the big houses. Always had maids. With their little aprons and their hats. Nursemaids to wheel the children about. You see, middle class. And - then came {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Coburn Road{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}. Then came {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Coburn Street{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}. And I can remember 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Coburn Street{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}, long long before it ever had a school. You see, and the higher grade went from {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Marmsey Road{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} school to Bow Central Foundation what they built, see in Coburn Street.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did you go on to any other school after?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No, I was too old.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did you ever have any regrets about your education?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. Didn\rquote t pay much attention to that. But that was our best - that - that\rquote 
s our best life really, although we don't appreciate it, we think we're hard done by when we go to school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did you have any part time education afterwards, evening classes or something?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 
No. But after - after I did leave school - I used to go to evening classes for a little while. Triad to take shorthand. I - just a little, I got as far as the pb ch j, and that, but I - I just couldn\rquote 
t concentrate, I was too busy wanting to get out. See.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 When you worked for your father did you get holidays with pay?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No, I got half a crown. That was it. But - the only advantage father gave me, if I was going out. See, I used 
to have Thursday afternoons, I had to have. Because that was the Shop Act. I was going to tell you about that. I - I opened the shop on one occasion, and a man came into the shop. He got - I - I'd served him and he stood talking. He said - are you the ass
istant here? I said, yes. He asked me how much I got. So I said, I think that\rquote 
s a bit impertinent on your part. He said, well, he said, I'm the Shop Act. So he said, I'm from the - Shop Acts. He said, I'd like to know your wages. And - when you get your hal
f a day. And in them days I used to to get practically every half a - half - afternoon, \lquote 
cos used to be under Victoria Park. Used to go over Victoria Park. Used to - get on the steamboat, a few girls that used to live in the street - that was - going to Clarks College at the time, and - he said, well it\rquote 
s a must, you must have - one afternoon and it\rquote s the Thursday afternoon for the - closing Act. See? Shop - half closing - half day closing. So I said, well when - my father comes in. Oh, he said, is it your father you work for? I said, yes. See, 
\lquote cos then just happens father came in. And I - explained who he was. So father said, well I never knew that she had to have a half a day like that. He said, but she has any afternoon she likes. He says, it\rquote s got to be
 Thursday afternoon. So that was that. So of course - apart from any other time that I had off, it was Thursday afternoon.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 You say you worked all hours in the shop, did you have much leisure time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 If I wanted to go out I used to say to father, father I want to go out. He used to say, all right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did starting work with your father change your relationship with him in any way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. No. No. No relationship - no change at all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did affect your relationship with your older brothers and sisters?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. They were all out. They were practically all out. Best part married. See? No. Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did you continue to do the same kind of things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Yes, well for - now - for instance, if I went out with my - like my girlfriend - and we used to go up the {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname 
place}}West End{\*\xmlclose} - we used to go to the Strand Corner House.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 What was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 One of Lyon\rquote 
s teashops. Not teashop - restaurant. It was a beautiful place. It had a - huge big lounge - foyer. It was beautiful. And we used to go in there, we used to have tea and pastries, see. Then we\rquote 
d sit there. But there was a stipulation there, if you got off with a boy, you - you - you couldn\rquote t - the boys couldn\rquote t come and sit at your table and you couldn\rquote t sit there. You came in on your own, and you went out
 on your own. But anyhow that didn\rquote t worry us. \lquote Cos we could all - we could always get boys.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 How would you get boys?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well first of all we used to go to the Mitre club. See. And - once a month - we used to have - what they call a social, where bo
ys was invited. But it was only once a month, well we used to chum up in friendship, you see, and this is it. And then perhaps - one boy would bring another friend in, and so it - it used to go round too the circle used to get bigger you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 But you say you couldn\rquote t bring boys home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. Because - in father\rquote 
s estimation - you had to be introduced to a boy. If you wanted to go with a boy you had to be introduced to him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 When people came round to his house, friends or neighbours or relatives, 
would they have an invitation to come or would they just drop in casually?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Just drop in casual. Just drop in casual.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did you have any special boyfriend at this time?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh yes I did have a boyfriend. I did have a boyfriend at the time. A ver
y very old boyfriend. And even - even after years - years after I was married we still kept up friendship, because it was my friends brother, and my friend always used to say, you should have been my sister-in-law. I said, yes, I know I should but I didn
\rquote t
. You see. And - you see - what parents used to go at - about years ago, if you said you were going with a boy, your parents wanted to see your boy. See? And you used to make a date for the boy to come home to meet your parents. Well - the father - my fat
h
er used to go into details. What do - what - living he was getting and what job he had. You know, whether it was regular in - in his - habits, you know, is he sober, you know, and - and all - all that sort of thing. All these details. All before you could
 go out with that boy.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Even going out on a casual basis?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 You were married in 1920?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 How long had you known your husband when you got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well, it was during the war years, 1914 war years.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 How did you meet?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 My friend and I was going out. And - he came home on leave. And my friend said to me, Alf}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid1253119\charrsid6362028 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 e Myers is home. So I said, who's Alfie Myers? So she said, oh he lives opposite me. She said, you want an intro? I said, yes please. See, so of course - he
\rquote d already met my friend - as a neighbour. So of course when I saw Alf - he was in uniform. We made a date.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 How far away did this friend of yours live from where you lived?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No, she lived opposite where my - husband was - living. And - only a cross the road. And I lived in the next street. See?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 You didn\rquote t know him before that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh I didn\rquote t - I never knew him, no. So you see, we made a date. So I said to him, I said, well - can\rquote t - you can\rquote 
t take two girls out. He said, who says I can\rquote t. So we went out, three of us went out. And at the end of the evening - Alf and I made an appointment to meet again. And not Cissie. And Cissie\rquote s back went up. She said, if you\rquote 
re going out with him. She said, it breaks friendship with us I said well don\rquote t let it be like that. I said, I don\rquote t know how long I\rquote m going out with him. I said, it\rquote 
s only just fun. You see, but - we kept friendship, and then when he went back - he wrote to me. And this is how it went on. Until he came home.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Do you remember the first time you met his parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well I knew his parents. \lquote Cos I used to go in to play the piano. But never dreaming anything. See, and Alf wrote to me and he didn
\rquote t write to his parents and when I went in - I said to him - I said to his mother, I said, I\rquote ve had a card - a field card from Alf. - She said, you have and I haven\rquote t. How comes that? I said, I don\rquote 
t know, he just wrote me a card. So he got back safe. See, the next - morning they got the letter. I only got the field card. So that was that. And this -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 You went round there to play the piano?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 
Just as a - just as friendship because - my husband had two other brothers - and two sisters, and they used to bring their friends in, you see, and - this is how our life was. As I said before, if there\rquote s a piano there and anyone can play - you
\rquote ve got company. And there was boys and girls that used to live in the street, they used to come in. And the carpets used to be rolled up, and - used to be dancing. You see. And there was another girl that used 
to come in, with one of the boys, my - brother-in-law. And they used to go to school with her. But she could only play by music. - And they used to say to her, get off and let her get on see. \lquote Cos I could play anything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 How did you learn the piano initially, you say your parents didn\rquote t play?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well I used to have lessons. See? When I was at school, yes. And - I never pad no attention to it. I couldn\rquote t be bothered. I couldn
\rquote t be bothered with it. I could sooner pick up a tune when I heard it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 How long had you been playing the piano round there before you actually met him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh a long while. Long while.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Had you never met him there before?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 I\rquote d never met him because the war was on you see. And he\rquote d been called up and he was out in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname 
place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}Germany{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}. You see. And this was - 19 - 17 when he came home. On leave. But he didn\rquote t get - his demob \lquote til he was 19 - it was 1919. \lquote 
Cos he - they - put him over in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}Germany{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} for a year. See, and as -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did his parents have a shop as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. No, no. A
s I say his father was a docker. And - of course as the family grew up the eldest one - the eldest sister was married. And - there was another one that I was friendly with, very friendly with. But she died, she died when she was twenty-seven. And - so - w
e kept in touch all the time. And of course when Alf came home in 19 - 19, we got engaged and 1920 we got married.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Was he brought up to go to a church or chapel?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No, he\rquote s same as me. His father - was a Jewish Pree School boy, used to go to the f
ree school here, you see. And his father - well, he - well if he was a docker you can\rquote t keep religion, because if you\rquote ve got works on Saturday - and you\rquote ve got a family to keep you\rquote ve got to work, see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 When you first went back with him did he take you back home, were they surprised to see you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No, you see, I\rquote 
ll tell you how it was. The rumour went round - that Alf was taking a girl out. While he was on leave. See? Well I never - made it a practice of going into the house unless my friend, my girlfriend was with me, you see. \lquote 
Cos she was friendly with - Alf\rquote s brother. Dick. Boy and girl together you see. Well this is how it was, we were in like a little circle. And - when he went back he wrote to me and we kept up correspondence, and of course my f
ather was pretty strict he used to say to me, who\rquote s the letter from? I used to say, from Alf. He\rquote d say, oh you\rquote 
re still corresponding with him? I said, yes. See? So of course - when he came home - he was going to be demobbed, he wrote to say he was going to be demobbed, and he\rquote 
d like to come home to meet my father. I told my father, so father said, all right. Let his parents come round as well with him. Which they did. See, and that - that was it, and that\rquote s how it went on. See?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 So that the first time he met your father was with his parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No, he came in first, I introduced my father to him, and then his parents came like the next week. Came to tea. And that was that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Were you treated as one of the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 I was always treated as one of the family. Yes. Even now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Would they ever let you talk together by yourselves or were you always in the same room as them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Ah yes, of course. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 How did you get on with parents in law after you got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well I lived with my father for a year.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Your father-in-law?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 
No, my father. And then I lived with my mother-in-law for ten years. My mother-in-law and father-in-law for ten years. And this is how I know - so much about the dockers because there was a dock strike.
 And I can remember the 1926 - dock strike. The general strike rather. Yes. That was a - bad do that was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 What did you call his parents before you got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Mr and Mrs. Mr Myers, Mrs Myers. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did that change after you got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well - my mother-in-law said to me, look - I\rquote 
m his mother so you might just as well call me mum. I said, all right. That was that. And - his father used to call dad. See, he was dad, my father - my mother and father, we didn\rquote t call mum - mum or dad. It
 was mother and father. And my grand daughter came out with it a couple of weeks ago when she came here, she said, gran, she said, you know my father. So I looked at her, I said, well I think so. Oh she said, go on, she said, you know what I }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6040488\charrsid6362028 meant}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028  I said, 
yes, I know what you mean. But I had to chuckle to think that she should say that to me when all her life, her seventeen years, has been - mum and dad. See? And if she wants anything or she wants to talk about anything she goes to dad. Not }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1253119\charrsid6362028 mum}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 . And this is
 what I told her, I said - certain things you must go to your mother Speak to your mother. Confide in your mother. And if your mother thinks it's worthwhile she\rquote ll confide in your dad.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 The first time that he met your father, was that }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1253119\charrsid6362028 during}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028  the war still or just after the war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No, during the war. During the war.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Was this the first boy you\rquote d ever brought home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No, I used to bring the other boy home. The other boy used to come home regular.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Were you ever warned off boys by your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Not a thing. Not a thing. No. You see -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did your father know his parents before?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 
Well I knew his - I knew his parents because used to see them. You see, it used to be a recognised thing years ago - when we - when people used to have th
eir little houses they used to sit on a chair at the door. So if you come through a street, you know people. My father knew them. My father knew them. Of course, \lquote cos they used to come and out the shop as well. Oh yes. Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Can you describe how much you\rquote d see of each other when you first started }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid1253119\charrsid6362028 courting}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 ?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No, he was in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}Germany{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 you see. But we had a good - year while we were engaged.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 When did you get engaged?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh I got engaged - when he came home, I don\rquote t know when it was. I was to much in love I suppose to realize when it was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did you carry on going out with groups of friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. No, we just kept to ourselves then. We had our own company.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did you go on any holidays while you were courting?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. You didn\rquote t in them days. No. What? To go away with - good gracious me, you wanted something. I can\rquote t see where it
\rquote s right today. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Can you remember a moment when you decided to get married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No, we just made up our minds that we\rquote d got engaged and - that we wanted 
to get married you see. We got married on the twentieth of June 1920.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 But did one of you actually say, will you marry me?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No, he said - Alf said to me, he said, I think we\rquote d better get married. I said, O.K. I said, well we\rquote ll have to tell father
. I said, you\rquote ll have to tell your mother and father won\rquote t you. He said, oh they know. I said, that\rquote s O.K. then. See?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did - it come as a surprise to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. No. And - we had a home affair. We had a lovely affair, lovely home affair. Good compan
y. You know, as I say before like in them days, you - used to make your own company. Had plenty of fun. But we had it all planned out so lovely. It was glorious weather. And where we got the beer - we borrowed the forms and borrowed tables, and where we l
ived in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Aberavon Road{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} there was a lovely garden and we planned to have the - dinner out in the garden. Like have the reception -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 This is {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}not Grove Road{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} now, you
\rquote d moved?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No, this is Aberavon, the next turning. What used to be Brederick place you 
see. And - it was a glorious day, on a Saturday. But golly on the Sunday - it never ceased }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1253119\charrsid6362028 raining}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 
 from the time I opened my eyes \lquote til I went to bed. After that I never knew anything.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Where did the wedding take place, was it in the synagogue?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Stepney Green. Victory Square. Yes. Where my father was a member. See, where we\rquote re members now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Before you got married you say he went round to your father to ask permission?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Were you present when he did that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Yes. I wasn\rquote t going have my father say anything - unless I heard it. Yes. But - that\rquote s how it was years ago.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did you have an engagement ring?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 I had a beautiful ring. I had a diamond half hoop.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Do you think you can be engaged without a ring?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well it\rquote s not the thing really is it. I mean, the - the ring - the ring - there\rquote 
s nothing to it really, on the other hand I think, if you\rquote re going to get engaged, and you\rquote re keeping with one fellow, you want something, you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did your husband wear any other rings before he got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well I had a - a dress ring. Also I had a nice gate }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1253119\charrsid6362028 bracelet}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 , I had a locket and chairn. I had some lovely presents from him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did he wear any rings or have any presents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No See, but my father didn\rquote t think at the time that it was right that I took presents. I said, well, I said, I\rquote 
m engaged to him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Was there an announcement in the paper?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No, we didn\rquote t announce - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did you have a party?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh, we had an engagement party and then - we took a bottle of whisky - round to those that couldn\rquote 
t come to the party. See? To give \lquote em a drink.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did both sets of parents treat you any differently once you were engaged? Could you stay out later at night and things like that?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh yes, I could - O coul
d stay out any time. But not my sisters - no. See, I - I got - I couldn't - as I said before, I could get away with anything. But - even if it - before I ever thought of going with any boy I used to go out dancing with my sister, the one that\rquote 
s at Streatham, and - coming home one night, see the boys used to see us home, but we used to say - don\rquote 
t come - and take us to our door. Well, if the catch was off the street door we knew father was about. But my sister used to knock first and the street door used to 
just - she used to say to me behind, the doors open. Well a hand used to shoot out because we were after time. If father used to say ten o\rquote clock, it had to be ten o\rquote clock. And he wouldn\rquote 
t take no excuses, we were out after that time. And being girls - father was frightened, but we didn\rquote t have sense enough to realize that, see. Used to go dancing at {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceName}}
Poplar{\*\xmlclose} {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceType}}Town Hall{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}. Yes, lovely lovely dances, yes. And we had boxer, our - one of the boys to see us home. Oh dear.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 How did you choose your wedding ring?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well we went to Blunt Lanyard and I bought my wedding ring by weight. You see, when you get married - and hen Jewish people get married it
\rquote s got to be a twenty-two carat gold. I don\rquote t know about now, I don\rquote t whether that still holds good but I think it does, but you\rquote ve got to have a twenty-two carat gold wedding ring. See.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Who pays for that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 He did. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Have you had any other rings since marriage, like an eternity ring?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. No, I\rquote ve got this one, that was on my fortieth wedding, see Marcasite, but - that\rquote 
s all. But - as regards - presents, he had such a lot of unemployment in that period, you know, after we got married. See, he had work when we got married and after that - there was no work. It was a bad bad time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 What was his job before he got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 
In the - in the boot - boot and shoe. See, and then - he went over to the - transport work. For the bus - like the leather on the bus driver\rquote s - uniforms. Then he went into the - leather coats. YES.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did you save up before getting married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well we had to save. Everybody had to save years ago.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 You say you lived with your father for the first year? Did you buy any equipment before you got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well, you see, at Oweny, the big drapers, being old standi
ng customers we used to put parcels away. And - one night - he - Alf wanted to have a bet. And he said he was going to put five pound on a horse. But I got four pound out of him before he left me, that only left me a pound. And he put this pound on the ho
rse. Tangiers I think. There was Tangiers that year, and Ugly Ducklong. And I said to my father I said, what won? He said, Ugly Duckling. So I said, oh that\rquote 
s a shame because Alf done Tangiers but Ugly Duckling was scratched. Disqualified and Tangiers won. 
You see. So then Alf gave me the twenty pound to get my parcel home. I think it was about - twenty-odd twenty something - to one, Something in the twenties to one, so he gave me twenty pound and I went - I - I\rquote ve still go house linen here - that
\rquote s never been through water. I\rquote m frightened to take it out now, if my daughter-in-law, \lquote cos she\rquote d say, mum - you don\rquote t want that now.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did your father help you with setting up home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh yes. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did you have a bottom drawer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well - we - we always used to, see, if we were going with a boy you see, we used to buy things and put \lquote 
em in a - for the bottom drawer. So that you had a good supply ourself. And it\rquote s grown with me that if I ever took anything out - such as pillow slips, sheets, I\rquote ve always had that - way of going to replace that. And up \lquote 
til a couple of years ago this is what I was doing. And my husband said to me, what are you doing it now for? I said, it\rquote s a matter of use. He said, well who are you going to leave it to? So now I\rquote ve got 
the terrible trunk on top of me - wardrobe in there, with all the houselinen but - when my son comes he\rquote s going to take it all down for me because there\rquote 
s lots of things now that I want, I want a renewal of pillowslips, teatowels and different things}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1253119\charrsid6362028  you see. I know I\rquote ve got\rquote em out}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028  there. We were all - we were }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1253119\charrsid6362028 all brought}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 
 that way - up that way, to have a good supply of houselinen, tablecloths, I\rquote ve got table clothes, I\rquote ve got - one - one towel, it\rquote s a big white Turkish towel. Now before this last war - I h
ad two and eleven on a club cheque from Wichams, I thought myself, well if I\rquote m going up to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Leeds{\*\xmlclose}
 I might just as well change it. And when I went in they said to me, what would you like? I said, well what can I have for three and eleven? They said, you can have a Turkish towel. So I said, right, I\rquote 
ll have that. And each time I take it out the drawer I think to myself, oh I\rquote ll bring that out and use it, I put it back. I don\rquote t know if it\rquote s a relic, go back again. See?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Who did you first see to arrange about the wedding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well you had to go up - to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Dukes Place{\*\xmlclose}
{\*\xmlclose}, that\rquote s the chief Synagogue of all see. Well your parents go. My father and his father with Alf to make the arrangements. And then of course like the English weddings you\rquote ve got to give three week
s notice to the registrar for the banns to be called. See? And then after that, if everything\rquote s plain sailing and there\rquote s no queries you get married you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 How long before the wedding was it you went, was it three weeks?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Three weeks, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Was there any particular reason for June the twentieth?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 I should have got married on June the thirteenth. And I said, golly, I\rquote 
m not going to get married on no thirteenth, it can - it can wait \lquote til another week. But on that June the thirteenth, the fish shop - got burnt down. At the top of - opposite where we used to live. The thirteenth. And that\rquote 
s how I know how many years Jacob\rquote s the fish shop got burnt down, because it was a week before I got married. Yes. I said, I don\rquote t know why, I said, I didn\rquote t get married the thirteenth, haven\rquote  had much luck.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did you want a large or a small wedding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well - didn\rquote 
t want a large wedding so long as all the family and friends was there. You see. And they were large rooms, and we had the large garden, a
s I say, we - we reckoned everything up for - eats to be laid up in the garden, well when it rained so hard we had to lay the tables up - it was double parlours you see. And they were big double parlours. So this is what we had.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Was the reception in your place?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No, his place. I thought his mother - his mother worry.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 How did you decide who to invite, were they a lot of relations?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well, you see - we\rquote re practically going back - these days to how it was. We used to invite - the principles 
of the family, first of all direct family. Then after that the principle of the children of the direct family. Well if it was only a small affair you used to invite the eldest one. If the eldest one was married it was two. You see. And - oh, you just had 
to put up with how many more was in the family, if you didn\rquote t run to it you didn\rquote t run to it, you see, but - it\rquote 
s going back that way now because we went to an engagement, and only one - out of the family was invited. And when my daughter-in-law said, oh golly, we don\rquote t do that up in Leeds, I said, well you invite anybody up in 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Leeds{\*\xmlclose}. I said, but here the English way is you invite the eldest one of the family. See? So that was that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 How were people invited, was it by card or word of mouth?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well in them days we used to send card for them but today they - they don\rquote 
t send cars. We used to send the taxis you see, to certain addresses. Used to give the taxi driver the address to bring them you see. And then - go to the synagogue.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did any have to stay overnight?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh no, it was in the early hours of the morning before we went home, don\rquote t know who stayed overnight, don\rquote 
t know who was sober and who was drunk - who was - drunk.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 How were the costs of the wedding met?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well father - usually the father of the bride - foots the hill.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did you do anything special the last week before the wedding, like a hen party?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Were you still working in the shop the day before you married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh no, I - I finished two weeks - I finished up two weeks, I didn\rquote t go in the shop.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did your husband see you on your wedding day before the wedding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Why not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well you never do. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1253119\charrsid6362028 You\rquote re}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028  not supposed to see the bride the day - the day - night before the wedding.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 What did you both wear to the wedding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 I wore a - French grey costume, and he wore a navy suit.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did you have something old, something new, something borrowed, something blue?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 I had a blue garter.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did the bride have attendants?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Bridesmaids?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Pageboys or flowergirls? How did you decide on your dress?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well I just - went into the - shop. I saw what I wanted in the window, and I had one made like it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Were you given away at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh my father threw me away.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did you have a best man?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 And ushers and things like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 My - brother-in-law. See? His - Alf\rquote s brother-in-law really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 What about ushers and groomsman?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh God knows, I didn\rquote t know anything talking about that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did you wear flowers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh we always had flowers.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 What happened to the flowers afterwards?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 
Well I think I threw mine to someone. And she was the next bride. Matter of fact I saw her - this engagement that I went to recently. So I said,
 Julie - do you remember how you met Dave? She said, yes, through you. So I said, remember when you sat on the stairs all night? Ah, she said, those was the days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Why are your side of the family and his side of the family separated in church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well - in the synagogue - men go to one side and women to the other, always.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 So it wasn\rquote t a matter of his side of the family and your side of the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No, no, no, no, no. Men of both sides go one side and women of both sides go the other, see. I suppose they don\rquote 
t trust each other really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did you have any presents when you actually left the synagogue?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No, they all came in before.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 What kind of presents did you get before?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh - you\rquote ll laugh. We had clock sets. We had - wash stand sets. And do you know - they\rquote re a rarity today, I\rquote 
m only sorry I got rid of mine. There was - two - basins and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1253119\charrsid6362028 the ewers}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 
, the big jugs. Soap dish, I come to the small items first. And then the chambers. See?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did you have photographs taken outside?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did you have anything like confetti or }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1253119\charrsid6362028 rose petals}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 ?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh, confetti, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 What did you go away in, in taxis?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 We came - we came home to the house in taxis.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Were they decorated?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Only the bride\rquote s. With the white ribbon.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 And you all went back to his place?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 To his place, see, for the reception. See, \lquote cos we - we had the caterers in. See?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did everybody who went to the wedding turn up at the reception or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh yes, a lot - a lot of people came to the reception. Quite a - quite a - well it was a packed house.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Was it a set meal or just a buffet?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No, a set meal. Set meal.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 How was the seating arranged?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well as I say, we had the double tables to the - like the double parlours and the forms, and you could - well, like two sittings.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did you have a big wedding cake?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Were the wedding presents on display?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1253119\charrsid6362028 Well}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 
 you had them on display before the wedding. People came - used to come in to see your presents you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Were there any speeches?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No, only sit down, sit down.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 What about dancing and singing?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 
Oh well, after - after the - people had eaten, forms was folded up and - tables - the trestles put down you see, they were popped out in the yard, 
and of course there was plenty of room for dancing and singing. And drinking, we had the bar in the corner. See, in them days, in the - double parlours used to have sideboards, you see. Well with a table adjoined to that you made a good bar. With somebody
 at the bar - for serving the drinks. There was plenty of drinks, of every }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1253119\charrsid6362028 description}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 .
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Who did the catering?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh - I don\rquote t exactly know who it was, somebody came in to do the catering.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 How long did the reception go on for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Oh right \lquote til the early hours of the morning, three - four o\rquote clock in the morning.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did you go away on honeymoon or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No, we didn\rquote t go away on - on honeymoon.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 So you stayed at the bitter end of the reception?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No, we went home - we went home about two o\rquote clock we went home. But we left \lquote 
em all there you see. We went home to Grove Road.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Was there any practical jokes played on you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Did he carry you over the threshold?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 He threw me. He threw me over the threshold and said, well that\rquote s what you wanted. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 What does this threshold thing mean anyway?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Over your step, over your first step. The first step together you see. Well two can't get over the threshold together so one\rquote 
s got to carry the other.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9589514 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Can you remember attending any other weddings when you were young which were different from your own wedding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16539070 HM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3412272\charrsid6362028 Well I\rquote ve been to English weddings and - I\rquote ve been in church to see the ceremony, there\rquote s not a ha\rquote 
porth of difference in any of it. Only the way it\rquote s performed. No. And that\rquote s what I say, religion is money. And this is it. If two can make ago of it, all well and good. But there\rquote s always ups and downs. There\rquote 
s good times, there\rquote s bad times, you have to put up with that, you see.
\par 
\par }}