{\rtf1\adeflang1025\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\adeff0\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang2057\deflangfe2057{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}{\f38\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f39\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f41\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f42\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f43\fbidi \froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}
{\f44\fbidi \froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f45\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f46\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f48\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}
{\f49\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f51\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f52\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f53\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f54\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}
{\f55\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f56\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden 
Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs20 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}}
{\*\latentstyles\lsdstimax156\lsdlockeddef0}{\*\revtbl {Unknown;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid1781692\rsid2252871\rsid2583568\rsid4940319\rsid5447395\rsid6302555\rsid6825366\rsid11226495\rsid12537051\rsid13846497\rsid15361306\rsid16481126\rsid16646548}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 11.
0.0000;}{\info{\title <pagez1>}{\author SEENU}{\operator lhorto}{\creatim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min9}{\revtim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min9}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords49275}{\nofchars280870}{\nofcharsws329487}
{\vern24613}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 http://schemas.microsoft.com/office/word/2003/wordml}{\xmlns2 urn:schemas-microsoft-com:office:smarttags}}\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1800\margr1800\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0\ltrsect 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\donotembedsysfont1\donotembedlingdata0\grfdocevents0\validatexml1\showplaceholdtext0\ignoremixedcontent0\saveinvalidxml0\showxmlerrors1\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace180
\dgvspace180\dghorigin1800\dgvorigin1440\dghshow1\dgvshow1\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\splytwnine\ftnlytwnine\htmautsp\nolnhtadjtbl\useltbaln\alntblind\lytcalctblwd\lyttblrtgr\lnbrkrule\nojkernpunct\rsidroot12537051 \fet0
{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}\ilfomacatclnup0\ltrpar \sectd \ltrsect\linex0\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ltrpar
\ql \fi-461\li461\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid4940319 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\ul\insrsid4940319\charrsid16072257 Information about interviewee}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid4940319 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid4940319\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\ql \fi-461\li461\ri0\widctlpar\tx2057\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid4940319 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4940319\charrsid16072257 Date of birth}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid4940319    \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4940319\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4940319  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5447395 1891}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid4940319\charrsid16072257 
\par Gender}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4940319           \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4940319\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4940319  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5447395 M}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4940319 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4940319\charrsid16072257 Marital status}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4940319 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4940319\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4940319  
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5447395 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4940319\charrsid16544153 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4940319\charrsid16072257 Occupation}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4940319 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4940319\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4940319  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5447395 Principal foreman (engineer)}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4940319\charrsid16072257 
\par Geographic region}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4940319 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4940319\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4940319  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5447395 
Westcliffe-on-Sea, Essex}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4940319\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\qj \fi-461\li461\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid4940319 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Could you tell me then what your father's job was?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Yes, 
he was a chargehand - at a boilermakers, and he worked in Shalers dockyard. Actually he worked there the whole of his life, his working life I think. I'm not quite sure about this but I think so. And he - eventually reached the - stage of being a chargeha
n
d. I'm going back now to my earliest recollections when - yes, about 97, 1897, before you were thought of - and - when I sometimes used to take his dinner down to him. If he was working on a special job and they had to work overtime, he would have to stay
 
at work during the dinner hour and - usually the sons and daughters of the workmen - used to take their dinners down, in a red handkerchief. Slopped all the way down because it had gravy in them, but - we used to stand outside the dockyard gates, and - wh
e
n the policeman put his hand up we could all go in. So - we used to go in and find our fathers or our parents, and - they sat down and ate their - their dinners, and off we tootled again. Well he was then - a chargehand of boilermakers. I can't remember m
uch - before that period.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Where did he come from?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
He came from Queenborough. I'm talking now about Sheerness dockyard by the way which is just opposite. Yes, he came from Queenborough, and - I remember him telling me many - many many years afterw
ard, when I was also working in the dockyard, and I complained to him one day, I said, I couldn't catch a bus - a tram to work, we used to have electric trams. He said, well, what about it? I said, well I was late. He said, well it serves you right. He sa
i
d, when I was a boy I worked a four - I walked four miles to work and - work and four miles back, and so he did. As a lad he was in - living in Queenborough and working in Sheerness you see. And the only means of locomotion - was to walk, which he did. An
d - I also understand from my mother that he did this for many years after they were married.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Was he apprenticed as a boilermaker?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No. There were no apprentices in that day, not - from what we would term apprentices. He - apparently got a job in the dockyard, and they sort of - drifting in - in - into doing boilermaking work. That's all there was about it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 So he worked his way up from being a boy in the dockyard?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mm. Yes, that's right. No, I think the - examinations for entry into the d
ockyard - I wouldn't say when - because I think that - quite a number of my elder brothers sat the examination, only one passed, that was my brother a little older than me, about five years older. Then he passed. Now he entered the dockyard - about 188 - 
99. So they were - existing then. I went in in 19 - 04. Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did your mother have a job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No, my mother had a full time job bringing in children. When - when you have a family of eleven - it's jolly hard work. She had to bring up a family - and -
 on very very inadequate wages incidentally, very very low. No holidays, I can't remember my father having a holiday. That's a blow isn't it. No, I can never remember him having a holiday. And when he at last retired - when I was an apprentice - I always 
s
aid to my other brothers that the shock was so great he died, well he did. He died within a year. But I do think there was something in that argument though, I think that he was - attuned to so much - regularity in his life - that when he lost that - he s
ort of lost the urge to exist, put it that way. That's what I feel about it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 He retired from the dockyard?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
He retired from the dockyard - when I was an apprentice about the third year of apprenticeship, I should think - about 1907. And - within a year he was dead anyhow.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Before she was married your mother didn't work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No. Oh - wait a minute. I'm not quite sure about this. But I've got an idea she was a servant. I did hear some sort of story when I was very young - of her working for the
 vicar - of a church in - Queenborough. Now I wouldn't like to say that's authentic, but I think it is.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 She came from Queenborough too did she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
She came from Queenborough as well, her father - it's going back a bit isn't it I believe that he was
 the - Chief Constable of Queenborough. It sounds a very very high position. But - if you know Queenborough as I knew it when - as a boy it - it only consisted of about one road actually. Incidentally my father was Freeman of Queenborough you know. Mm. I 
think he inherited that. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What advantages did that bring?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh none at all. Well these posts don't mean much do they. I think they're supposed to - in theory - be the reward say of services rendered I should imagine anyhow to the community. But 
- I don't think there's much value in them anyhow. And that applies to today, I think they're all tripe. It's like making an alderman.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did your father belong to a trade union?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Yes. I don't know what but I think it was a boilermakers union. Now 
I - I only discovered this after his death by the way. My eldest brother - was looking through his papers. And he said to me - one day, look, this is something to interest you. And this was a copy of a letter that my father had wrote - to a - what they te
r
m the Lords of the Admiralty. In connection with some - application for an increase in wages - that the people in - Sheerness Dockyard were making. And - I remember - it very very plainly because my father signed himself, your very obedient servant - so a
n
d so and so and so you know. And I remember as a kid I thought to myself, well that sounds a weird sort of - sort of address but of course it's fairly typical. But - I don't know much about that side of his - activity. As a matter of face he was very reti
c
ent about that. I don't know why, but he was very reticent. But that might account - this - this might account for it really, that when he died I was only about - sixteen, and I suppose he thought that I wasn't - really mentally alert or fit - to - the co
n
fidences that he could have given me you see. It was a big loss to me actual. But I should imagine probably that that was the reason. Because we were just - before his death we were just sort - going for a walk in the evening, and - having a little chat, 
mostly about football by the way. But we were sort of getting down to a bais, you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did he talk about politics at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
He was a Liberal, which incidentally was fairly revolutionary. Oh yes. In Sheenness it was very revolutionary, I can tell yo
u that. By God it was, mm. I remember an uncle of mine - Uncle Jack, whom I liked immensely - he in a - as a reward for his political activities, had his house, which owned incidentally painted in the Tory colours during an election. Which wasn't very goo
d. Mm. Yes, in the night he got up, he found the walls on the outside of his house all sprawled with - a very vivid blue.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Was your father active then in politics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No. My mother would be more active than my father. My mother was - I should say she
 was very fluent. She was quite a good actress in a way - you know, the dialogues and things like that and these little concerts. No, father was very - quiet, self effacing, but - he knew what he thought, and he was able to express it very well, but unles
s you asked him - there would be no expression.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Do you know why he was a Liberal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No. No, I don't know that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 He didn't explain why he supported the party?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No. No, we had - as I say, we had no - discussion with him on that thing. With 
my mother, many many years afterwards - it couldn't have been so long after that anyhow, must have been somewhere about 1909 - when I was about nineteen or eighteen, and I joined the Socialist party, and I remember that shook her. And I remember then sayi
n
g to her, well - you're a Liberal and most of Sheerness is Conservative, what does it matter. I can also remember her doing this for me which I thought a lot of - we used to hold open air meetings of course in Sheerness and they were outside a Conservativ
e
 Club. Which - was quite good. But anyhow - it was a normal sort of meeting, none of us would speak really - but we were very enthusiastic, and we had - a scheme of - taking it in turns in taking the chair. Taking it in turns in opening the - meeting etce
t
era, and all doing our bit, and also taking the collection. And I remember one night, I happened to be taking the collection, and there were only about two in the audience, and - somebody put their arm round the back of me and put a penny in the box that 
I had. And I turned round, it was so unexpected you see, I turned round, it was my mother. I said, good heavens. She said, yes, I thought I ought to, she said, you look so lonely.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 But she was an active Liberal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Yes. She belonged to the Liberal Gu
ild and all that sort of thing. Yes, oh yes, she was quite enthusiastic, very enthusiastic. The first election I remember - was 1906 I think. That I believe, I'm not quite sure about this, I think that - the - the Liberal party got back into power in 1906
 
didn't they, I think so. Mm. We didn't get back into power, yes we did. Oh Lord yes. A bloke named Doctor Napier - came down, nobody knew anything about him but he came down - and there was a wave - of enthusiasm for the Liberal party, and I remember that
 - Chinese Labour was one of the planks - and - I believe that - at that time there was a lot of Chinese - industrial competition, in England, and for some }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid11226495\charrsid2252871 w}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 eird sort of reason - the Liberal party thought that - the country was going to be overwhelmed with 
Chinamen. But - and I do remember that that was the cry at election. But anyhow the Liberals got back.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 How did you become a Socialist yourself then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Well I think there was a gradual process. But I can remember - the day when - I felt more indign
ant with the - Tory party than any time in my life. You must remember that - in the workshop in those days things were very - they were very callous. Although we had trade unions, there were very very few who belonged. They were too scared. And the - what
 
shall I say, the bosses - that includes a foreman - of course when - the workmen were made chargehand they thought they belonged to the other class. That sounds very weird but it is true. And - they treated you accordingly. But anyhow I can remember - whe
n
 I was about - seventeen or eighteen I was working with a man for whom I had a very great regard. His name was John Morley. He would be about thirty at that time. He had a wife and two children, two little girls, lovely little girls. And he - I worked wit
h him - and he did a lot of me so}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid11226495\charrsid2252871  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
far that - on Sundays his wife would invite me to their place to tea you see. And sort of the humanising effect it had upon me - as a sort of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid11226495\charrsid2252871 rapscallion}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  and - it came the period one year - when they were going to give us d
ischarge, and - these rumours used to get about like what they term political leaks today, they were purposely let out. And - everybody knew - that about forty men in the fitting shop were going to be - discharged. And of course that was meant - to put ev
e
rybody on their toes. And I can tell - tell you this it was a most terrible thing in the whole of my experience. Grown men, good mechanics - good craftsmen - scared stiff of their being unemployed. I'm going back now in the days - when there was no unempl
o
yment benefit, you just went out like that, and - the unemployment figures were always very high, and if you got into employment you were damned lucky. But anyhow I remember one day - on the Friday afternoon - when the clerk was coming round giving out th
e
se - papers - everyone was looking you know sort of keeping an eye, here he comes, you know, keep - sort of keep an eye and - on the bloke who was coming along with a - notices, and - he stopped at our bench. And he gave - said, here you are, I can rememb
e
r his tone, I remember the tone that he said it. And - my friend, John Morley took it, he put it in his pocket. And I thought to myself, my God. And I immediately said to him, sorry, John. And he burst into tears. And that shut me up, I thought, God Almig
h
ty, there's a man, a grown man - a fine man in every respect burst into tears. And I think really that I decided there was something wrong politically. And I probably - did the obvious, I joined the Comm - the - Socialist party. Incidentally I have been a
 member ever since. Oh yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Which party was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh - going back to the Social party in those days there were - Socialist party Great }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid11226495\charrsid2252871 Britain}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 , Independent Labour Party - Socialist Democratic Party, and the British Socialist Party. Now - all the
se parties had to - claim or make claim to about half a dozen men. Because there was very very few of us anyhow. But the particular party that I joined was the British Socialist party, merely because I think of the term British I thought myself this stand
s for all the others - and can swallow the others up, which incident - incidentally they did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Which branch did you belong to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Sheerness branch. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 And how many members were there then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh - we limited our members - membership in those days to ten. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Why was that?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Well, what we felt about it, mind you we were all very immature, and we - we were all very enthusiastic, but we did feel was this, that the only members we wanted were people who - had enthusiasm. We didn't 
want people - sort of paying members. We wanted people who were prepared to work, and we decided that there would be only about ten people - who would be prepared to work - so we limited the number to ten. Now that - had rather a peculiar effect. As soon 
a
s we knew that - broadcast that we were going to have no members above ten, we had a lot of members - people who wanted to join. But anyhow - we did limit it to that extent, and we also - decided this. That everybody had to be prepared - to speak. Whether
 they could speak or not didn't matter, they had to be prepared to get at any open air meeting you had and - oh and hold the platform. Incidentally it often wanted holding.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Where would the meetings be, in the market place?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No. At - I don't know whether you know Sheerness do you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 I haven't been there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Well you haven't missed much. Anyhow I suppose probably - the best building in Sheerness in those days was the Conservative Club. It was quite a good building. Now opposite the Conservative
 Club - was an opening about - length of our garden leading down to a school, which was a National school, which - where incidentally my wife, who married me, taught. I was her only failure as a pupil. But anyhow that's where we used to hold our meetings,
 so that the platform which we used to }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid11226495\charrsid2252871 build up}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  with }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid11226495\charrsid2252871 tumble}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
 - thumbscrews and that sort of thing, we built up and face the Conservative - Club entrance. It was good fun too.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Was that Saturday nights?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 I'm not sure about Saturday nights, I don't th
ink it was. Because mainly because we were otherwise engaged. But often on a Saturday, we would go - to a village - on the other side of the island, near Sittingbourne, Chennon, any places like that, and we'd go out to a little village pub, and we'd have 
a
 drink, and we used to ask the - landlord whether he would mind if whether we had a meeting outside of his door, and - usually they used to say no, that's all right. And we used to borrow one of his - lemonade boxes - for a platform, and just - have a go.
 
For about half an hour, that was all there was bout it, asking questions, hoping there were none, and - then go back and have a yarn with the people inside and - that was all there was about it. And I used to thoroughly enjoy that you know. I think most o
f
 our chaps did. We did have a stunt after a time, of always opening our meetings with a - a song. And - incidentally we had - there were four of us - and we had a damned good quartet. Oh there wasn't any doubt about that. And we used to sing either the In
ternational, Red Flag or something like that to open up. Which was also rather good fun.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Those would be agricultural labourers you were talking to mainly?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Yes. I would say yes. There was - there was - nothing - nothing industrial in the neighbourhood. Nothing industrial at all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 How did they take to Socialism then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Well I don't know whether they understood it. After all we were not very articulate. But - I think after a time - they used to enjoy it. It's always enjoyable to see other pe
ople make fools of themselves anyhow isn't it, and there they had - say half a dozen of us or so - who were trying to do what they obviously couldn't do. I think they enjoyed it. Anyhow we used to treat them with a pint, treat them to a pint or two.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 How much regular support did you have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 How much what?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 How much regular support did you have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
There were one or two pubs - I was trying to think of the name - of the village near Tennon, I forget what the name of the village was, but I do kn
ow there that - the publican was very anxious for us to go, and also on one occasion when we were outside saying goodbye one of them said, well come again won't you. I think probably they took it in the light in which we meant it. We were having a good bi
t
 of fun, and incidentally if we were doing any good - that was incidental. And I think they were having their bit of fun too. I think we learnt more off them than they learnt off us. I mean it - to me it was very instructive. I'd never dealt with farm lab
ourers before. And my God - those fellows, they were jolly fine chaps. And what were their wage, fourteen bob a week. Some of them less.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you have meetings in the winter, indoor meetings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh yes. Oh yes, indoor meetings. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Discussions and talks?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Not discussions so much. Discussion for - for - private consumption. But we used to hold - about three meetings a year on Sunday evening, in what is a - Wellington Hall, that was at the back of a pub, and it was quite a nice hall, we used t
o hold our meetings there, we used to get a speaker - speaker down from the headquarters - who I think enjoyed himself, and - that was all there was about it. We never got much of an audience. But - frankly we were not - very concerned about audiences. We
 
were certainly more concerned - about ourselves. Very egotistic weren't we. But - that was all there was about it, we - looked forward to these meetings, we all wanted to have a go, and - and whether the people in - the audience understood what we were ta
lking about - didn't matter a lot to us. I can remember one Sunday night - having a go at Churchill. Most awful cheek. But anyhow, Churchill at that time - was - Home Secretary. And at that ti}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid11226495\charrsid2252871 me there was a fair amount of hooliganism}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}London{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}, probably not as much as there is now though, and - they were after some criminal, in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Sidney Street
{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}, I don't know whether you know the history of it, do you? Well anyhow, I remember - getting very sarcastic - sarcastic about Churchill - paying more - concern - to the -
 criminals of Sidney Street than he was to the - farm labourers and engineers in the - workshops and that sort of tripe, which of course looking back was - pretty absurd.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What were the books you read about Socialism?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What were the books? Oh Lord. I suppose Karl Marx was the awful thing.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You read Karl Marx?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh yes. Yes. Oh yes, I did study Karl Marx, and - Kortsky, what was his name Kortsky, yes. Oh there was quite a number of books that I had. I also - became an outdoor student of - {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname 
PlaceName}}Ruskin{\*\xmlclose} {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceType}}College{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}. From which I transferred to the {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceName}}Central{\*\xmlclose} 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceName}}Labour{\*\xmlclose} {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceType}}College{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
, all correspondence mind you. I mean it's all right to talk about going to college and all that sort of thing - and you could get to Ruskin College fairly cheaply - but the - the - compe
tition to go to Ruskin College - as a paid student - was terrific you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 That would be before the first world war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh my God, yes. Oh yes. Mm. Oh yes, I was - I'm not sure about the 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceName}}Central{\*\xmlclose} {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceName}}Labour{\*\xmlclose} {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceType}}College{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 when they first - sprung up. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 About 1912 I think.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Was it? I thought it was - older than that, but anyhow about that time, but anyhow I - I know I was one of their first students. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What did you study there then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Logic. Which a lot of my friends used to laugh at. E
conomics and Industrial History. And I - I learnt quite a lot really. Most of which I forgot afterwards, but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did anyone else in the branch join the college?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No. No. No, I was rather pleased about that, I could tell them a lot. No, I was a member of - I was a - correspondence student and then was - during the war I would say up to about 1916. I would think so.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Can you tell us about how you started work yourself, did you start work when you were at school at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No. No, no, except in
 a - except in a very - what I thought was a most degrading way. Most of my - my father - and most of our friends in the neighbourhood were very keen gardeners. And - there were more horses in those days than there were motor cars of course, in fact the -
 motor cars were almost non-existent. And - most of the - gardeners - would give you a penny or tuppence if you would bring them in a load of manure. And - each morning - before I left school, I used to go round and - collect manure.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh I got into ver
y serious trouble with my father, and - and mother. I used - used to go out each morning - to - get }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid11226495\charrsid2252871 manure}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 , which I objected to very strongly by the way - and - I began to think of some ways and means of avoiding it. So I went out and I thought to myself, 
well - if I - take a load of manure home every day, or every alternate days, and the days when I don't take a lot of manure round, I cover the heap of manure - with earth I can put the manure that I do bring on the top and it would come up fairly quickly 
y
ou see, a little heap Which I did. But - it only lasted about four occasions. When I got a good hiding. The only other time that I earned money - was on Good Fridays. An uncle of mine had a bakers shop, and he used to make hot cross buns, and - I used to 
go round to - quite a large number of my mother's friends getting orders for a half a dozen hot cross buns, which I delivered on Good Friday morning. That was quite good.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 But you left school then in 1904?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 I left school about - thirteen, I think w
hen I was about thirteen - just over thirteen as a matter of fact. At that time they were making two entries a year into Sheerness Dockyard. Six monthly entries. And - they also made some con-cession that you could sit at an examination - when you were th
i
rteen and a half, instead of fourteen. For some weird sort of reason they wanted a colossal number of apprentices at that time. I don't know why because there was no imminent war anyhow. But anyhow, I left school, at least I - sat the examination when I w
as thirteen and a half, and I went - actually went to work when I was about thirteen and threequarters I should imagine, something of that I know I was the smallest boy of the entry. Which I wasn't very proud of.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Can you tell us about the first day at work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh my God. Actually the - I believe there would be about - I'm not quite sure about this, about half a dozen entrants in the fitting shop, the engineers shop. I remember my father taking me down - I remember him - saying well there it is son, y
ou go in there, in those big gates and you turn to the left and you'll find a ticket office. And you - stand there until the chargehand comes. I wasn't very happy. I think he saw that, he said, well cheer up, we all had to start anyhow. So in I went, and 
I
 - went in and turned left and - there were men rushing about all over the place, delivering their checks do you see, which they picked up at the gates, the entrance gates. And - ran across - and put them in a box, just inside the shop. When the bell ceas
e
d ringing, these boxes were shit like that and those who were late had to go home for a quarter of an hour. Very sad that was. But anyhow, I went in and - but the - the charge - the - charge - man - chargehand's runner we used to call him, who was a clerk
 
- he came along and he said, come on, and he took us - four - six of us I think there were up to the - foreman's office. Up - one of those iron staircases, going up like that. And - we stood outside in fear and trembling while he went inside to see the fo
r
eman, and then he came out again and - in turn he said you, come with me and the others stood there and - he took you to - some chargehand you see. Down the stairs - to the chargehand, where he handed us over. And the chargehand in turn handed us over to 
a
 fitter. Who was our instructor for the time being. And - the instructor - gave us a vice or - told us to stand at a vice, gave us the tools, and - a little piece of metal and told us to get on with it, filing or whatever the case may be you see. And - th
e
re we stood. Well I was a bit handicapped. I found I wasn't tall enough to reach the bench. Actually the benches - and the vices were - I suppose about normal size you see, and when I got up to the bench I was sort of filing up there you see. And they wer
e
 big vices, and - the bloke with whom I was working, oh he said, I'll soon settle that. And he got me a box you know, six inches high, and - he stood me on the box, quite a little thing bout - a foot square, and I stood on this - this box sort of - filing
, until somebody, bright idea - with a bright eye }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid11226495\charrsid2252871 kicked}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
 it from under my feet. I went down of course. Caught the box, collected it, stood on it again and out I went again. Well this went on I suppose for about half a day really. And I was feeling very sad 
and sorry. Any how the following morning - I took - a bag, a little bag of sand, in this - and got there fairly early, and I filled this box with this sand. And - I waited. Stood on the box and I went on and - filing, felt that somebody wanted to come to 
t
he stores and - they came up and kicked - oh - of course the man thing was - was heavy. Anyhow, there was a bit of a shemozzle, this - bright lad wanted to fight me and all that sort of thing but - I was safe, in the protection of the instructor, so that 
was all right. But nobody ever kicked the box again.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did they play any other tricks on you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh my God yes. All sorts of tries there were in workshops. I think the funniest thing really what did - did have a piece - a certain amount of humour I t
hink was when you were sent to the stores to get a rubber - to get a rubber spanner. And the number of us apprentices - who went very seriously up in the stores - to get a rubber spanner, and was told equally seriously, oh, tell Mr so and so that we haven
't got one yet, come again later will you, and like }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid11226495\charrsid2252871 dammed}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
 fools we all went back.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What other tricks?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
I don't think tricks exactly. We used to have our little football matches, which was rather dangerous from many points of view. Playing footbal
l among working machinery is not too good you know. How we survived I'm damned if I know. But anyhow it was common practice, when the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid11226495\charrsid2252871 c}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 hargehand wasn't there of course. There was a fair amount of bullying but not - excessively. Although we did have one who
 was - an awful creature. He was about the worst. But mostly the men I thought - beyond cuffing you round the ears, which didn't hurt you after all did it - and - kicking your backside or things like that if you did something that annoyed them - there was
n't much really that you could complain about, I don't think. Anyhow, my reactions were really that with the exception of one bloke, I liked everybody. I thought they were a damned fine lot.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 How would you annoy them, what would annoy the men?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Wel
l I suppose if you went along, we had iron benches, and they were right along one side of the shop and along the other side you see, and - within the - the - particular area of the man's vice, that was his property, actually. And he was very proud of that
 bit of property. And a good fitter would - by the side of his vice on the right hand side of his vice, he would have all his - files - all regularly }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid11226495\charrsid2252871 laid}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  out, so that all he had to do was to pick the one he wanted and go on, put that down, always in the sa
me spot, and do another one. Well if, as an apprentice, you wanted to - borrow a file off somebody - I'm speaking personally now, in my particular case, I used to think to myself, I wonder whether he's got what I want? And I'd look along the bench, do you
 see, and if I found that somebody did have a vice - a vice - a file that I wanted - well in due course that file would be mine. At least I would be using it, until I got a kick. Which was all - perfectly justified I think - really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 How did you deal with this bully?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh I had a scrap with him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 In the workshop?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh yes. That was merely - that was - within a few months of my finishing my apprenticeship. I changed then from the - the little boy - I was four feet six and a half when I started my work. You know, I have to - often when I see kids and I see them about 
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid11226495\charrsid2252871 fourth}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
 feet six or something like that I think to myself, my God. But anyhow - I developed I suppose in a normal way. I did all I could to - make myself physically strong - for my o
wn protection. I did all sorts of things. Gymnastics - and - I remember one famous - thing of mine which rather annoyed my mother immensely. You know, you - if you go up a staircase - and you jump - you can hang on to the top storey. See what I mean do yo
u
. Well I used to do that - and hang on and pull my weight - as soon as I got home every dinner time for - dinner, pull my weight - weight about two dozen times which - I thought was extending my length, I don't know what - but anyhow, that's what happened
 
you see. But anyhow by the time - I was - nineteen I finished my apprenticeship nineteen and a bit, I suppose I was about the same size I am now actually. And - I was footballing, cricketing - I did play tennis. And - among my own fellows, I used to box. 
We all did a bit you know, mucking about. One of our - my friend - fellow }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid11226495\charrsid2252871 apprentices\rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  father had a greengrocers shop, and we used to go to his stores to box. Which was terribly funny. I'll tell you about that later. But anyhow on this particular occasion I
 can remember going about after - lunch, and - seeing this horrible bloke - that had bullied me success - successively - over a long period - getting hold of a kid's arm and twisting it round his back and this poor little devil was howling. And - I don't 
k
now what was wrong with me - I shouldn't have done it really but I went at him. I said, leave that boy alone. Of course that had the obvious effect, he got - he got a dmaned sight worse. And before I knew where I was I had set about him. And my God didn't
 
he cane me. I should think - this - this fight lasted a hell of a long time, about quarter of an hour, and - he hit me everywhere. And he could hit. But I wasn't going to be beaten, every time I got done I got up. And toward the end I could hardly damn we
l
l stand, but fortunately I noticed that neither could he. Because - there were no three minute rounds you know. This would have gone on forever. If - if one of us hadn't collapsed. Anyhow - I did notice this that - he didn't seem to be hitting me at all, 
a
nd I seemed to be hitting him. And - eventually he went down. And he didn't get up. For which I was very pleased. Anyhow my pals got a - got hold of me and took me into the lavatory and cleaned me up but by God I was a mess. Ooh. But - I believe it made a
 marked effect upon this - bully. They did tell me some years afterwards that - he was never the same again. But - it was slaughter.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 All the men were watching while you had this fight?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh yes, yes. The funny part about that you know, the bell ha
dn't gone, we were - we - we'd started our fight - before - we were supposed to start work. And - after we'd been at it for about five minutes we were supposed - supposed - supposed to start work, but I did hear some time afterward that the chargehand had
 been given the tip to keep away for a bit, which he very nicely did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 They were quite co-operative were they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh yes. I think - I think that - most of our chargehands - I don't think I met a bad chargehand really. They were - they had their job t
o do - they had to see that - we learnt our job, they had to see that we did our job. Then they had to - keep a certain amount of discipline in the workshop, which is very essential, by gum it is.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What sort of things would they use discipline for then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 For?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What sort of things do you mean? What kind of discipline was needed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh - supposing - which was fairly prevalent, more prevalent today than it was then - that a bloke would - leave off work, wander off and have a yarn with his pal.
 Well there you've got a couple of men who are not producing anything aren't you. And that, in the eyes of a chargehand, is a heinous crime you know. It's a terrible thing - because after all, his point of view, he's got a certain amount of work to get ou
t
 you see, in our particular case we were all more or less working on engines. Ok. Those engines should be done, roughly on an average within a certain period. And - if not then you're keeping the boat back, you're going to get into serious trouble. At lea
s
t your not, the chargehand is. And naturally he's going to keep his own end up and keep - within limits, keep you at your job. Oh I don't blame them at all, I think then were - very justified. And this - I can say this - that - as far as I was concerned, 
I
 didn't like - the chargehands who - were strict - I liked the chargehands who were weak - weak-kneed, but by God, they didn't do me any damned good. No, no. No. In my view - as an apprentice, and as - as a craftsman - you've got - to submit to workshop d
i
scipline. If you're there to do a job - and you're paid a good wage, incidentally you're not - but - if you're paid a good wage - it's up to you - to - do a job - a day's work. I know in latter part of my career, when I had - control of quite a large numb
e
r of men, they always knew - that if I put - if they pulled their weight - everything was all right. But by God they knew they had to pull it. And I think that's perfectly fair. I think if you pay a man - incidentally that was a part of my job, I reckoned
 
that - the highest paid - workman in the factory were the people that I wanted. I didn't want any scallywags, I didn't want people on the low rate. I didn't want low rated people. Because they're no damned good to anybody or themselves. But if a man is pa
i
d a good rate of wages, then he should produce the goods. I'm not in doubt about that. And - in my - department anyhow - they all knew that. And - incidentally we had a damned good time. Discipline was very very easy - to maintain, it's - they - most of m
y blokes - were interested in their job, and they knew that I was interested in them - I think - the part - am I driver -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Where was this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 This - on the latter part of my career in Farnborough. Farnborough, yes.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Engineering again?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mm. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 The aircraft?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What were you doing there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
I was - what - they used to call a principle foreman. But - in the re-organisation of industry and all that sort of thing, they call us a technical assistant. Technical officer. It 
meant exactly the same. Yes, it probably didn't - wasn't worth so much as a foreman. But anyhow that was - just a change of the -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 When did you become a foreman then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh blimey. I think that was the only part of the war. Early part of this second
 world war. Before the second world war - I was on aircraft inspection for many years. At Farnborough, I used to do a lot of outside - what we term outside work is going round to various firms inspecting work - that is ultimately - for Farnborough, inspec
t
ing at their place you see. No, I did a lot of that, and when the war broke out - I was - controlling a small section of inspection, and - the head inspector came to me one day, just after the outbreak of war, and he said, I'm going to - transfer you to E
xeter, for the duration of the war. I said, are you? He said, yes, he said, we're going to have a branch down there - it was a branch of the defence department, and they were experimenting in the defence of {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}Britain{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} - these - big balloons, barrage balloons and all that sort of thing was a part of it. The idea of having it at Farnborough - at {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Exeter
{\*\xmlclose} was because they were - far enough away from the bombing zone, also - we took over {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Exeter{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} university. So we had - a lot of staff at 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceName}}Exeter{\*\xmlclose} {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceType}}University{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} - and - a - a
 lot of staff which we took on down there at Honiton Clist, just outside which is the airport.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 But you were in engineering?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 How long were you working as an engineer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh before I became an inspector? Oh well - I became an inspe
ctor - in the first world war. Let me see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 So you worked in the dockyard?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
I worked in the dockyard - until 1916. My ideas on those days was to get away. But I didn't. For this reason actually. The state of employment in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}England{\*\xmlclose}
{\*\xmlclose} wasn't good enou
gh. The point was you couldn't chuck up a job, at least I - I couldn't, put it that way, I couldn't put up - chuck up a job until I got another one. I wasn't one of these brave people who say - oh to hell, I'll find something. I wanted a certain amount of
 
security. Of course - coupled with that was a fact that - my wife and I were - weren't married but we were keeping company, and - anyhow, I didn't - I didn't want - I wanted security, put it that way. So I hung at Farnborough - hung out at Sheerness docky
a
rd, until - 19 - 1915 I think it was. I think it was 1915. When I - made application - to the superintendent of Farnborough for a job as an inspector, which of course really was a damned cheek. I had never worked on aircraft - but I had fairly decent qual
i
fications as an engineer. Anyhow - I got a reply, yes, come at once. And it was a vastly higher rate than I had been getting, at the dockyard so I tootled off down there. And - at the beginning I went on detail part inspection. I don't know whether you kn
o
w anything about engineering do you? Do you? Well anyhow, imagine that to be an aircraft - it's composed of a few hundred parts isn't it. Right, well all those parts have got to be made, and - for the assembly, the - efficient assembly of all those parts 
t
hey've got to be within certain limits, otherwise they won't assemble, and that won't do it's job. OK? Well - the - what we used to term the detail inspection - was in each particular section of the factory, where these parts were being made, you would in
s
pect the individual detail of parts. And then they would be out - go to another part where they would be assembled, where you'd see the assembly inspector who would do the - that part, and then the final part like that would be the aeroplane, they would b
e
 all assembled up and would all, we hope, assemble efficiently, Got it? I went - first of all went onto the detail inspection, and then - the - the chief down there, the head inspector - came to me one day and he said, he said, oh - I want to put you on n
i
ght shift. I said, why? Well, he said, I'm going to have a - night shift of two men, he said, and I want you as one. I said, blimey, I haven't been here long enough. He said, that's all right. I said, all right. I said, oh wait a minute - what hours am I 
w
orking on night shift? He said, you start at six at night, you end at eight o'clock in the morning. I said, my God. I said, what about weekends? He said, well - you leave off work on Saturday morning - until Sunday night. Well I made quick calculation and
 I found - that I was getting more time off then - than I was on day shift, because we were working seven days a week you see. So I said, OK, I'll do it. So another bloke in my - and myself - went on, well that job was I thought was a cynicure}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid11226495\charrsid2252871 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  we were not 
set any particular type of work to do, but we were supposed to be efficient enough to inspect anything which became - finished - and was put up for inspection, any part of the factory during that night. Which was quite a tall order. But anyhow - we got th
rough. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Going back to the dockyard, how long were your hours there?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Hours? Seven in the morning 'til twelve. One o'clock 'til five I think, no - one o' - I'm not quite sure about this you know. It's like going back into the dark ages isn't 
it. I know what it was when I started. Let's start from there Seven o'clock in the morning 'til twelve, midday. Home to lunch. Half past one 'til half past five. That was five days a week, and - seven o'clock 'til one o'clock on Saturdays. I think that co
m
es up to fifty hours does it? Something of that, yes. Now there is one peculiarity about the dockyard, it only lasted one year. In the summer you worked longer than you did in the winter for the same money. There was no electricity. We worked with candles
 
and - gas jets. So it was better from the - dockyard point of view - to work in the daylight than at night. And - during the winter months - we used to leave off work at quarter past four in the afternoon, which I thought was wonderful. And we used to sta
rt in the morning at half past seven. Now that - that lasted a certain period you see, but - as the - the days lengthened so you went back to your normal time of course.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Was it time wages?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mm. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did they start introducing more machinery while you were there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
I wouldn't say they did. No. No, not at - not at - in the dockyard. What machinery we did have - was improvised, there was only one - semi-automatic machine as far as I remember when I left. And that was for making - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid16481126\charrsid2252871 screws}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 , quit
e an elementary sort of job, and - it wasn't automatic, in the way that today's machines are automatic. It couldn't be worked without an operator - to do it. It had a shuck, which was a hollow chuck, and it had a long piece of metal going right out, which
 
was gradually shortened as you went along on the job, your - your tool rack, was composed as far as I remember of four setters. One was a dye, to - screw dye, another one was to put a champer on, another one for something else and something else and the o
ther one's a parting machine, so that the operator - slewed round this particular machine - this - chuck here, to cut a thread, and then that would release is self, spring back and he would screw it down again, to put the champer on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Were there no electrical riveters for - instance?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Compressed air riveters. I don't think we had riveters but we had chisels. You know - how these blokes out on the road - cut big holes in the road, and make a hell of a din? Well, when I was an apprentice, toward the l
atter part of the time - they introduced - compressed air - chipping machines. They were things about that size, about the same size - as - a Black and Decker drill. And - you put a little chisel in and you used to use it for chipping and that sort of thi
n
g. For instance, when - a ship came into the docks, with a piece knocked of it's - runner, it's - propeller, they would - raise another piece onto the propeller, and the runner of this piece would have to be chipped off with this damned automatic thing. S
p
eaking as an apprentice, it was hell. And - it was hated by everybody, by the men who didn't work it because of the noise, and by everybody who did work it because you went home at night like this. So the - the chargehand - hit on quite - I thought was a 
good idea, until it hit me, that if - anybody didn't behave themselves, right ho, we put you on the next chipping job. And - I got quite an amount of that funnily enough.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Why was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Well I suppose I was a bit of a damned nuisance - but I can 
remember this, and - that going home at night, you know, you felt terrible really. I'm not joking. But going home at night you know you'd sort of - go like - not - you were shaking. But anyhow that was the first type of - automatic thing that I remember. 
W
e didn't have any electrical stuff, no. No. Of course I think you know - I've often heard women, including my wife - say, why don't they do something about those people who make big holes in the road - and make - disturb everybody's peace? And I said to h
e
r time - time after time, I said, by God I'd like to put you on the end of that. I mean - what the hell. We're only putting up with the noise. Those people are standing on top of it. They're not only putting up with the noise but they're - they're destroy
ing their nerves aren't they.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Was there not a lot of noise in the workshop anyway?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Yes. There was a lot - there was a lot of noise. The first workshop I had in Sheerness dockyard - was a combined workshop. It - was a machine shop and - fitting sh
op. And - it was - you - you know these old churches and chapels that had two galleries running down on either side, and with an end there - well that was how the fitting shop of Sheerness dockyard was. You went into - don't know whether I can make a sket
ch, anyhow - it was straight like that, right along there - but upstairs was a gallery, right along there was a gallery and there was a gallery.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 So galleries on three sides?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Galleries on three sides. Underneath here were - benches - right along t
here, right along there and right along there underneath. The whole of the centre was more or less filled with machines. Big machines and small machines. Now up on the top - on the top of the gallery, we had - a - a traveling crane. A bloke used to sit - 
i
n a little carrier, I used to think it was a carrier, underneath this crane, which used to run along on two rails. He controlled that by - going along to this part, running it - the carri - the crane along to a certain point, lowering his job, and doing w
hatever's - was required. Got it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you belong to a trade union in the workshop?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh yes, I did, mm. I - became an apprentice trade unionist.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Can you tell us about how the union was, the meetings and all that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 The union meetings to m
e were very interesting. Very interesting indeed. In fact - incidentally, the - the union meetings in the early days as far as I remember were very conservative. And - most of the members I would say - were Conservatives. So that when I - and one or two o
t
hers - who - were Socialist joined - I'm not so sure that we were - gratefully received. I know that - to be fair to the other blokes - if it was possible to twist an argument round to the Socialist side - we did so, would you like the - we thought that -
 
quite fair. But I'm not sure that it was. Now there was another thing that - I don't think was very fair. It was an idea of mine but we flogged it like blazes, that - in addition to having a meeting, a branch meeting, or dis - dis - discussion of business
 
- when the business is finished, we should have it opened - for the discussion of other things. And we should be able to book a speaker, to speak for half an hour. From somewhere else you see, on all sorts of things, didn't matter a damn what it was, all 
s
orts of things you see. And - they agreed. And - for the first year - we had most interesting lectures, on all sorts of things, religious, Melthusianism, we had two blokes down from Melthusians League and various things of - interest you see. Collieries. 
A
nd that went down very well, they got - quite popular. But - we gradually - introduced - a certain amount of politics. And of course it was one sided politics. I'm not sure that was very popular. But - I'm quite sure of this, that although it wasn't very 
p
opular, I think the large proportion of men there thoroughly enjoyed it. I think - they enjoyed the cut and thrust. Because - because - I mean we were chewed up no end you know. There wasn't any doubt about it. I mean a lot of these men - they had more wi
sdom in their little fingers than I had in the whole of my body. And - and for a bloke like me to tell 'em what ought to be done in - in this country of theirs - was quite a wrong thing. But it was good fun.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 How many people went to the meetings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Before I left Sheerness it was getting very popular, and I think really - it was due to the fact that they were more interesting, do you see. Instead of going there and hear that so and so is sick and so and so is unemployed and - what are we going to do 
a
bout it mates, and all that sort of thing, they were having - something to talk about, and they were having something to - to listen to you see. I was say - anything from twenty to thirty. Some nights - if we had somebody - coming - who was going to be in
t
eresting - I think the chief really attraction, was if they knew there was going to be a row. And they would roll up in - in dozens. As a whole I wouldn't say - that Sheerness dockyard was very strong - from the trade union point of view. From the enginee
r
ing trade union point of view - there were three main - trade unions. There was the Amalgamated Society of Engineers. There was the Steam Engine Makers. And there was the Tool Maker. They - obviously - in course of time did amalgamate, and - became the Am
a
lgamated Engineering Union. They of course - have - had more amalgamations and they have become the Amalgamated - Engineering - Workers Union. And they have over a million members today. But the engineer of today or the craftsmen of today - bears no resem
blance to the craftsman of when I was an apprentice.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Were people discouraged from joining the union?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
I wouldn't like to say they were openly discouraged. I don't think so, no. But I do think that they were afraid. Yes, I think that, I - I think that's quite true.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What were they afraid of?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
They were afraid I think - that - if - at any particular time, you had a foreman there who was very anti - that - and any of them got into trouble, that they would be for it. And I think that they wer
e very very much afraid of the fact - that there might, under - some circumstances, be a tendency - to choose a trade unionist who they would possibly think would - could be a nuisance, for discharge when the opportunity arose. I think - sorry - I think a
 
lot of this you know - is - not so much the fact - that a trade unionist is a nuisance. But - I think - the ordinary management of an engineering works is afraid of their potential. What can they do? And I think they're scared stiff. I'm quite sure of it.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did the union at Sheerness ever interfere in discharges?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No. No. None whatever.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 It was benefits only, that's all they discussed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
We had not the slightest - idea of when we - when men - men were to be discharged, why they were to be di
scharged or anything about it. To - I do remember on one occasion, when it was suggested to the management - that if at a certain time they knew they were going to be discharged, could the men know - right at the beginning so as to give 'em as long a peri
o
d of - probation as possible. They thought we were mad. I'm not joking, they did. That was the attitude in engineering in those days you know. For an engineer today - where he could - no engineer today in my view - whose only been in engineering for the l
ast twenty years - can have no conception whatever - of the engineers of fifty and sixty years ago. Not a shadow of doubt. Not a shadow.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Were you ever involved in any strikes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Me, yes, oh yes. I was in the general strike.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 I meant up to about the end of the first war.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did they ever get near to striking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No. At - at - at Farnborough - the - we had our shemozzles. But there was nothing particularly serious about it, except on one occasion. I think - to a very great exte
nt, the people with - with whom I worked, and I suppose myself, we were very very anxious to win the war. There wasn't any doubt about that. And we were very very anxious to do our bit. I do remember one incident when - we in the inspection department tho
u
ght we had a terrific grievance, and - we were prepared to go the whole hog. And I can remember that we held a meeting, and - we all said what we thought about it, and we all uttered our threats, and - we were going along very well, until - an old friend 
o
f mine who was older than most of us there, and he was a Scotchman and - he had had a very very long - experience in the trade union world, and in the engineering world, and - when everybody had been tearing their hair, he got up in the quite a calm sort 
o
f way he - he said, well, something - about this description, he said, well, he said - have you ever compared your lot with the lot of those in the trenches? Well of course we hadn't. Have you ever done so and so? Have you ever put your place yourself in 
t
he place of the management? Don't you realize that the management have got certain work to do at a certain time and all this sort of stuff, and really he put - the meeting on its footing do you see. And he was getting toward the end of his time and he was
 
speaking - louder. And - a little bit quicker, and suddenly - the top row of his false teeth jumped out. Oh my God. I can remember him standing there - and he jumped, and he caught them. And he - he tried to put them back. Well of course, then - the meeti
ng was convulsed. And to be perfectly honest everybody forgot their grievances, and we all went home comparatively happy. I think we'd better have a cup of tea don't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 These are men in the workshop?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mm. I mean this - this fellow that I was tal
king about, this Scotchman - it's true he lost the top row of his false teeth, but - by God he was sound. He was a wonderful chap. He knew his job. Good hardworking fellow, clean living chap I suppose - many people today, many - ladies anyhow - I'm sorry 
a
bout your sex - many ladies today would have - if they heard Jock - in the workshop would say, what a vile man. Not a bit. No. Another point about you know - about what I found about these damned engineers - they could swear - use most atrocious language,
 
but it all had a meaning. And - they used to take - well - what shall I say - they stopped swearing when they took their overalls off, really. I mean as a lad I went in and - naturally I - I thought I ought to learn to swear. I mean it sounds so - silly d
o
esn't it really, but - it's just the atmosphere of the shop. I mean for instance, if - a chargehand came along in those days, and said, oh dear me, old boy, you shouldn't do it that way - it doesn't cost anything. Well what they would do would - they woul
d say - what the bloody hell are you doing? Now that has got a colossal meaning, do you see? And the bloke knows - my God I've slipped up here. It means a hell of a lot. And - incident.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What were these men operating?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What we term automatic machi
ne operators. They have a setter, who's the - toolmaker, the setter will go from machine to machine, say perhaps - up to a dozen machines perhaps, depends upon the tape - type of machine, and he will do all the setting of that particular machine you see, 
and all the - operator will do is just to operate, start it, stop it and all that sort of thing you see. But, in many many cases, owing to these - stupid system of piecework, the setter is getting much less than the operator. It's common practice. And -

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
What bout the introduction of women during the war, do you remember that happening?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
I remember the introduction of women - during the 1917 - the first world war. I remember seeing the first woman - girl - come out of our foreman's office. This is w
hen I was on inspection then. I was sitting, and - the door opened and out came this fellow, and - and he was followed by a - a very meek and mild looking girl, who looked as - well like a pullet who'd laid an egg and didn't know whether it was the right 
thing to do. And she walked through the shop, followed - followed this bloke right through the shop, but you know, within about a month or so she was ruling the roost.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 How was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 I'm not joking. She had a - profound personality, she had a very
 loud voice, and she was the daughter of a Colonel. Now - now what else do you want than that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What was her job then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
She was - on inspection. In those days they developed - what were automatic micrometers, that was a - a bit weird, so that you 
couldn't make a mistake any harm. And these girls each were - on her particular gang, they each had one of these automatic - matic - micrometers, and they just - got on with the job, hundreds of them. And - she ruled them, oh my God.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 If girls hadn't c
ome in during the war that would have been considered a man's job?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh yes, that would have been a man's job. Oh yes, that would have been -

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did the men object at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No, the - no, they - most of them were very very glad to get rid of the
 job. I mean after all you know - there's nothing more soul destroying than to do the same thing day after day, day after day, my God.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did men go back to doing that job after the war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No, it didn't arise actually because - during the period of w
ar you had so many of something, the same thing you see, didn't you. You had so many aircraft - of the same type. Well normally we didn't have that. So that you didn't require these huge number of parts.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 But girls have remained in engineering?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 O
h yes. Girls - girls form a very - important part in engine - engineering today.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Do you remember any disputes about what particular job people belong to one union should do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No. No. Not one. Not one at Farborough. I never - I never - I never rem
ember any argument about whether they should have women - and that was a - quite an innovation, but as far as I know, they didn't - didn't object, I didn't object. And really I suppose - there's no reason why they should have done. They had sufficient wor
k, the craftsmen themselves had sufficient work, and that's all - that they were concerned with anyhow, that's the principle of the job isn't it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 They weren't scared they would lose their jobs to the women after the war?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No. No. Now that could ha
ve arisen during this - this world war, the second world war. In - in the job that I was in, I had - about two dozen girls who were called women fitters. And - to be perfectly honest, I thought they were pretty awful. Well you can't - you can't teach - an
y
body a complicated - sort of processes in about six weeks, the whole thing can't be done, it's just not that, and yet they expected these girls to come in and within about a fortnight they were doing - quite elementary sort of engineering jobs but the fac
t was they were doing it - they were doing engineering jobs. The main people - were - very very intent to win the war.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What about the branch of the British Socialist party in Sheerness?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Well, I - I don't remember them, I - I would say that they 
- they were - quite - well they lined themselves up behind the Government. After all - in every country you have these - militant parties - but - wiping out all these militant parties, is another country. And I think - that, when - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid16481126\charrsid2252871 Britain}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  as a whole - has
 been faced with any difficulty in the way of wars - most political parties - have lined up behind the Government, said, let's get - let's settle this job first. Now you get too domestic - back to domestic things afterward.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You don't remember any conscientious objectors for instance at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh blimey there were some, oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 How were they treated?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
I think they were treated - more kindly than they ought to have been frankly. What I - what I feel about that is this really - that - they took advantage of the laws of {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}
}Britain{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} - to - sell them up the path. After all - you know, nobody likes going to war, my - by God my boy didn't like to go in the war, but he went. And hundreds of thousands of others went. But you get these conscientious obje
ctors, people who knock on the street doors asking you whether you love Jesus - and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 In the first world war you mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
They take the first opportunity to do nothing about it, do they. But they want the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid16481126\charrsid2252871 protection}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  of the country.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What about 
the first world war, you didn't have them coming round like that then
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No, I was once presented with a white feather.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 It was a military town was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 The }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid16481126\charrsid2252871 commitment}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  in fact, the kind of the awareness of the war was probably stronger.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Yes. And - and following it, yes, people were in - supported it more. But there was more - in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Guildford{\*\xmlclose}
 I think, objecting, in the second world war, there was some there. But - the - but Guildford didn't have a lot of ideas about any - went to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Guildford{\*\xmlclose}. We had a bus, we lived in - we lived in 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Guildford{\*\xmlclose}
 and I worked in Farnborough. And we had a bus to take the workers home - each night and back to work in the morning. And - we'd start of from Farnborough, and you' get up Ash, and the driver would p
ull up and they'd all go into a pub - and after a time they would come out in ones and twos, and they'd settle down again and - we'd start for home. And the main theme of conversation - was Lord so and so, Lord Onslow, Sir Henry somebody else, whom these 
blokes - father's had worked for and they could tell you all about them, all their pedigree, and how nice they were to their servants, and God it used to - oh. But that's how they were.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 It was quite a shock after being in Sheerness to meet that kind of person?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Well at least in Sheerness they - they were very good men. No, they - they were nearly all carpenters. What about that occasion when we were in - Lens shop, Kay, do you remember that? Any? Well Len Winter. Len - Austin. Well this was a cous
in of mine, and he had manager - he was a manager of a shop in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Guildford{\*\xmlclose}
, corn chandlers. In talking to him one day in the normal way, you know, as cousins do, and a car drove up outside, he said, oh excuse me, and he dashed out to take the order from a la
dy who was sitting in her car. And - that was their usual - well we were - buying a present, do you remember that Kit some of our friends, I don't know who it was for, and we were in the shop trying to get a very nice vase. And presently the bloke who was
 serving us - completely - forgot us, some lady came in and he went up to serve her. So of course we did the obvious, walked out. But it was - Guildford was rotten with it, you know. Absolutely.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What about the officers, were there officers at Sheerness
 who were treated in that way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
I don't know, most of the - officers that I - I - came into contact with were engineers. And I - I can't help - keep on a - keeping on about this but they are as different breed, there's no doubt about it. And - the - t
he Naval Officer in the name of - I forget what his name was, but anyhow he had the - capacity of going round on the job in the morning, going -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Who I thought were pretty awful. One was Pimple Rich. So named - so named because of his - face. But - he always did as little as he possibly could.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 He was a good teacher.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
I know he was. I know, that's the tragedy of the whole thing, but he didn't teach. Oh no he didn't, you went there as a colleague of his, I was under - one of his victims. Then there was a - then there was old - Sleepy Middleton, what about him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Which school was this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 The boys school.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 At Sheeness there was one board school for everybody?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mm. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs. R. No, there was another school, more than one. This
 was the main boys school really, then there was the technical school attached to that, later on. But - prior to that it was - there was a Church of England boys which wasn't over good. There was what we call the Bluetown boys, there were three boys schoo
ls then. This was the best one really. The results were good from it. I mean some of the boys who passed out there did remarkably well. And if they hadn't had a grounding -</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr. R. Oh yes, but I say that was because they had something to aim
 at. Well I - I think - I think the more - more of the credit - went to the boys than the teachers.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you enjoy it at school yourself there then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 I enjoyed it all right but - I - I think they were awful, frankly I do.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What was awful about them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
This - Sleepy Middleton for instance, he used to come in in the morning suffering from the night before - and - he - the first thing he did was to arm himself with the side of a slate, you know those wooden things that go round a - like the sl
ate - slate frame, well he used to - it was bout a foot long, and he always had that in his hand all the time, and you'd - just as likely get a - a cut across the knuckles with this chunk of wood as anything else. Well as regards teaching - not a bit of i
t
. Not a bit. And there's old - then there was Walter Blackmore, he had the less qualifications of - anybody there, but by God he could teach. Wonderful bloke he was. But what about the headmaster? Cor. I know he did, Kit, but he didn't do his job did he. 
Well you - you served under him after - after me, after I left. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did the teachers sort of emphasise more things like manners or tidiness?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Good Lord, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Punctuality?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No, they're not - you - you didn't - I didn't learn - how to beh
ave, my wife taught me that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What did the teachers think was important then?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
As far as - far as I can see - the teachers there - taught up to a certain standard, they knew the standard, and that was the dockyard standard, and they taught up to 
that. But, beyond that - and any imaginative thing was - didn't come into it. And with regard to making the lessons interesting I can't see it I absolutely fail to see it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did they favour the cleverer children do you think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Pardon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did they favour the cleverer children rather than the others?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 I don't think so, I can't see that, no, I can't, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
What about children from poorer backgrounds, did they treat them the same way as the others?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 I don't think there was any discriminat
ion at all as far as I could see, and some of my friends, not many, but some of them used to come without - without shoes and stockings you know. But I can't see any discrimination. One fellow I can think of - his name Alf Springett, always came without b
oots and stockings. And - but he was a lovely scholar.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What about the other boys?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh the other boys never took any notice. No. Oh no, Springett was a friend of mine until I left Sheerness.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did your parents come up to the school and meet the teachers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No. Oh good Lord no. And the teachers that I've mentioned wouldn't want to see them anyhow. Well - everybody knew that before you went there as a - as a teacher that - you could always find - \{BLANK\} school in the Conservative Club every ni
ght. Everybody knew it. We boys knew it when we were kids.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Do you think their politics influenced the way they taught?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 I think they gravitated to the bar.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Was it a mixed school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Just boys then?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 All boys, yes. Well the 
example was bad anyhow, Kit, from the headmaster downwards. When you think of a headmaster who when you have - playtime comes for the kids, kids go out to play. The headmaster of the boys school meets the headmaster of the other school, attached - and the
y walk across a field near the school, up onto the promenade, looking at the water and they go for a walk about a mile each way, and they come back casually about ten to - quarter to twelve. Can you wonder about the discipline. I can't you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Discipline was all right in the other school wasn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 I don't know, Kit, I -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. But you - you object to order at any time don't you?</subject2>

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Ay?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You object to anybody that's going to order you. Anywhere at any time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No, I - I see - I see the obvious. Even - but I believe in discipline.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Self-discipline?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Discipline. But there was no discipline in that school. No, if there was it was only when you went there and you exerted it. But it wasn't before.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Were you a rebel at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 I can't remember that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 I think you said there were eleven of you in the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh eleven of us, yes. I was the youngest of eleven. We - we had - nine boys and two girls. Actually I only remember nine. The two elder boys - F
rank - and George - were - who came about in the - about half way down, had died before I - came on. So I only actually knew nine. And - seven boys. One, two, three were in the Navy.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 They went in for life you mean to the Navy, that was their careers i
n the Navy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mm. Actually, I - tried for the Navy you know. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Was that before you became and engineer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No, when I finished my apprenticeship - if anybody had said to me - I should be going into the Navy I should have laughed like hell, bu
t - one brother who got on rather well in the Navy - he - he was very keen about it. And - many of his friends who were at that time Warrant Officers - were advising me to go into the Navy. And I - I remember saying to one on one occasion, why - why are y
o
u so keen that I should go into the Navy, I don't want to go in? Good Lord, he said - you you'd do well, he said, you play the piano, he says, you play football, you play cricket, he said, you're made. Which rather indicated to me - how easy it was to get
 on in the Navy. But anyhow, apart from all that - I made application - finished - after I'd finished my apprenticeship - I was going into a - as an engine room \{BLANK\}
 you see, and - I made application, and they told me to report, I think it was Chatham Ba
rracks, for a medical examination, and they turned me down. Yes, to me that was an awful blow actually because - having taken such a hell of a long time to decide, you know, I thought it was all cut and dried. Buy anyhow - the - doctor said - we can't pas
s
 you in. I said, why? He said, you've got varicose heel. I said, I know that. He said, you know it? I said, yes. I said, all I want to know off you really is that - if I have an operation will you pass me in? Well, yes, he said. Now actually looking back 
I
 don't believe him at the time. I'll tell you why. When he was halfway through the examination - he - made many many tests of my chest, and I could see that he had a certain amount of doubt about it you see. In the end he called in the - his assistant, an
d
 he said, send Doctor so and so to me. And this - other doctor came in and they had - combined - operations, and I thought myself then, there's something funny about this. But anyhow I went home - made arrangements with the doctor, went up to Poplar hospi
tal of all places - and had an operation, and - within a fortnight of having finished the operation - I returned to Sheerness, and I presented myself for examination again. Of course they turned me down flat. So that was that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Your brothers became Warrant Officers then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No. One - there was a such a thing in the Navy, they used to call the writers. Who we'd call clerks and secretaries today. Well one of them - had - he was rather - I suppose he was fairly well educated. Actually I always said to h
im that - he was very clever. And - I'll tell you what he did. He told my people that he - wanted to be a teacher. And - that was rather against the grain because - frankly we couldn't afford it. But - they decided to make this supreme - effort and he bec
a
me a pupil teacher first. And - he was there - a pupil teacher for about three years, 'til he got to the age of about sixteen or seventeen. Then he decided he wouldn't - be a teacher and he would go into the Navy. Well actually what - he had been after wa
s
 another three years education of course. But anyhow, he went into the Navy and he did very well. He - got a commission in the end. And he - in a way - being the eldest of the three who went into the Navy, he was - a - of great use to them, insofar that h
e
 could use influence, and being - a writer - he was the - secretary of the - Admiral at - Chatham - sometime. He could - pull a few strings. Which with one brother was very necessary. Anyhow one - one of them went to the training ship - at Harwich. No, ju
st outside of Harwich.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Ganges do you mean, near {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Ipswich
{\*\xmlclose}?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 That's it. {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Ganges{\*\xmlclose}
, that's the boat. Well he went there and he got his training. He did very well actually. And - after a time he went - he was on the HMS Terrible. She was a four - four ma
sted boat - four - funneled boat, and she I believe she and the Powerful were the only two four funneled boats in the Navy. Anyhow, it's a man of war, and - he then was sent - to - {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname 
country-region}}South Africa{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}, during the South African war. And - the HMS Terrible was in the Relief of Laysmith I think. Anyhow, having - as he - she used to say - having cleared that }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid16481126\charrsid2252871 little war}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  up, they he then went to - {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}China{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}. With the Chinese Rebellion. And after that he came home. I believe he was away then about four or five years you know
. In those days you - they - didn't have a limit of two years, that was all nonsense. You were away until you'd finished your job. Anyhow he came home at that time and then I got to know him more - better really 'cos I was very young. When he came home fr
om - South - {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}China{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 I suppose I would be about twelve. And I would be at - began to then sort of take an intelligent interest that - that I had a brother who was a sailor. He became the Warrant - Officer at a very early age, and - I forget what - what ship h
e was on, anyhow, we had a - a letter one day saying that he'd got consumption. And that was fairly rife in those days you know. Particularly one these - boats. The ventilation was - pretty awful. The living accommodation was very very bad. And - you had 
to be fairly strong to survive you know. But anyhow - he had just got his commis - his - Warrant Officership then. And - they said that he was going to be sent to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Chatham
{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} hospital. Now what - what would I be, that would be - I believe it would be about 1909
 or something like that. And - would I - would I meet him at - the station and - take him there. So up I tootled, only too glad to have a holiday from work - and - I met him there at the station and took him to the hospital. I know I - I feel - felt very 
i
mpressed, he of course was - given officers quarters. He had his own - rooms. And I felt very bucked about this. It's wonderful what things - have an effect upon you. But anyhow - in due course he got invalided out. And - by the time he was invalided out 
-
 Lloyd George had introduced his Insurance Act. And they wanted a lot of clerks. And - they held Civil Service examinations all over the country, for these clerks. My brother sat and he got a job. And he became a fully fledged clerk, and they sent him to 
- {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Birmingham{\*\xmlclose} I think, yes, {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Birmingham{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
, and - when the war broke out in 1914 - he wanted a change by then and he - volunteered. And they were very very pleased to have him. And they stationed him in charge of the - defence of - Ramsgate. And while he was the
re he won the MBE. For doing - apparently there was a - I suppose it wasn't - couldn't have been a bomb in those days, it must have been a shot - some very big shell, but it buried itself - among a group of - houses there, and my brother went along and - 
m
ade it safe, and he got the MBE anyhow. Now another brother - was for a short time - a boy labourer in Sheerness dockyard. And then he joined up the Navy - in the - what they term the armourer's crew, dealt with arms - gun - guns, rifles and all that sort
 
of thing you see, and - he believed in enjoying life. To him - being in the Navy was not something that you sort of set your mind upon, and decide that you were going to do well at it. It was a - it was a sort of a job where you could have a damned good t
i
me. And he followed that through his life. And that was where my older brother - who was the writer, had a fair amount of influence is very useful. He got him out of many many scrapes. In fact he got him promotion to a first class Petty Officer once. Only
 for him to lose it again. But anyhow - he had a good time. And incidentally he - he died - about 1918/19 I should say. And he died in most peculiar way. And by that time he had - left the Navy, and he was - trying to get a job - in 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}London{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}, as a taxi driver
. It was in the early days of taxis by the way. When they were more or less changing over from the old handsome cab and the carriage and pairs and that sort of thing. And - he was in a garage one day and he - the bloke who was driving the - the steel car,
 
trying to get it out of the - gates - put it in reverse instead of - in his first gear, and it - went hell for leather at my brother who was standing at the back, and - squashed him there, anyhow he died. I've got a photograph upstairs I'll see if I can f
ind it before you go - all the - our boys in the fam - the family.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What about the other three then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
The other two? Oh the other three. The eldest brother - he was an apprentice at a grocers shop. And - in due course - he bought a shop. This shop was in a very very bad - part of {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}
}London{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}, Hommerton, I don't know whether you know it. Do you? Well his shop was immediately outside of Hommerton station. I can see the damned place now. It was an awful sort of place. It was a three storeyed house, and the
 shop - fair sized shop, about this size perhaps, but stores in the back, where he had his grinding machines for the coffee and storing all the stuff that wasn't in - ordinary use you see. Is this light? And - when I was - what would I be - eleven, twelve
, thirteen, before I - went into the dockyard anyhow, I used to spend my holidays with him. And - he had this big house, well quite a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid16481126\charrsid2252871 comparatively}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  - big house, the shop, tons of biscuits, ham, you know, everything that a kid would like to muck about with, 
and I used to go there for my holidays. And - there I used to }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6825366\charrsid2252871 Devour}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  his chocolates and his - biscuits and and I remember one particular thing that I was very very partial to - he had one of those grinding machines for grinding up coffee beans in the store
s at the back. And - it was my delight for him to say, Stan - do me a few pound of beans will you? And I would go in there, and I believe I'd eat as many as I ground, I used to love them. But anyhow -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did he expect you to help quite a lot? Did you hav
e to help quite a lot when you were there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh yes, yes. Oh yes, I think I gave him an added freedom actually, because - stand - standing or sitting in a shop all day when you haven't much to do is a bit of a bore isn't it. Well he didn't stand there.
 I did. And - when a customer came in I used to shout out, shop. He used to stride in you see. But I got very very vivid recollections of how beautifully he used to cut ham. You know these - cutting machines today, well they - they weren't a cut - a patch
 
on my brother honestly they weren't. He - to see him cut a hock of ham you know, slice it across was wonderful. And you could go into his shop then in those days and you could have a - half an ounce of ham. You know, just about one thin slice and - enough
 
for a sandwich. He sold eggs at out - outside - on - Saturdays he used to employ three other boys. I used to tell him that he sweated me because he used to have four. But anyhow, these boys were outside - right along the outside of the shop - biscuits, bo
x
es of biscuits all the way along. Tuppence ha'penny, threepence and fourpence a pound they were in those days, and these kids used to shout out, two and a half, three and four a pound. On the other side of the door - on the door - were these big crates of
 
eggs. Varying in sizes from the small to the fair size. The small were about two or three a penny. And - the big - were I suppose a penny each, something like that. And - I joined the ranks outside and I used to have a very good time, no doubt about that.
 
We had a - fair of scales up there, we used to weigh up the biscuits and - that sort of thing. Sell the eggs. And - at that time, I don't know whether it's true, but - it was a belief - that if a man had had too much to drink - and he came along and he - 
b
ought about half a dozen eggs and ate them, you know, just broke the shells and ate them like that, that he would be sober. Now whether - whether there was anything in that or not I don't know. But nearby there was a pub. And people used to get tight ther
e
 - most awful sights I saw there, but anyhow a lot of these blokes they used to come along and buy half a dozen eggs and eat them. And - whether they staggered off or whether they walked off I haven't got any recollections about but - recollections about.
 But anyhow that was the idea. Now another brother -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
So he stayed for his whole life did he, he ran this shop for the whole of his life did he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No. Oh no. No, he - he collapsed - which ra - rather made me think - he collapsed in health. Which ra
ther made me think - that this medical doctor - was not such a damned fool as - I thought he was at the time. He - didn't get consumption but he got a complaint of the chest. And he had to give up his shop. He went into - insurance, and I'm quite sure tha
t
 he was very very glad - that he'd had to give up his shop 'cos he had a wonderful time after that. These insurance agents you know get money for jam I think. You only work in accordance with the work that you get - on your book, and if you get sufficient
 
work on your book - to keep you, fairly comfortably, there's no incentive to do anything about it is there. I know that he used to have two or three days a week off. I don't blame him. But anyhow, he eventually was superannuated from the - insurance, had 
a
 very nice pension too. Now another one - he was also apprenticed to - a grocer. A grocers shop in - Sheerness. I forget the name of the shop, but anyhow it was quite - oh Shrubsalls. It was quite a large shop. And they employed, I suppose half a dozen to
 a dozen - employees. And he served his apprenticeship there, then he left - and he went traveling, in the grocery line. And - then he became manager of - a Teechans branch, Teechans, Twtgens, they made tea. Anyhow they had many branches in 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}London{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}, and he became manager of one of the branches. Then he became a commercial traveler. And -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 So he finished up as a commercial traveler?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
He - a commercial traveler, then he went to Wolsey's the underwear people. And he took charge of their - advertising department. And he did very well, no doubt about that. They supplied him with a house which is a very large house in - 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Leicester{\*\xmlclose}. I don't know what he earned, but I know he used to very very free with his money. But - he - contracted cancer. And he died abo
ut - twenty-five or twenty-six I should imagine. Let me see, that's -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 There's one more I think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh yes, one more. Now he was the only of our - one in the family who became an en - an apprentice in the dockyard. You know the method of getting int
o the dockyard do you, by an examination you see. And - the numbers - of entrants into the - dockyard depended upon - the state of whether we were gong to have a war or not. That sounds rather fantastic but it is really true. If it was calculated that in 
a few years time - t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6825366\charrsid2252871 hey would - we would be in - en}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
gaged in war, then obviously they had to have a good supply of labour. And they had to have labour which by that time would be trained. Well I can - remember very very plainly - that at that time when he - 
was an - entered the dockyard, there was something in the region of about eighty or ninety apprentices entry. There would be about - two or three dozen entrant fitters. A few shipwrights. Ship fitters, moulders, carpenters, joiners - you know, the whole r
i
gmarole that's - sets up an establishment engineering, but anyhow he got in, and - he was - rather disappointing my people because my people wanted him to be a fitter. For some weird sort of reason they had an engineering mania. But anyhow he became shipw
r
ight. Which was just as good anyhow. There's as certain amount of snobbery in all dockyards you know. Oh yes. You know, there were mothers going out saying my son's a fitter and yours is only a shipwright, that sort of tripe. But anyhow it was quite real.
 
But anyhow he was a fitter, he - was a shipwright. He got horribly fed up - with work, so did I, and - when the first world war broke out - he volunteered - to go into the RAMC. Now he - that would be about - let me get my dates right. I went into the doc
k
yard in 1904. So I finished my apprenticeship in 1910. He was six years before - no, five years before me. So he finished in 1905. Well - he got a transfer to Portsmouth dockyard - at that time because he was interested in building the first Dreadnought, 
a
nd he got an ent - transfer there and he was there about two years. And then he came home, we had a sort of breakdown, and - transferred back to Sheerness dockyard. When war broke out - he volunteered, to go into the RAMC, and he joined up in the - the Ar
my, went across to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}France{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
, and he broke down over there and he - they sent him home quickly. And he got invalided out. There seemed to be something - what shall I say - there was a sort of a physical breakdown among - many of my brothers you know. And I rat
her think - you could trace it back to my mother. Who - many many years after she was dead - incidentally she lived to a ripe old age. Mm. Many years after she was dead, I - sort of traced her family history. And there was a tuberculosis - background, the
r
e wasn't any doubt about that, which - as far as I can see, had run, or did run among most of us you know. Two - to a stronger or weaker degree do you see. Anyhow, he was invalided out - then - he got married, which - seems rather funny when you've - had 
consumption to get married, but - anyhow he did get married, and his wife - knew all about him. And he bought a shop - a greengrocers shop - and - he ran that greengrocers shop until the beginning of the - second world war.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did she help him run the shop then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh by God yes. She was a wonderful wife. And she still is. Oh Lord yes, if he was ill she would go to market four - four o'clock in the morning you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Had she worked before she was married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Not in that line, no. No, not in that
 line. But - she had a Jewish tendency. She used to laugh when I said she was a Jew. But - she did have - and - she was very very business like and very hardworking, no doubt about that, my God she was. Because many many times he was ill, while he was at 
t
he job - in the shop you see, and - she would just put him to bed and carry on. It didn't matter. Anyhow, he became an air raid warden. During the - second world war. And - he did quite a - an amount of good work too, digging people out and all that sort 
o
f thing. And then he retired, so called, chiefly because - by that time his wife had got beyond looking after the shop, and she'd taken the job - selling tickets at - in railway stations. She became a ticket clerk. And she was all right at that too. And t
h
en they moved into a civilian house, and she was able to carry on her work do you see and he was able to carry on his work, until the war ceased, then they both automatically - ceased work. I say they ceased work, my brother then - was - somewhere near th
e
 age of sixty I should imagine. Anyhow - he got another job. He couldn't rest anyhow. And - he worked for a firm of solicitors, he started as a sot of messenger, and after a time he became their odd man, and - all sorts of odd jobs he did. For instance, i
f there was any repairs to their premises he would do it. See, having a background of a - shipwright, he had a wonderful set of tools and he was very very handy.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you know what she did before she married him?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No, I don't know that. No, I don't know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did the other brothers marry?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Every brother - that - except the one that - thought life was - one long - fun, were married, all of us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Do you know what jobs any of the wives had?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 We'll start from the eldest one. The one that h
ad a shop, she worked in a clothing place in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}London{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
, in - that was a Jewish shop, making blouses, as far as I remember. At least I've only heard this you see. Now, the one - who married the bloke who we - he - ended up at - Wolsey's - I don't know what she
 did, her name was Myason. She had a Jewish - background too by the way. I hadn't thought of all this before. And she used to play the piano beautifully. Now I don't know what she did, but - I know what she could have been, she could have been a comedienn
e
. She could sit down at the old piano and she could sing - the funniest songs imaginable. And entertain, you know, anybody who came in. Now then, another one - was - who's the next in rotation? Oh Howard, his wife - worked in - a dressmaking shop in Sheer
n
ess. And - she had - two sisters. One of her sister's was my schoolteacher. Which was rather funny. Because - having a brother - who is very friendly with my teacher - I thought in - ought to give me a certain amount of freedom, until she gave me a good h
iding one day. That was the end of that illusion. Another one - let me see, how many's that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 The ones in the Navy that did marry?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh, Sid, oh yes, his - teacher, his wife was a schoolteacher. She was a very big woman, and - she was a schoolteache
r - in - Aylsham - Faversham. And - she was quite a talented woman really. She - she was quite good to him I should imagine because - for a very long - large proportion of their lives together - he wasn't a fully fit man by any means, no doubt about that.
 But - she wasn't worried. Now the amazing part about them is this. That - they had - three children. Which you know is against all the laws of - of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6825366\charrsid2252871 eugenics}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  isn't it. They had three children. One of them is a hulking great big bloke about six feet one. Str
ong as a horse. He is now just over sixty. He's an architect. He came down here a short time ago - another one - he had two daughters, and both of them were strong as anything, until one contracted cancer and died a short time ago, but the other one is st
rong as a horse. Doesn't seem to be any logic in it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What about your two sisters, what happened to your two sisters?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Two sisters, well - one - one sister, the elder sister - was - a woman who was always ill. And never died. You heard this story a
bout the creaking - creaking doors haven't you, well, my sister was a very typical example of that. I can remember as a kid that - she had to have - special treatment. May mustn't do that and May mustn't do that because she's not well. And I can remember 
w
hen I was quite a kid I was much younger than her - I used to think to myself, she never is. You know, in a sort of a boys way. But anyhow, she got married and she married a bloke who lived in Hackney. And he had a very big lot - a very large greengrocers
 
shop. A greengrocers shop to which he added a coal merchants - and when the shop - became vacant next door to him - he - it was a fish shop and he took that on as well. He did very well. And - what he made my sister spent. She was - she was extremely - ge
n
erous in every way, no doubt about that. Give anything away. But she had no value of money, no sense of - money at all. For instance I can remember - when I was quite a kid I used to go there as well for holidays - and - even - when I was a boy - it used 
t
o strike me - how - irregular it was for a woman who wants to buy something - goes to the till and takes out a pound and says, go and get so and so, and I thought to myself, how the blazes can they keep records, they can't. But anyhow, her husband died - 
during the second world war.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did she work herself then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No. My eldest brother, who is in insurance remember - she was making an awful mess of the business - she had not the slightest idea of running a business at all, not the slightest. In fact 
- all the time if she didn't get up in the morning she wouldn't open it 'til midday or something like that. But anyhow - he said he would buy it off her. And he did, he bought it off her, he and another brother who went to Wolseys. They bought it - off he
r
, and - I don't know what the price they paid her. But she lived for some considerable time doing nothing anyhow. Then she bought a little - business - which was a little tiny shop - that sold chocolates, and all sorts of sweets. And - she only had that a
bout two years, that was in Hackney too, and then - as far as I remember she didn't do any more work.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 So she didn't work before she was married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No. Not to say work, no. She lived in various parts of 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}London{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}, she had - two boys. And two girls. The
 oldest - her eldest son was a fine lad, no doubt about that. And he took the place of his father actually. You know, he kept her - she never liked me to say that but I say he kept you straight. But actually he did. He organised her life for her. Somebody
 had to do it anyhow. But anyhow, he got married in due course, and he died about - a few months ago. Died in Harold Ward - Harold Wood hospital.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 And your youngest sister?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 The other sister - she - she - worked - in - a stationers shop, Greig Alle
n and Company, in Sheerness. They also produced the local paper by the way. Anyhow she - she worked there, she went there as a little girl, and she worked there and she became quite efficient. And - then she moved down to - 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Margate{\*\xmlclose}, was it {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Margate{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}? Yes, {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname 
City}}Margate{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
, and took a job - managing the shop, a stationers shop - which belonged to a Mr Tanner, Mr and Mrs Tanner. And she worked there - I suppose for about ten or twelve years. This Mr Tanner - he had built the job up - built the shop up out of nothing mor
e or less, and - he was a Salvation Army man by the way, so is the - the - the mother, and - my sister joined the Salvation Army. But anyhow she worked there for many many years, and I had - an aunt who lived in Ramsgate. Now this - aunt - was the wife of
 
my mother's brother. We're getting into complications. And - he - had a mineral water business, this is the - my mother's brother, he had a mineral water business in Ramsgate, but he - used to bend his elbow. And - I suppose it was necessary in his line b
e
cause - he used to deliver - very - bulk supplies to publicans and all that sort of thing and - he used to - have a pint or two while he was on the job and - anyhow to cut a long story short - he lost his job. He lost his trade completely. Now, my - they 
h
ad - a family, and they had an eldest son, who had the family complaint, he had tuberculosis. And this youngest sister of mine go married to him. Much to my consternation, and everybody else's consternation. She didn't get married until - oh years after I
 
got married anyhow, and I was - thought she was going to be an old maid, in fact I was rather hoping so because I knew of her infatuation with this - cousin of hers. Anyhow she got married. And - to compound the felony she had a child. And that was what I
 
thought was about the last word actually. Anyhow - after the child was born my sister - developed - tuberculosis. And she was living in Ramsgate at that time, and - we all sort of helped in some way you know to bring the kid up, and she is now - the girl 
o
f about fifty I suppose. At the beginning of the world - first - second world war - they were evacuated to Aston Clinton, just outside of Aylsbury. And - this daughter won a scholarship at the local grammar school, and - attended the local grammar school,
 and entered into - local Government service as a clerk or typist or something, shorthand typist. And - eventually my sister died. Now this is the amazing part about this, the most of my people who - w}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6825366\charrsid2252871 ere supposed to be - have been }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 in - inherited the diseas
e lived to a fairly old age. This sister died, aged just over eighty. Only about three years ago. She left her daughter, and - her daughter - has maintained the flat in Aylsbury.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Her husband died much earlier did he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 He died soon after they were married.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Had he ever worked then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Not - not to my mind - not to my knowledge. But they told me that he had - for a short time after they married, he did buy an insurance book. Now whether that's - right or not I don't know. But, he - he would say really that he did no work.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
So when you were a by which were the ones who were at home then? How many were there actually in the home with you when you were a boy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 I don't remember my brother - my eldest brother living at home. I don't reme
mber my next brother living at home, but I do remember him coming home - on leave from the Navy. And - you know, for the short - short time. My next brother, I don't remember him living at home at all. Because he shifted away from Sheerness, he was a comm
e
rcial traveller, shifted away from Sheerness, but they all visited very very often. The home was a home, there wasn't any doubt about that, it was a sort of a headquarters. My - brother Herbert - the one that didn't care - whether it snowed or whether it 
r
ained - he lived at home for most of the time. Because he was the only single one. Now the other one who was a Warrant Office, I he was at home for a very very short time. So really speaking - for the main part of the time - our house was inhabited only b
y
 my - brother who was a shipwright who was the next one to me - and the others who used to pop in now and then. The - the armourers crew - who used to drink - he always had his headquarters at home, always, didn't matter what part of the world was in his 
h
eadquarters was there and his clothes were there and he had his bed there. He was a delightful fellow in my mind anyhow, I - always thought that he was the brainiest man in the family honestly. He had a wide knowledge, he was - remarkably well read. And h
e
 used to write a very good letter you know, his letters were - very interesting letters, all about things which mattered, you now, not - I got up yesterday morning, I did so and so, not - nothing like - of a personal nature but - you know, they'd be inter
esting letters.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did they all write home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Yes, they all wrote home, not all to me. But although I must admit - that - they treated me very well. They - all the family said that - I was spoilt, I probably was, I don't know, but I know they treated 
me very very well indeed, no doubt about it. Looking back I - I - I've done some most extraordinary things really. And my brothers have taken it all in the days work. For instance I had - the - the one that became a writer, he had a - he had a house in - 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Gillingham{\*\xmlclose}
 - when he was stationed at the Chatham Barracks. He was then - secretary, it wasn't - didn't call him a secretary, they called him a chief writer at the Admiral of the Norr. And - it was a nice house, and he was there about seven years. But anyho
w, I used to play football and all that sort of thing - and - we used to - have quite a number of away matches in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Chatham{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
, well if I didn't want to go home I didn't go home. I just used to stroll in their - their place and say, well I'm - I'll stay the wee
kend. And I never ever remember any of them questioning it. Never. Oh all right, yes, all right, well you know where to sit. Same thing applied to my brother in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}London
{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}, the insurance agent. The one in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Leicester{\*\xmlclose}. No, they were all very very good.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 So you had quite a lot of holidays as a boy, going away?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No, not a lot, most of my holidays were - spent - in Hommerton or Hackney.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 And you always went by yourself, not as a family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh no, we never went - never went with the family. Oh my God,
 my mother never had a holiday. My father never had a holiday. My father never had a holiday from the time he joined the Navy - the Navy - I've got the Navy on the brain - time he joined the dockyard 'til he got his pension. And then I've always said the 
reaction was so great he died. You can't - you can't break a routine - of fifty years you know, like that can you. I don't think so.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 How old was he when he died then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
He died about - sixty-two. And he got his pension just after sixty. Oh no, they never had holidays. They used to go to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}London{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
, to Hackney - for a weekend. But that was quite - quite an event.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 All of you went then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh yes. 'Cos you got to remember this that my father - in those days they - they never had Saturday off you kn
ow. The first - Saturdays I can remember - was - I think he left off work at three o'clock in the afternoon, or something like that anyhow. Anyhow, then it was reduced to - twelve thirty or one. And when I got there I think we left off at half past twelve
. But we always worked Saturdays. Well you couldn't have much of a weekend you know if you leave off work at three in the afternoon can you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you have sort of Bank Holiday outings with your parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Four holidays a year. Christmas Day. Good Fr
iday. August Bank Holiday Monday I suppose it was Easter Monday as well, I'm not quite sure, but there were four days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What did you do as a family on those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh nothing. Nothing. My father - I - as far as I remember him you know, he - he alw
ays had to work. I don't mean - had to work for payment. But there was always something in the house, that had to be done, he had his own house you see. It was only a small house. But he did have the savvy enough to - live in his own house, which was rath
er unusual in those days you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 He bought it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh yes. Oh yes. It was a - very very small house. It was in the middle of a row of about - I suppose twenty or thirty other houses. You opened the front door - you did have a passage, but - the pas
sage - made the drawing room very very small. Then you had what we called a middle room. Then you had a kitchen. Kitchen and scullery cookhouse place. You had no bathroom. Upstairs we had quite a nice room in the front, over the front drawing room, and - 
t
he stairs went up in the middle of the house - turn right, turn left to the - my mother's and father's bedroom. Turn right - to the bedroom - that was occupied by - various members of the family. And then out of that room into another little room, there w
as another bedroom. No bathroom.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 How did you manage for baths then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}
}Bath{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}? I made a few notes for this some time ago for you and I - I've lost the damned things. But - I've got a very vivid recollection - Saturday nights was the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6825366\charrsid2252871 bath night}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 . There
 was no doubt about that, and - whatever else happened - everybody had a bath on that night. I can remember - we had - looking out of the kitchen window - into the garden, or into what we called the back yard, there was - there was a kitchen sink in front
 
of this - window. I remember that kitchen sink in particular. -It was only a very shallow one about four inches - deep. It was yellow with age and it was chipped all over the place, and - it didn't always run effectively, so my father seemed to be everlas
t
ingly clearing the damned sink, but hung on a wall, the party wall between the two houses, were three baths. There's a big bath, a middle sized bath and a small bath. And - we used to call them the three bears. There was father bear, mother bear and littl
e
 baby bear you see. And - the mother bear - the father bear I assume, I don't know this - I assume they were the baths for my father and mother, because we never saw them bath anyhow. The routine - was that the - the youngest had the bath first. And - we 
h
ad a big copper which - in which my mother - used for boiling up the - washing and that sort of thing. And - the bathwater was cooked in - boiled in that. It had a fire underneath it you see. And - that was ladled out into this bath, this small bath, whic
h was then put on the table - and I was bathed on the table. And - I can remember having a bath -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You were being bathed then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Yes, I can remember - I can remember being bathed. My father bathed me, my mother wiped me, and - I can always remember 
this. Which is very funny actually I think. When I got to bed that night, because I went to bed very very shortly after a bathing, my head always felt cold. And - I put that down to the fact that my hair was washed, and not properly wiped. I'm pretty sure
 
of that. I suppose there were so many of us they got fed up with wiping it. But anyhow then my next brother, the shipwright one, he would take his bath, and so on - those that were home at that particular time would do their bathing. And - in due course a
ll the - the water - was pured down this sink, that didn't flow very effectively, and - eventually we all - tootled off to bed.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you have a fixed bedtime as a boy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
As a boy, yes. Yes, I had to go to bed very early. Seven o'clock anyhow - alwa
ys. Unknown - unbeknown to my people - they didn't know the whole story - they used to put me to bed, but I always used to take a book with me. And during the whole of the summer I used to read until it got dark. Well I - I couldn't go to bed - I couldn't
 go to sleep anyhow, I wanted - I wanted to do a lot of reading, that's all there was about it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Was there a regular washday in the same way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Washing day, oh yes, washing day was Monday. You mean washing the clothes? Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You wouldn't have anyone in to help at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh my God, no. No, my mother did it all herself. I can always remember my mother's hands, on washing day. And I've never seen it with anybody else. If you put your hands in very hot water - and they stay in this hot water for 
a certain time, you get sort of little marks - spare flesh, on the underside of your fingers. I'll have to show you that one day. I haven't tried it for many years, but I do know that is true. But on washing day my mother - for some hours after washing, I
 
used - I used to be fascinated with her marks on her fingers. Anyhow, she used to do all the washing. We had - two lines - two lines out in the back garden, we used to have a very very tall pole - this is Navy by the way and we used to have two lines - on
e
 with - the top line which we haul - used to haul down, put the clothes on, and haul it up and that used to fly nearly the - the height of the rooftop you see, and then the next one was hauled down a little way and that was hauled up and that was - so the
r
e were two lines of washing out nearly always. There wasn't much - ironing done as far as my recollection takes me but we had a mangle. And that was where I came into play. From a very early age I used to do the mangling. My mother used to - fold the clot
hes and of course feed the mangle, and I used to turn like - like this, it was fairly hard work I suppose really but I used to enjoy it. I believe was paid a farthing to - do some mangling.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You got pocket money then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No, not - if I did the mangli
ng I used to get a farthing, I can remember that. But I can actually remember the beginning of my pocket money. When - people in Sheerness lost their husbands, or their husbands died, a very large proportion of them opened a little shop - in the front roo
m
 - in their front room. There was no license about it or anything of that, they just opened a shop. And they used to sell sugar and - butter, tea, ham. And according to their - clientele and what they demanded so their - trade would increase you see. Well
 
anyhow - I remember - getting up one morning, and seeing the shop opposite - the house opposite our house - was turned into a shop. And - I remember telling my mother that - it's very likely that - Mrs Las - Mrs Lascombe, I remember her surname, Mrs Lasco
m
be has opened a shop. And my mother said, looking at me - with a certain amount of contempt said, yes, I know she has, she's lost her husband. Now you know for some time I couldn't - connect - the losing of a husband with the opening of a shop. Because if
 
you lost your husband I thought you'd lost him, he wasn't dead, you just simply lost him, you mislaid him or something of that description you see. Until eventually I worked it out. But anyhow - after that I noticed that one or two of my friends went alon
g
 there - into this - this shop and they bought a farthingsworth of sweets. And - I being rather nosy - I wanted to know where they got their money from. And they said that was their pocket money. Well if they had pocket money I didn't see why I shouldn't.
 
So I put it to my mother. And - oh - that wasn't - unheard - that was unheard of our family really until they reached the age of about eleven or something like that. Anyhow I pressed the subject - and mother said she'd - see father. And - I remember getti
n
g very home - home very early from school that night, I wasn't going to miss - miss this, and - mother explained the situation, that - I - thought I - ought to have some pocket money. And - I pointed the fact that so and so and so and so, my friends had g
o
t pocket money, and also that some of my brothers had pocket money, I'd gone so far enough - far enough into it to find that out. And - my father said, yes, but they had to earn it. Then I said the wrong thing, I said, why can't I earn it? And - it was de
c
ided then that I should clean every Saturday morning I should clean the knives, all the knives in the house. And for that I received - one farthing. Now you know cleaning knives in those days - wasn't like - cleaning the cutlery today. They weren't stainl
e
ss steel. You had a - a knife board which was a piece of leather, and on that you sprinkled - brick dust and you went up and down like this with all these blasted knives. And you know with a big family - there were quite a number of knives in our family y
o
u know. And they weren't too good. But anyhow that was the - the first time I earned any money. I got a farthing a week - and that was subject to the approval of the - cleanliness of these knives by my mother. But I feel quite sure that she - I think she 
was - rather keen that I should get this farthing, so that - she wasn't too particular in her inspection.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you have to do anything else to help in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No, nothing much, except that I did - my father was a very very keen gardener and he had a lovely garden. I did collect the horse dung. Mm. Which I thought was rather infra - infra dig but - but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Were your sisters expected to help in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
My sis - eldest sister no, never, she was always unwell. She always had something w
rong with her, there wasn't any doubt about it. But the younger one, the one that married the - her cousin, yes, she always helped, she helped very much too. She had a - tremendous amount of commonsense about her. Which made her marriage rather more - rem
arkable, to my mind.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What about your father, did he help inside the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh yes. Yes. Father was always helping inside the house, he was always - always odd jobs. Always putting a shelf up here or - putting a shelf in there and - doing - doing
 a bit of painting or scraping or cleaning the sink out or scrubbing the garden - path or - always had something to do. And he always mended our boots you know. Mm. I should say that - my father - could trace the age - of his family - merely by counting u
p the numbers of shoes that he had to mend. Because when they were all - at home - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6825366\charrsid2252871 although}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  I never remember that, there must have been a hell of a lot of shoes you know mustn't there. And I never knew - any of my shoes to be taken out of the house to be me
nded. When my father was alive. In fact - when - he died I mended my own shoes for quite a time. I - how I used to hate it, I wasn't good at it either.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 They were bought new?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh yes. Yes. Yes, always.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What about clothes, were they bought new or secondhand?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No. They always had new clothes but - being the youngest son - I used to inherit the clothes of my brothers. Oh yes, that was quite - that was quite normal.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Your mother mended the clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Yes, she was not a very good needl
ewoman by the way. She used to make my knickers, I can remember that quite plainly. And although I know it's an awful thing to say you know, I was heartily ashamed of them actually. No, they were - they were very very bad. Terrible things. They were an im
itation of the normal - plus fours that were worn - about twenty years ago, do you remember those things? Well they - I always thought their biggest virtue was that they didn't have to fit. It didn't matter, you had tons of room in them. Well, }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6825366\charrsid2252871 my mother}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  - m
ade my knickers - in exactly the same - plan. There was room for expansion. They were terrible things actually, no doubt about it. But - there it was. There was no money I suppose really, there was no spare money anyhow.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Would your father help with the cooking at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
YES? Yes, he did, mm. My father was a very handy man, no doubt about that. Oh yes, he could do anything. And he was always doing things. Dammit all, he used to scrub the - the chapel out - in turn. That was a small chapel that - tha
t one we always we went to. And - it wasn't a very big chapel, not - not much larger than say a modern garage really, it was built of wood - corrugated iron on the outside, and - wooden flooring. We had no caretaker. That chapel was wholly maintained and 
looked after by - people like my father.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What denomination was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Primitive Methodist.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Your mother and father both went on Sundays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Yes. Yes. My father - only went every other week. Now that was rather funny, because I can never ma
ke out why he didn't go every Sunday. And some - years after that - he gave me a clue. Quite unnecessarily, and I don't think he meant to have said so. But - he said, when I would - when I was in an - in a - an apprentice, he and I often used to have a wa
l
k - on Sunday evenings. And this used to happen about every other week, when he didn't go to - to chapel. And - I remember once - on one occasion, saying to him, why don't you go to chapel every Sunday dad? And he said quite spontaneously, I can't afford 
i
t. Now that didn't sink into my - you know, I didn't think about it until some time afterwards. And then I realized why it was. My father never gave less than sixpence in the collection. He would never give anything under sixpence. And that was quite a lo
t of money to him. So rather than give less than sixpence he would stay away once a week. Once a fortnight.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You didn't feel as a boy that they had a struggle to make ends meet though?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No. No. I - I do remember this, that - as a boy I didn't like 
going to the butchers shop. And I'll tell you why I didn't like going to the butchers shop because - I knew - that what we bought there was very inferior. I mean while people were getting - their steaks and all that sort of thing, and I was lining up for 
twopennyworth of pieces, it didn't sound to me to be very good. And I used to hate it like hell. On the other hand - I suppose - that represented really the - financial position of my family.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 How many times would you have eaten meat a week then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 I can't remember we ever went without it to tell you the truth.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Every day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
I seem to think so, yes, I don't think that we went without meat at all. No, I don't think so. It was an inferior sort of meat - I'm quite prepared to admit that, in fact
 I'm damned sure it was. And I'm quite prepared to admit that - what was left over today was eaten tomorrow. It was hashed up and my mother was rather good at hashing up stuff. Which - I didn't think much of. But there it was. But we never went short. No,
 never.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Could you tell me what a typical day's meals would be like?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
I know we used - used to have a lot of rice pudding. No, I would say that the ordinary meal - would be - a stew. Probably on a Sunday we would have a joint. Yes, I would say on 
a Sunday we would have a joint. I won't say that the helpings from this joint were very - lavish. I'm prepared to think they were fairly frugal. But - it was there, we had it, we had veg - vegetables, my father used to grow vegetables by the way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Which vegetables would you have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Potatoes, cabbages and brussel sprouts and all that sort of thing, the normal. And he had an al}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6825366\charrsid2252871 lotment at the back - the garden}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  at the back of the house. So that - that was well provided for. On the Monday I suppose we would have cold meat perhaps. And - we would have some pica - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6825366\charrsid2252871 piccalilli}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 , or some pickled cabbage or some pickled onions.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did your mother make the pickles then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No, she didn't make the pickles - my father always used to pickle shallots.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 He did it himself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh yes, he did all them. As a matter of fact after we were married, I used to pickle shallots, I grew shallots - for many years, and I used to pickled shallots. Until my wife said she couldn't stand the smell of them, so - but frankly I
 used to rather like them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 So the main meal was at midday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What did you have in the morning?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
We had - oh in the morning, toast. That was a treat by the way. If I was good I was allowed to toast my bread. If not I had ordinary - bread and margarine or bread and butter or something of that description. And nothing lavish.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You just had toast then, not an egg or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Pardon? Very very unusual. If I was ill - I had an egg. I rather used to enjoy being ill and - under those conditions. I had an egg but - not as a tiny kid, no.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you have tea or supper later?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No, I had nothing after tea.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What would tea consist of?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Had tea. Bread and jam usually. In fact I think it was always bread
 and jam. We never had what the north country people called a high tea, I don't remember that at all. It's always bread and jam. And cake, my mother used to make cakes of course.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 She didn't bake her bread though?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No. No. Never.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What did she cook on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh we had a kitchen range. You've never seen them of course now do you. It was a - about that size I suppose. The fire occupied about that amount, and - the - stove - used to be about that size, not on the inside, the inside would be about 
that size you see. And - the - fire was there, that would be about that height, underneath was ashes, and that would be - up to the same level as the stove do you see, the open stove. And there was always quite a big fire, as far as I remember. I don't re
m
ember - funnily enough I don't remember any shortage of fuel. There always seemed to be plenty of coal. Mind you it was - enormously cheap you know. And we always had a good fire, and - my mother did all her cooking on that. It didn't - it didn't have a l
ittle tap, now in - in later life I used to see - those {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}kitcheners{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 - what had a boiler on the other side, and a tap, that you could let the water out of - hot water out, but I - we never had that. The - the - {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}kitchener{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 - was a very effective - cooker. You k
now the modern gas - stove - has the gas burning in the - in the stove itself doesn't it? The kitchener, the old fashioned kitchener - had heat supplied - on the side, and over the top. But no - nothing - of a heat giving nature was inside the stove. Now 
t
hat was much purer than today's gas. In later life - I got very annoyed about these damned gas stoves because it did seem to me - that - you - you had your gas jet going full belt in the bottom of your gas stoves - halfway up at the back - you had - a lit
tle aperture of which the foul - air went out of. But the whole of the gasses }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6825366\charrsid2252871 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  un}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6825366\charrsid2252871  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 brunt gasses went into your meat and that sort of thing. And I took a rooted objection to that, so much so - that my wife and I - saw an advertisement in one paper - of a sto
ve which had - instead - it was a portable thing, it's - oven was bout that size, and on this side - was - an aperture, over that, passing over the top of the oven, and here you had - a row - a jet row - a row of gas jets which supplied the heat, to the i
n
side of the oven, and over the top. But no gas went inside the oven. We had that for many years. Well we bought that, I think it cost about forty-five bob or something like that. And we never saw another one all the time we had it. I - I made up a little 
table so that it was instead of being - low down, it was body height you see so my wife could - and we had that for many many years, for - until before we came here anyway. And it cooked beautifully. Well those old {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}kitcheners{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} did, they cooked a - wonderfully well. Very well.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you have any tinned food?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Any what?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Any tinned food?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No. Pineapple. Pineapple we had. I don't remember any other tinned food at all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Corned beef?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 I believe corned beef was after my time, I'm not sure
. I wouldn't - I wouldn't like to commit myself on - on that. Although I have a recollection - that my brother in his grocers shop - had fair sized tins of corned beef.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You don't remember eating it in the home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No. I think he did - I think he did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you eat fruit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Not a lot. Most of the fruit that - we had - I'm sorry to say I pinched. Well the - we didn't have a lot of money to spare for fruit I suppose so my mother never bought it. At least, not that I remember. Rhubarb she grew in
 the garden by the way. But - fruit - apples, pears - we never had an apple tree in the garden. Just before I left Sheerness, no, after my father died we moved into a house that had a pear tree. And that to me was wonderful. Never seen a pear tree in a - 
in a garden before. But we had one there. No, the - the normal apples that I had - were pinched out of orchards. And there were a fair number of orchards in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}Kent
{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} as you probably know. And - even on the Isle of Sheppey there were orchards. And - I used to pi
nch them, that's all there was about it. I am quite sure of this, that - the owners were quite aware of it and they sort I'm quite sure of that. But they - didn't seem to worry a lot. Sometimes you'd hear a stentorian word like, get out of there, and you'
d all }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6825366\charrsid2252871 skim foot}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 . But - nothing - nothing untoward happened to you.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You didn't catch rabbits I suppose?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No. No. No. No, I never - never did any - poaching like that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did people in the town get rabbits do you think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 I don't remember tha
t they did, we used to have rabbit sometimes, but I don't remember that they were poached in any way or -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Just bought off somebody coming round maybe?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
People used to shoot them with a shotgun you know. I know that because they used to take the shots out of 'em.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you have fish?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Fish, yes. Oh yes. Now the fish - I don't know whether you can imagine - do you - ever - can you ever picture - these hand shucks that had two wheels, two - two wheels down there, a shaft here - and - a slopin
g - board, running from there to there. Well that's how they used to bring round fish. There was one celebrated bloke in Sheerness - we called him Blower Johnson. He used to sell fish - he used to buy it, I should imagine, off the fisherman who came ashor
e
 on Sheerness beach, and he used to buy the fish, and - push it round on his truck and sell it to the people. Shouting like hell all the time, and as he - continued - going round the - town so he - used to get tight. And - I think the fact of the matter w
a
s, he - as he went around you see he got more money I suppose and - I suppose he couldn't keep money, that's all there was bout it. And - he couldn't pass a pub. And - he used to - get tight very very frequently almost daily, and to see Blower Johnson fig
h
ting with his - his truck when he was tight - was really something. But there were quite - a number of fish shop in Sheerness too, quite a number. Shell fish as well, oysters. An uncle of mine had oyster beds - in Sheerness, or Queenborough, you know, jus
t outside of - Sheerness, and also at {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}West Mersea{\*\xmlclose}. That was a - my - my mother's favourite fruit, was - oysters.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 So you ate quite a lot of oysters?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Yes. Oh he used to bring them home in bucketsful. My - my uncle did. He was a Salvationist by the 
way. And - very fervent when in prayer. But - a good fisher - a good fisherman, and - a good businessman I suppose. They said he was fairly rich by the time he died, I don't know but - I know that he did have quite a nice house in 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}West Mersea{\*\xmlclose}. He had a hou
se in Hooe, up the Medway. That was more like a cottage where he had oyster beds. And - he had a house, now where the hell's were - oh he had a small place in Queenborough. In other words - near - his three lots of oyster beds he had some sort of habitati
on, and he could put up for the night.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did your mother make jam?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No. Not as far as I recollect. Very very - no, I can't recollect it. No, we were - we were more likely to make jam. Oh yes, when we - after we were married my wife and I used to ma
ke jam. Mm. Yes, we used to go blackberrying - can't say I liked it, we used to go blackberrying, and - get home and have tea and then make this jam. Jelly mostly. Because - neither of us liked the pips, and we used to make jelly mostly. Very nice too.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did she make any medicines?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
My mother? Brimstone and treacle. Now there's a - something else I'm trying to think of. It'll come to me later, I - I forget the name of the damned stuff. Anyhow, she used to make that. It was horrible stuff. Don't thin
k I'm vulgar but it looked to me like }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6825366\charrsid2252871 diarrhoea}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
, it was awful stuff. It was - sufficiently objectionable to - to make anybody well by - just by looking at it. But this - brimstone and treacle - was terrible stuff too you know. Anyhow my wife will probably 
think of some of these medicines, she's jolly good at medicine.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 She made medicines then did she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No, she used - she's very good - she had studied a lot of medicine you know, my wife, sort of a hobby of hers. And - she - if you want to know what'
s wrong with you - you've only got to ask her. But she is - quite honestly she's very good. She's never seen a doctor since she were - had her baby you know. No. She won't see a doctor, that's all there is about it, she said, I know more than he does. Whi
ch probably is quite true. Continuous effect upon the audience or the reader than if you don't hear it. Also I had ambitions of - either - going in for politics or - trade unionism you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 When was that then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh my God. It was before I finished 
my apprenticeship, it must have been about 1909. And during those days - of course - to be a Socialist was an unheard of thing really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you go to evening classes then, to learn the shorthand?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh yes. Yes. Yes. Yes, I - I went to evening class
es - I also learnt typing that way, which - I'm not a good typist but - it does - it saves me a lot of writing, and I can't write, my - writing's pretty awful really. I - I always think ahead of what the hell I'm writing you know, which is a very big disa
dvantage.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 There were one or two things that I got a bit sort of muddled about.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Yes, by all means.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Your father, after he was in the dockyard he never did any sort of casual or part time jobs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No. No. Not as far as I know. No. The part 
time jobs of course rose in the house.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Was that the first job he ever had or did he have anything else?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No, as far as I know that was the first job, but I'm a bit }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6825366\charrsid2252871 hazy}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
 about that, I wouldn't - I wouldn't like to commit myself about that. But - m
y impression - from - aunts and uncles and that sort of thing, is that that was his only job. There was one thing I did - I was thinking about - on the - the last night that you were here. I think about these things in bed you know. You asked me whether -
 my mother had had any job other than the home. And I said no. Well that - that I suppose is perfectly true except - she did have a little general shop. In - {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}
Sheerness High Street{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}. I don't know }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6825366\charrsid2252871 exact}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  - except it - expect it's existing today. But it was a li
ttle shop, and I was born in that shop. Incidentally - during the latter part - of - my apprenticeship - when I was sort of - taking wings and feeling my feet and that sort of thing you see, I was complaining about - conditions, politics and trade unionis
m
 and work and God knows what, and one - one of my brothers said, well anyhow, he said, we hoped that you wouldn't live. Quite - quite honestly he said this - said that, I said what do you mean? Well, he said, you must remember that - I think it was Herber
t. I'm not quite sure, well he would be about ten years older than me you see. And - he said, what you've got to remember is this. That when you came along we were utterly fed up and sick and tired of the napkins being washed, on the line, and }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid6825366\charrsid2252871 squalling}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  kid
s. He said, so - the brothers and myself all - brothers who were older than me and myself, he said, we were - almost praying that you wouldn't survive the ordeal. Which is understandable. I mean, a small house - napkins all over the place, drying, being w
a
shed and dried - no - adequate - convenience for getting - bathing the kids or - all it meant in those days really was a - was that the kids were a damned nuisance. They were a nuisance. What it did have - what it did do was - the elder brothers and siste
rs always knew that with the arrival of each kid - their sleeping accommodation was reduced. And reduced to a very great extent too. I mean three and four in a bedroom was nothing. It was quite normal.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 How long were you in this place where the shop was then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Well I don't remember it. I have no recollection whatever of the shop of any description. All I know - is that - my mother ran the shop, and I suppose she did fairly well, I don't know. But I do - I do know this - that - even up to the time th
at - when I was about seven or eight - she was still suffering from bad debts. She was out of the shop - but she was still collecting money weekly from bad debts.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 She collected it herself then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Well sometimes I had to do it. That's why I knew about it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Why do you think she gave it up then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Well it got too much really. You can't - you can't effectively run a shop - which is a full time job - cook a dinner for - the kids and a husband who's working - attend to all the - housework, the m
ending of clothes and the hundreds and one things that are to do. Can't do it, at least I don't think so. Something's got to suffer. I mean - you pass your life - dashing about inside the house listening to the bell for somebody to come into the shop, and
 then dashing in the shop. That's not good.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 There was never anybody else like a lodger or another relation living there?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Later on they - lodgers came. And - but that was when most of the - the - my elder brothers and sisters had left home you see
. And - I can remember this, how deeply I resented these lodgers. It's almost true to say I hated the sight of them. And I know I was very very rude. Oh yes. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What kind of people were they then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mostly Naval people. You see, Sheerness - being
 a dockyard town, and a Naval - town, you had a lot of coming and going of the Naval people. And - I believe - she said so anyhow, my mother had quite a reputation among Naval - people, coming for a three weeks - three months and that sort of thing do you
 see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Would they be seamen then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No, they were - they were - mostly Petty Officers, or Warrant Officers. Mostly Warrant Officers as far as I remember - as far as I remember, they used to bring their wives with 'em.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 She gave the all meals as well then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No. They used to live aboard their boats or in the barracks. All their meals were supplied in there except - a tea, and breakfast, which my mother gave - but if they came with their wives, they used to have two rooms, a bedroom and - a liv
ing room you see. But as I say that was when the housing of - of the family was a little bit easier.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You had a parlour didn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Yes. We had an extra room downstairs which I think is very bad planning actually. You know the normal type of hou
se - they're all joined together - about fifty or sixty of them, one long row, all the same design - they had a - a small passage, in some cases they didn't have a passage, they - you opened the door straight into the - front room. It's a small front room
,
 you came out of the front room and you went down a passage to the kitchen but on the left - halfway down the - this passage there was another room. Which was always fairly dark. Insofar that they had a very very small room - small - aperture as a window.
 There was hardly any - any light got in the damned room anyhow.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Which room would she let then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 That was the middle room.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 She let the middle room?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Yes, she let the middle room as their living room, and one of the bedrooms upstairs.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you ever eat in the parlour?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Very very rarely. Very very rarely. I suppose we did, I can't really - remember that. But - usually - our kitchen - our - meals were served in the kitchen. It saved work - which was a very big consideration. And it was much more convenient.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Would you all sit round the table together for meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Yes. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You had your own places, the same places every time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 More or less, yes. Oh yes. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Would you have grace at meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you have to wait 'til the end to go or could you go when you finished?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh no, I wasn't allowed to sit - I wasn't allowed to get - to leave the table. Another thing I wasn't allowed to leave was food. Oh no, what was given to me I had to eat. You clear 
your plate up Stanley. It didn't matter if you liked it or not. That was quite a secondary consideration.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 So you couldn't choose at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh my God no. No. Oh no, it wasn't - it wasn't a matter of my saying, mum, I don't like so and so. Oh don't
 you? Oh well, you get on with it. You're - you'll learn. Of course - the - I would say really - that - by the time I was - being able to think say, from about ten or twelve onwards - I would say my mother - was just getting out of the stage when she was 
r
eally hard up. You see, with a lot of children - she must have been hard up, must have been. But these - at the time that I'm speaking about now - most of 'em had left home. And so it made things comparatively easy. But my mother would still say - sufferi
ng from the effect - of the period when - you couldn't leave half a potato on your plate.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Would you sometimes see her have less food so that the rest of you could have more?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 I don't ever remember that. No, I don't ever remember that. Probably it 
didn't happen really. For the reason as I've just spoken.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you feel that they were having a struggle to make ends meet yourself?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No. Not the slightest. It's most amazing I think you know - how unsympathetic children are you know. They're real - they - it is really amazing when I think about it. I mean - the fuss that I }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 kicked}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
 up because they wanted me to go to the dockyard. Utterly selfish, completely unreasonable. But - I didn't care a damn, it didn't affect me at all. And - if anybody had sa
id to me, but - you must remember that - it's going to affect your mother's and father's happiness I shouldn't have believed them. It just wasn't - didn't occur to me. I mean that was my business as far as I was concerned. I still wish that they - they ha
dn't insisted upon it but - I can quite understand their idea.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Your father was never ill or out of work while you were young?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
My father never had a day's unemployment. Neither have I had act - actually. He was never ill, I never remember him bein
g sick. Never. But it obviously - to me now looking back, he must have been ill at certain times, but he just hid it and didn't worry about it, just continued going to work. Well he couldn't help it. If you were out of work - away from work you didn't get
 any money. You had no sick benefit in those days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Didn't they subscribe then to any clubs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Sick clubs, yes, but that was a - the - the sick benefit - and clubs like the Oddfellows and the - Reccabites and Forresters and - Druids and that sort of thing, they were in about five shillings a week. Couldn't leave much on that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 But your parents did subscribe one of those?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mostly, yes. Yes. And - in those days we had - what we called a - called a club doctor. I forget the name they called th
emselves but there was a certain committee in Sheerness - who - came to the conclusion that it was an awful thing to have to spend a lot of money and - paying doctor's bills. So they clubbed together, and - by the payment, I think it was tuppence or three
pence a week - they had their own doctor. I suppose that's a forerunner of the - National Health. I can remember his name, he was a nice fellow. Doctor Mortice was his name.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You remember him coming then to the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Yes, oh yes, yes. Oh he was g
reat friends with our family, he - I think he was rather fascinated to - you know, there's such a hell of a lot of us and we were always sort of arriving and - oh yes, I rather liked him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Going back to meals, were you allowed to talk at meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 O
h yes. Yes, there's all a lot of - always a lot of talk. Wasn't always intelligent talk, but - there was always a lot of talk at meals. And a fair amount of then I suppose a fair amount of - horseplay really you know. Unknown to my mother, kicking under t
he table and that sort of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did they insist on your holding a knife and fork in a particular way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 And sitting up properly?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh yes. When I see these kids nowadays - walking about, slouching, humpty backed, dirty looking, I 
think to myself, my God - I mean - whether their mothers and fathers are proud of them I'm damned if I know but - I know to me they look an awful lot. And some of their table manners are very despicable. They have a - I suppose they look upon a meal - fro
m a utility point of view. Your there to do a job of work, you want to eat down - eat it as quickly as you possibly can. And that's about what they look like.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You didn't look at it that way then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No, I didn't mind, I don't ever remember - objecti
ng to the fact that I had to sit up. I wasn't allowed to - sit as I see kids, with two elbows on the table eating like this. That's about the last word, I saw a kid the other day - I said to my wife, my God, look at that kid over there. He was about eight
e
en or nineteen, quite a nice boy. But it was obvious that he hadn't got the faintest conception of - how to hide a knife - how to hold a knife and fork or how to behave at all. Well they hadn't been taught. In fact I should say - roughly - that there was 
m
ore table manners taught by the parents - and more tuition in the homes in those days - in spite of the fact they had big families, then there is today with all the education the mothers and fathers start off with. They don't seem to worry about their kid
s anyhow. I may be wrong, but that's how it strikes me as on outsider.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you find your parents were easy to talk to when you were young?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
My father was very very easy to talk to, so was my mother. My mother - was rather a - in a way, I'm going 
to say - I would have said she would have been a very very good actress. She - she always took the leading roles in the - you know these dia - dialogues that - they used to have, and these - don't you? Well there was a large number of dialogues that were 
-
 written over a period of years - which - Sunday schools, little chapels and churches, used to act in when they gave a concert. They used to give a concert to raise funds and - always supply their own - artists and their own - dialogues you see. I remembe
r
 many many dialogues - Box and Cox. You probably remember that. I can't think of the names of them now but my - anyhow my mother was always one of the actress in the - the dialogues that were - acted in the Primitive Methodist church. And my brother that 
my wife spoke about as being a good comedian, he was always a damned comedian too.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You had to go to Sunday school did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh Lord yes. Yes. I used to go - this is - very early days. I used to go - to Sunday school, which was at Bethel Chapel in 
the morning. That was at half past nine as far as I remember. And we used to leave there at half past ten. Then - I used to have to walk to my mother's chapel, which is the Primitive Methodist chapel, and - sit there until after twelve, listening to local
 - preachers and that sort of thing. The afternoon I again went to the {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Bethel{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 chapel. And then in the evening probably - I would go to chapel in the Primitive Methodist chapel in the evening. If I could dodge it I would. But - that was the usual method really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Were there any sort of church clubs that you joined?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Toward the latter part of the time, this would be - about 1910 or 11 perhaps, maybe a year or two before, the Bethelist - the Bethel Chapel ran a club. What I suppose today would be called
 a youth club. And - we had a nice little building. It was a part of the - chapel properly, and we had a billiard table. We had a ping-pong table. Played chess and draughts and all that sort of thing. And that was open every evening in the week. The - big
gest night of course being Saturday night because we were all - all free. But that was a very very good run thing that really. We had a good football team too. My God we did.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Was there a temperance club, was there a Band of Hope?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No, I never att
empted - went to any temperance places. I don't know why but - it's always struck me that - having - to sign the pledge was rather stupid. It always seemed to me that if you wanted a drink there was no reason why you shouldn't have one. If you wanted a dr
i
nk there's no reason why you shouldn't have a drink - providing you didn't interfere with the happiness of other people. That's all there is about it, to my mind anyhow. This - signing the pledge and - swearing off beer or - or all these other various dri
nks which after all are rather nice - I think is absurd. In fact whenever my wife and I - go out to lunch, if we got - she might have a bit of housekeeping money over, and - we generally have a drop of wine. I think it's very nice.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 But your mother and father would never go to a pub?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
My father never - now that was rather peculiar. During the Christmas holidays there was nothing for a - about three or four brothers and their wives to arrive do you see, from different places. Come down to Sheerness f
or a couple of day over the Christmas and Boxing Day. And then of course there was an awful problem of how they were going to sleep. But - the big problem was - how they were going to have - a little drop of beer in the house without - my mother or father
 
knowing. And that's - they used to work it - they used to work it that periodically one of them would be missing or his wife would be missing and they'd - go out and you'd say to yourself, I suppose they've gone in the back room. And - actually they'd gon
e
 in the back room to get a - have a glass of beer. But - I - I've got an idea - that - toward the end of my time anyhow that my father and mother knew that you know. I'm quite sure they did. But we had - used to have good fun, no doubt about that. Very ve
ry good fun indeed, all the old parlour games you know and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 This is Christmas?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Yes. Card games, all sitting round the table, about half a - oh, eight or nine perhaps. Playing donkey and old maid and - those sort of games. Good fun.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did your parents thing it was wrong to work or play on a Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No. No, I don't think so, I don't say that - it was so universal - as it - to play on Sundays as it is now. But - I don't ever remember, mind you I - I wasn't allowed to kick a ball up and down
 the - back garden. But to play - play draughts for instance, wasn't a crime on a Sunday in any house. But - not by any means.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you ever have family prayers in the home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No. No. No, we were never - I would say we were not - over religious fa
mily. My mother and father - always - saw that we had religious instruction. But - it was never - drummed into us or anything like that description. If we had religious instruction it was outside the home and in Sunday school or something like that. But h
aving done with that, well that was the end of the matter as far as they were concerned. No, I would say that my father and mother were damned good clean living people, and fairly broadminded I would say in those days. Oh yes, I think so.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What sort of 
people do you think they hoped their children would grow up to be the
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Well I wouldn't like to say that, I don't know, I - I do know this, that - although my mother - was very definitely anti-Socialist - I will say this, that she was rather proud of t
he fact that I was - a member of the Socialist party and I - occasionally got on the platform. She might have thought I was a damned fool but she was quite proud of it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
What sort of values would you think that they emphasized as important in life?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
I can - I would say truth really. I know they were very very keen indeed that I in particular, I'm only speaking about the effect on - myself, that I should never tell a lie. They were very very - keen on that, and I remember - telling an awful lie one 
day - we were always taught - to save money, not to spend it. That of course was another survival of the old days, of their days. And I had a money box, which was built in the shape of a little - post office, pillar box you know the round pillar boxes? Yo
u've probably seen the - money boxes have you? Well you put a - put the - the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 money}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  in the top and - you're all right. And - when Christmas comes you - you draw it all out again. And - that is then des - destroys the money box and you have another one for n
ext year. That's if your mother - and father - let you spend all the money. Usually the - next year is started off with about sixpence or a shilling from last year's money. And incidentally - I was rather adopt at - getting the money out. You probably kno
w
 the old dodge, you get a fairly broad knife - the pill - the little pillar box - is like that, the money - the slot goes that way. And you get a - a fairly broad knife, and you tip it up suddenly, and of course most of the money rests on the top of the k
n
ife. Well if you have a thin knife - and the pennies are fairly thin, by coming out with it very very gently you can draw some money out with it. And - I got fairly good at that. And - I do know this instance my mother and father were - rather worried, th
ey - I didn't seem to have any money in my - box do you see. In spite of the fact that people are always giving you money. And they asked me one day whether I took any out, and I said no. Oh there was a \{ILLEGIBLE\}
 about that. I don't know how they knew I h
ad but - they did know. They were right. And I remember my father saying - go upstairs, I'll come up presently. And when he came up - he gave me thas - thrashing, no doubt about that. And he said, I'm not - I'm not hitting you because - for taking the mon
ey. I'm giving you a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 thrashing}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
 for telling a lie. That's the worst crime you can commit. So he - he had no doubt about - lies anyhow. Some of our politicians could learn from that couldn't they?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Was that the usual way you'd be punished if you did something wrong?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Yes, but not - not much. In fact I think - that was about the only occasion really that I think that I had a good thrashing. I would get a - what my - my mother would call a clout. You know, sort of - smack across the - ears or something
 like that. Which didn't hurt anybody. And incidentally if a policeman could do that, were enabled to do that today we should be much better.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 That's what the policeman did to you at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Yes. Yes. And it had much more effect. Much more.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You didn't resent it then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No. No. No. Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you see much of the policemen then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mm?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you see much of the policemen around when you were a boy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Well, policemen in those days were - almost friends of the family you kno
w. And in - living in a small town we knew all the policemen. Some of them were friends of my brothers do you see and they used to come to the house, that sort of thing. Which incidentally reminds me of a story - that one of my labourers told me. When I w
a
s in Farnborough. He was a - this fellow was a hulking great big bloke, and he'd been a policeman, in the Hants - Hampshire - police, and - he used to tell me some of his experiences when he brought my tea in in the morning. And - and if I had nothing on 
I
 used to sort of - draw him out. But anyhow he told me that one day - he was stationed in Farnborough, and - he said the Sergeant, we always knew when the Sergeant was coming. He said, he always said I'll meet you at so and so at such a time you see. He s
a
id, well - he said, I went home tell you the truth that night, he said, it was a rotten sort of night. He said, and - I - within about ten minutes of the time when the - Get into trouble, he said, so I went along to a field, and he mentioned the bloke's n
a
me by the way, one of the farmer lads, and - he said, I knew he had a horse in the - in the meadow, he says, so I opened the gate, went inside, chased this horse out and chased him along the road, he said, and - I - I drove him round to the part where the
 
- Sergeant was going to wait for me to meet him. He said, when I got there he said, he - he saw the horse, he said he saw me behind it. He said, you're late. I said, yes. So - so would you be with this bloody horse, he said, I've been chasing him all roun
d Farnborough, trying to get him back into his - into his field.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Going back to your parents, one of the things you mentioned was when you went to the workshop, the dockyard, you learnt to swear. What did they think about that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 I don't ever remember that they - they heard me swear. I - I've often }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 marvelled}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
 about this you know really. You hear more bad language now - among grown up people, outside works, than I ever heard when I was a kid. It almost seemed that in those days - when men took their o
veralls off - they entered into a new world. That their old habits - dirtiness, not caring about clothes, and not caring about their speech fell off them. Just as easily as taking their overalls off. And I never remember swearing in the - in our house, no
.
 In fact I'm more likely to swear now. Oh no, they - it's very very weird really. And with regard to - I mean, this - loose talk of sex and that sort of thing, do you know I never heard anything in my family with all my - brothers you know. Never. Most am
a
zing. I've known my brother, the partic - the sailor one who didn't care a damn whether it snowed - I know him to come home drunk, time after time, but I never heard him swear. Never heard him swear at all. In fact when he was drunk he was always very int
e
resting. In fact in the latter part of the time you know, I was - before I left home, before I was married - what would it be now, I suppose - eleven, twelve, thirteen and fourteen, he and I were pretty - particularly friendly because - he was nearly alwa
ys stationed in - Sheerness barracks. That was - one of the good turns that his older brother did for me really. And - and he and I were particularly friendly. And I learnt a lot from him. Even to - get drunk. But - nothing }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 vicious}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  about him at all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 How did your mother and father react to that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
My father was very annoyed. Very annoyed indeed. But my father wasn't quite - I was going to say he was - he wasn't fair to him. He probably was fair to him but - he was more annoyed than my mother. But you
 know - this idea of being drunk - unless you're a damned nuisance, it doesn't really matter a hell of a lot. I can remember - you probably have heard of Horatio Bottomley haven't you? Horrible scoundrel wasn't he. But anyhow, he - he had a publication ca
l
led John Bull. Remember that? On the front he had something about - the world is a bundle of hay, mankind are the asses who pull. Each pulls in a different way - but the greatest of all is John Bull. Right. Well - whenever my brother, this particular one,
 
was - tight - he always used to talk about Horatio Bottomley. And he always used to say to me, what we want is a business government. So after a time - it fell to my lot - to - when we thought he wasn't - coming home in a fit state, to wait up for him. An
d
 - incidentally we always knew when he was - going to get drunk. I'll tell you why. If he was going to get drunk, he would - always go out in his uniform. I - I used to marvel at that you know. But anyhow - to come back to the other point, and - the usual
 procedure was I used to sit up and wait for him you see. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 
'Cos my mother used to get ra - ra - rather worried my father had died by then, and - I used to sit and wait for him, and - I developed a sort of - a habit, not a habit - what shall I say - can't thi
nk of the damned word, but anyhow I knew precisely what I was going to do, put it that way. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
And - I would be reading in the kitchen, and - you would hear a scraping at the front door, with somebody trying to find the keyhole, and I wouldn't take the slight
est notice. And - after a time he would - put the key in and open - you know, open the door, close the door, not very softly, and stagger up the - passage. Come into the kitchen, and - I wouldn't take any notice at all. I'd still be - reading. Then after 
a
 time he'd say - well, aren't you going to say how do? Something like that you see. But if - if I had - said to him - hello old man. He'd say, what's the matter with you then? Don't you think I could get in? Or something, you know he would be - asking for
 
a quarrel actually. So right - so I didn't take any notice. But when he started to talk - I always used to judiciously lead the conversation into government. And within a couple of minutes, he would be in full flow. What Bottomley said and what Bottomley 
s
aid this and Bottomley said that and - I'll give you - I'll show you John Bull what it says and all this sort of thing. But anyhow in the meantime - the difficulty would be to get him to bed you see. So - I used to get up - say well now, I'm going to bed.
 
Cheerio, and I'd still be talking about John Bull, I'd light the candle, we always had candles in those days. I'd light the candle, I'd - turn out the gas in the kitchen, and I would walk up the passage with this candle with him following along behind ups
tairs, and we'd both go into the same bedroom, and he would get undressed, still talking about Bottomley, I would get undressed and he'd be all right.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Did your parents say if another child hit you that you should hit back or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did what?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 If another child hit you did they say you should hit back or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh yes. Oh yes. Oh yes, no telling tales in my family. Oh no. I can very very - well remember going home one day, I must have been a very very tender age too, I must have been about si
x or seven. And - saying that so and so hit me. And I remember my father saying - and what did you do? Well, I said, he's bigger than me. He said, that doesn't matter. Go on, out you go. And always remember this my boy, if a boy hits you you hit him. It d
oesn't matter if you have a good hiding. And that always happened too. If he didn't tell me that my brothers would have done anyhow.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Do you think your parents found it easy to sort of show affection to their children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mm. They were. -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Or would you say they were fairly distant?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Yes. I would think so. They weren't - for instance my father always took me - to the football. And - he used to pay a penny for me to go in. Which was quite something. But he took me to the football and - he used
 to like to talk to me about football. You know, about the local team and all that sort of thing. It was very interesting. And I do know this, that he - he had one - very great ambition. He had an ambition that one day one of his sons would play for Sheff
i
eld United. And many years after that - when I was - making a bit of a name for myself at football - he did say to me one day, he said, well my boy, he said, I hope that you will - be what none of your elder brothers have been. I said, what's that? He sai
d, play for Sheppey United. Which I did }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 incidentally}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
 but he never - he wasn't alive to see it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 That would be about 1910 or so then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 That would be about eleven, twelve, thirteen, mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 When grown ups were talking were you allowed to join in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No. No, not really. Occasionally - I was allowed to join in if - my people thought I was - what shall I say, had something - to contribute or some story to tell. They were rather - I - I think they were rather pleased at the fact that I had probably te
ll a tale, and - that - allowed me sometimes to speak, well that and - the greater amount of tolerance there was in - when I came along, from what there was when the others came along. I mean, that has to be borne in mind the whole time really. See lookin
g
 after one son or two sons like my elder brother, even he was five years older than me you know. With all the others out of the way, was quite a different proposition, and it could almost develop into a sort of a hobby, in those days. Which of course my e
lder brothers and sisters never had.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Do you think that your mother and father were equally influential in bringing you up or was one more important than the other?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No. I would say my mother - my mother was - in a way she was eloquent. Say - calle
d - call her fluent. She was certainly fluent, and - she was a woman of very very quick - I would say almost intuitions. You know, she never - she wouldn't think a problem out. She'd say, we'll do so and so. And as far as I can see - my father - if it was
n
't very important and if he didn't - think very very definitely and strongly the opposite, he would say OK my dear, that's all right. You see, fortunately in these - the effect of these little problems of hers didn't affect much. They weren't very - impor
tant. I do remember once - when my father - when we bought a house - when we - we moved out of Invicat Road into another house, and I well remember - my mother being very very annoyed at the fact - that the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 transference}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  of the deeds had to be signed by my f
ather, and not her. I - I can distinctly remember her being very very annoyed and - in a childish sort of way, I didn't know what it was all about, but I did glean that - she was rather annoyed at the fact that this paper, these papers had to be left for 
my father to come home from work to sign them.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Why was she annoyed, why did she think that she ought to sign it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
I don't know, I suppose she thought - she was the - the sort of chief of the house I suppose. In fact, I think that would be perfect
ly true. She was the chief of the house. With all the things which didn't matter. But my father - I would say, had much more inte - intellect, much more intellect. He could always think things out.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did your mother inherit a little bit of money maybe f
rom her side of the family, would that be it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 She inherited money did you say?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Do you think she got a little bit of money from her side of the family which she then put towards the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh no. Didn't get any money. No, the only money she
 ever had was made out of the shop. Oh no, my - my mother - was as poor as the - the Ratcliff's.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 She didn't feel she was any different in social class?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh no. No, no. No, I would say it was just that - father - he had a full time job, he had a f
ull time job - looking after the clothing and boots and - maintaining the house and all that sort of thing - together with his own - other job, cleaning out the chapel and all that sort of thing, and - he didn't have time I suppose to worry about things. 
W
hich as I say they weren't all that important anyhow. But often my mother would refer to him - I know that I - if I got into very serious trouble - which I did, very often - that - she would always say to me - you wait 'til your father comes home, I'll te
ll him. And that to my mind was pretty awful. I - knew then that things had to happen. Because father wouldn't - look upon things so lightly. If I'd done wrong well I'd got to be punished, that's all there is about it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Going back to meals, when she se
rved the meals would your mother always serve your father first?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
I would say yes, but I've got no recollection of that. Not ostentatiously. But I would say yes. Mm. But that of course could be because he had to get back to work again.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did he go to work and then come back for breakfast?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No. Didn't come back to breakfast. He - went to work in the morning, came home at twelve. Half past one, they re-started work. He had about - twenty minutes walk from the dockyard to our house. So - he had - 
at home - twenty minutes, twenty minutes, forty - he had half an hour - ten, twenty minutes - at home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 But sometimes you took it down for him didn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
That was when they were working - they had a system - in the dockyard - that sometimes - it
 was uneconomic to bring ships into the dockyard to repair, but they would be done up the harbour. Well in other words they'd be floating the whole time. Well on - in those circumstances, a body of workmen would go up by boat - and they would go up to - w
h
atever - wherever the boat was and they'd do their job, and they would - wouldn't be able to get home to work of course - home for dinner, so they'd have a half an hour for dinner, and they would take it with them. Now you could - take - meals, a dinner m
eal down to the dockyard gates, and the police at that time would put it - in the boat that was going up to the boat that was up the harbour. So by that method it would reach your father.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What time would you have breakfast then usually?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 I wouldn'
t know. When - in the very very early days - I don't remember my father going to work. By the time I got up he apparently he had gone.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 So when would that be that you had breakfast?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 I would say by the time I - by the time I was about seven or eig
ht I would - I would know that he was about, probably I might have got down sometimes - with him still being there. But - my mother in those very early days when I was very young, I wasn't very welcome far at the breakfast table. She had something else to
 do than to feed a hungry boy. So that we usually, my mother and I - and my elder brother - had breakfast together. Very frugal.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 And you had tea when he came home did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 I had tea with my mother mostly, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Before your father was home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh yes, my father got home - somewhere about half past six or - something of that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You didn't keep any hens or other livestock?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Yes, we kept chickens. Now we kept chickens in - in 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Invicta Road{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}. We kept chickens in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Elmer Road{\*\xmlclose}
{\*\xmlclose}. That - wasn't 
very - popular by the way. That was a little bit - more snooty than the area that we had come from. And there was nothing like the working class for being snobbish of course. Anyhow - we kept chickens there, and - I can remember - that - after my father d
ied we had chickens. We were living in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Hope Street{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 at that time. And - my mother - having to have something to do to bring in an income in when my father died of course, and his - pension - stopped, naturally, and - she wanted to move to get into a larger h
ouse to take lodgers. You know, take a - make a paying game of it. And I remember - shifting from {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Hope Street{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} - to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname 
address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Alexandra Road{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} in Sheerness into this larger house - and my mother said, well, you'd better hire - a truck - and - bring the chickens along. 
So I hired this truck and - I set about the chickens and caught them - caught them and - got them in various size boxes that I put on the truck, and I started for the other end of the town. And when I was going through the High Street these damned chicken
s started making the most infernal din. Cock-a-doodle-oos and - I - I can remember - saying to myself, hope none of my friends see me. But anyhow soon after that we - we stopped. Keeping chickens.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Who looked after them then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Usually my older brot
her. The one about five years older than me. Oh yes, he - he was a much more - domesticated animal than me. Much more. He - he would help my mother, he - he must have helped my mother enormously. I - I can't ever remember really that I did you know. I mus
t have been a selfish little brute. But he did. And he used to look after these chickens. Used to feed them. Clean them out, dig up their run. Sprinkle the - droppings on the garden you know. In fact he was good.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You never kept a pig?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No. No. The
re's some story that we did once but - if so, that was - not in my days. There were many dockyardmen who did keep pigs you know. Oh yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
If you were worried about something as a child you could go and talk to your mother about it or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 I woul
dn't say I could talk to my mother. If my father was in the right humour I could talk to him. But mostly it would be to my brothers actually. There were one or two brothers of mine. Har - the second eldest, who was again good to me, there was Herbert who 
I
 - I haven't spoken to you before, and - Said who afterwards became a commissioned officer, he was very good. But if they were handy - and I was worried about anything - that - usually I would - see them. But funnily enough - never - the brother just olde
r
 than me. Now that's weird isn't it. I seem to have leapt that one completely. No, I could always get very - lots of advice off my brothers, always. Sometimes it was good, sometimes it was very bad. But I think on the whole - it was good. I know I had a f
e
w shocks - I remember - going to my - next - next to the oldest brother one day, I went up to his place to tea, I used to walk in and out of these houses you know just like I liked, which must have been an awful nuisance. I remember going up there and I w
a
s just beginning to - feel my weight at playing billiards. I was an apprentice you see. And - I used to go to a little pub - that had a billiard room. And there you could play a game of billiards for threepence. And - I used to spend my threepence each we
e
k playing a game of billiards. And - I went up there one day with the idea of meeting a friend of mine, and - there was another - much older man than me in the room and he said, do you want a game son? I said, yes. All right, he said, I'll play you. And h
e
 played me and he beat me. And he walked off. He said, well, goodnight son. And - I thought to myself, now why has he walked off, he's left me to pay? Which he had. Which of course was the normal routine really the loser paid always. I didn't know that. B
u
t I can remember - saying to this brother of mine, pouring out a tale of woe and telling him how awful it was that this fellow - went off - and - he - he looked at me and he said - well what about it? Well, I said, he left me to pay. He said, look here my
 
boy - he said, if you will - will mix with men and think you're they're equal, he said, you'll have to - put up with it won't you? He said, you're only a boy, he said, you can get all the billiards you want up in your institute, which was perfectly true. 
He said, if you want to look big and go into a pub to play billiards, he said, you'll have to put up with it. He said, but don't come your - don't - come whining to me about it. Well that was a very - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 salutary}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  lesson actually. No, I think - on the whole bro
thers you know - can be very very useful, to younger sons, or younger brothers anyway. And you can get a tremendous amount of - good from them. Good advice. And - you hold them up - to an extent as a - examples you know - you do this - because he does it 
a
nd - I do know this. That there were ta - there were times when I wouldn't - get - say Herbert - who used to get drunk by the way, I wouldn't let him know that I'd done certain things, I should be ashamed of it. Now that's funny isn't it. Well in other wo
rds his influence there do you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What would happen on a birthday when you were a boy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh I don't remember birthdays. There was - no cards of course. As far as I remember. Except on my twenty-first birthday I never received any presents as far as I know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You got presents at Christmas though didn't you?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 The stocking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
We used to hang up our stockings. And my father - always used to be Father Christmas. It was rather good fun too, all very - good, and very harmless - and to a very great extent very generous. For then anyhow.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you have sort of music together as a family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh yes. Oh - tons of music. Most of them had a toler - tolerable voices you know. And - my sister - one of my sisters - was taught 
the piano, the one that was always ill. She never made a fist of it, she never made a fist of anything frankly. But - when - I became - reached the age of about - ten, my mother - taught - had me taught to play the piano. That's - the piano there. And - I
 didn't get on badly really. I liked football more than practicing. Which wasn't good for me. And - but it was only when I realized that I could play - comic songs or play }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 hymns}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  that I really took any intelligent interest in the piano at all. But - when I w
as bout - thirteen, fourteen, fifteen onwards - on Sunday nights we always used to have a musical evening before chapel. And I used to play the piano at that time. Sit and play the hymns, all the old hymns and - damned good they were too.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You didn't have comic songs on Sundays then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
My wife'll tell you that we did. My wife could tell you that - I used to - I used to play a comic song in very very slow time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You didn't belong to the chapel choir?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No. No. Although I suppose I did a bit o
f singing in those days by the way. I suppose I had rather a good baritone voice but - but - I think it gave me more pleasure than it - gave me money.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Where would you do this singing then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 It was - mainly in Farnborough.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Concerts do you mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Pardon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 At concerts do you mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
When - when - before I was married - it didn't survive my marriage, and before I was married - and I was living in Farnborough, I had nothing to do, and - I used to go to different places that - they use
d to say, will you come along give us a song, and that sort of thing, I used to go just along, rather good fun. But of course you can't do that when you're married.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Would you be taken out by your parents to visit relations, did you go by yourself or did they go by with you sometimes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Yes, sometimes, yes, sometimes. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
What about shopping, would the whole family sometimes go out Saturday to shop?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No. No. The shopping - in a small way I did a hell of a lot - of before I went to sch
ool in the mornings. I hated that too by the way. But - no - no idea of going out - or - do you know I can't remember ever going out until I was about - Mother sent my brother, the one that's older - this - next to me, and myself to London - so that each 
of us could be married - measured for a suit of clothes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Right up to London?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mm. Now why go to London when you had good - tailors in Sheerness I don't know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Were there quite a lot of books in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh yes. Yes. The one that used t
o - drink freely was a very great reader. He - he used to read more than I do, I - I should probably imagine. He - he always had a book. Always. In bed he'd never - he'd always - used to get a candle about this side and he'd read and read and read and rea
d, always had, and he used to read good stuff.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did your mother or father read much?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No. Father read a little bit but very very little. As I say, it seemed to me that they were always so busy you know. Always.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did your mother ever go out to enjoy herself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Well, mother's enjoyment was going to the - to the chapel, or running a concert, or doing something, you see. But - not sitting down to rad a book. She would - I've seen her with a heap of dialogues - sorting them out, and finding which
 one they were going to do this year. Picking it out and - allocating the various parts to be taken by different people, Mrs so and so will be that and - but that was always her life, organizing I would say really, but not reading.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did your father belong to a working mans club?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No. No. Most people in Sheerness did. Most men in Sheerness could, although I never did you know. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 So your father's main outside interest was the chapel then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 My father had main - main interests in - the cha
pel, and he was a very great believer - in the - expertness of our football team. That was really his - his outlet. His football. Always.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No interesting in horse racing I suppose?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh my God, no. Never gambling. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What newspaper did you take?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 None.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 None at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
None at all, but - I can remember in my very early days that - we used to have a weekly paper. Lloyds Weekly News - that came out on Saturdays. But not a daily paper.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you have any sort of family magazines or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No. We used to have the Sunday Companion. And that's where I read a lot of Silas Hockings stuff. He always had a - serial running then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What kind of a magazine is that then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh you've never met it? Oh. Well I suppose -
 the Sunday Companion could be said to be - a periodical, a weekly periodical, printed - with the idea of interesting - and maintaining the interest of Christians. Every story in there had a moral. The story had never been printed in the Sunday Companion 
t
hat hadn't got a moral. I'm quite sure of that. But I can remember - that as quite a tiny kid, I must have been only about seven, I was fascinated with it. Absolutely fascinated. In fact, one - one or two of the plots I can remember now you know quite eas
ily. But - that was the only - of course my brother used to take in John Bull, but I'm - you're - we're getting really to a later stage now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Can you remember what happened when your father died, how the funeral was and so on?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Yes, I think I probably can, the - I knew he was ill. They brought him }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 downstairs}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
 to save my mother - going up and down stairs you see, and - so that he would be - more available for any help that - he needed. He had cancer by the way. I was an apprentice, it was be - 19 - d
idn't we look up the date, 1907 wasn't it? Well it doesn't matter. Anyhow I know - I know I was an apprentice. And - I remember getting home - one - one afternoon, and - going up the garden path, and - when we went up our garden path there was a window - 
i
nto the room in which my father's bed had been brought down. On the left just before you got to this window was the kitchen. And - I remember - going up the - this path - just sort of looking through the window, and - thought to myself - dad looks funny. 
A
nd he was dead actually. Anyhow I went into the kitchen, and - mother was stretched out on the floor, with about four or five other women around her, apparently she had had hysterics. I must have arrived very very shortly after - dad died. Anyhow, I went 
i
n and - I didn't know what had happened. And - an uncle of mine - my father's brother - got hold of me and - said, I want to see you. And - took me up the garden, told me that - my father had died. I really didn't see it at the moment, I thought - how - h
o
w can he have died? Any how - eventually did come to me and then I felt it rather badly. I - I left him and - he said, where are you going? I said, I want - I'm going somewhere where I don't want to see anybody else. And I couldn't find anywhere in the ho
u
se. In every ruddy room in our house there were people. So - I eventually found that the only room in the house unoccupied was the lavatory down the garden. And that's where I went and that's where I first - realized - really the enormity of the blow - of
 
losing a father. And it - it was very very bad to me. For many reasons actually because - I had just reached - the stage - when - I suppose I was getting a bit more sensible and - he and I could talk, and we used to talk rather a lot. And it was my deligh
t in those days to have a walk with him on a Sunday evening, I thought that was wonderful. But we could talk do you see. And - of course that was finished. Wasn't too good.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 So a lot of neighbours came in to help did they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh yes. Mm. Neighbours a
nd - I don't know whether this is true, it may be prejudiced, but it always did strike me that - in those days anyhow it seemed to me - that whenever there was a death in the family all the neighbours used to come in and have a look. This may not be true,
 
but that's how it struck me. Mrs somebody would come along and Mrs somebody else farther along the row would come in and say, oh I'm sorry dear, about your husband. You know, and sort of grove - gloating over her almost and sucking it all in you know. Any
h
ow that's how it was that day. You know, people saying - I remembered when I came out of the lavatory - one woman looking and saying poor boy. I thought to myself, oh hell. I didn't want sympathy. You don't want it. You don't want somebody keep saying poo
r boy. You want to get out of it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 And then he was buried about two or three days later would it be?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Was buried I would say about four days later. Two of my brothers - were - three of my brothers were in the Navy of course. Two of them came home 
for - special lave for the funeral. I don't know where the other one was, one couldn't get here, couldn't get leave anyhow. Quite big funeral actually I suppose. In its way. Because there are a lot of us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You had a big reception afterwards, tea and so on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Was that family only, or the neighbours again coming in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
That was in our own family, that was - in the house of course. As far as I remember the only use of these neighbours - was at - they came in on the day of the funeral, and they took charge of the affairs and - provided meals. Oh yes. Mm. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Was there any kind of vigil, sometimes they sit up when somebody has died in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No. No. No. No, that was - got to go to Ireland for that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 They do it in Scotland too.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Is it? No. I - I - I came across that - when I was in 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Manchester{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
. I was up there for about four days on a job - and - I went - went to the theatre. It was a horrible little theatre too. It was in the Streetford part of - {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Manchester
{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}, and this - wa
s a - a story - of the death of an Irishman. Most awful thing to - to write a play about. But it then - gave all the description of how they all come in and they wail and all that sort of thing you see. And when I got home that night, two things happened 
t
here. Tripe. But I did say to the landlady, I said, I've - been to the theatre. She said, what? She said I said, I went to the theatre and I saw - I believe it was called Handel Wakes or something like that, I said, and I saw that horrible - play about a 
m
an dying. Good Lord she said. She said, do you know, she said, that's exactly what happens. I said, well how do you know? Well, she said, I'm Irish. Oh yes, she said, I'm Irish, she said, it's terri - terrible thing. She said, I suppose they think it's al
l right, she said, but I know - she said even when I was in Ireland, she said, I - I used to think it was the most awful thing. \{BLANK\} Incidentally - tripe but - my mother - used to serve up - for supper, as a treat, gripe, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 stewed}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  with onions, lots of onio
ns. And I used to love them. And - when I left home - and got married, my wife doesn't like tripe. She said, well - you can have it if you like but I don't want any. I said, all right, I won't worry about it. Anyhow, when I went to 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Manchester{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} on this occas
ion - before I went out in the evening the landlady said - do you like tripe Mr Radcliff? I thought to myself, my God yes. I said, yes I do. She said, oh I'll give you some for supper. So I got home, having had a fill of these - horrible dirges and - and 
-
 walked in and sat - sat down, she - brought up a cup of cocoa - and there was a big slab of tripe on a plate. Like a flatfish. And I thought to myself, I suppose she's going to do something to that in a minute. Anyhow I sat and I waited, I drunk my cocoa
 
and then she said - don't you like your tripe Mr Ratcliff? I said, yes, but aren't you going to cook it? Oh no, she said, I'm not going to cook it, that's how we serve it up here. It was most awful thing. Anyhow I said oh well that's all right, and if you
 serve it like that that's OK I'll - have a go. So I ate it, but by God I did - that put me off tripe.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Would the neighbours help on other occasions, like when your mother was ill?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What sort of way, would they cook food for her again then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Yes. Yes, I think they would. There was - there was a - a certain a - certain amount of comradeship among women you know - in those - in those small houses, I think it still exists today in the small houses you know. It's only when people
 - have - got to - in the habit of living up to the Jones's that - they really - they're losing this idea of comradeship. You had it during the war.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Could neighbours come in without being invited?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Yes. Yes. I remember in the first little house that I remember in - in 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Invicta Road{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 - it was nothing for people to come in - walk up the garden path and - come in. Open the door, open - turn the handle, just walk in. That's all right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Would they be given a cup of tea or something?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Yes. Yes, y
es. Mind you the cup of tea - wasn't - like the cup of tea today. The cup of tea - was - tea that was put in the pot - in the early morning, and more or less simmered on the hob the whole day, with water added. Incidentally - when I was - went - first wen
t to Farnborough, the first landlady I had - used to do that there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Do you think your mother had a set of her own friends and your father a different group of friends, or did they share the same lot?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No, I would say they shared the same. No, I - 
I would say they shared the same. The only friends that my father had - and my mother didn't share were those that he met at the football. And that ceased when the whistle was blown.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did some of your father's sort of workmates come into the house?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh yes. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Would you sometimes have an evening when they were sort of entertaining each other?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No. The on - the only way I met my father's workmates was - when he and I used to go to work - together in the afternoon, or the morning. And - w
e used to catch people up and he'd say, oh, here's Mr Bishop, and - we'd walk along with Mr Bishop or Mr Smith or something like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
So these occasions when you were singing and so on, they were for the family, that wasn't for neighbours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh no, no. No, we used to have }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 damned}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  good sing-songs at home in our own family you know. Very good.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What about playing games, your parents playing games?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh yes, they were always - game for - Christmas time or anything like that, always. Father would always take a lead in those games.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Would he play cards with any of his friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Would he have a friend in and play cards ever?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No. No. No. No, he would always play cards, but mind you they weren't the - the cards games that yo
u play today. They were not - I don't ever remember playing whist until I was about - seventeen or eighteen, then my brothers taught me. See, having three brothers in the Navy was a big advantage. And - they taught me all the games like bisique, uka, crib
 
- twenty-ones. All those games they taught me, and bridge. But my father, as far as I know, he never played widge - he never played whist. I shouldn't think - say that. But - all the games, card games that - entertained the family, like - the games beat y
o
ur neighbours out of doors for instance - old maid, donkey, two - two or three different forms of donkey, all games of that description which everybody could join in you see, they were the games really that were played. At Christmas time Tiddlywinks. Not 
dominoes because there weren't enough dominoes to go round. We used to play draughts. Dad was quite a good draughts player. Quite good.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
When you were a boy did you have a sort of group of friends that you played with, apart from your brothers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh
 yes, outside the house but - not - not that they would come in to play. They would call for me. But - I don't ever remember - that they played in the house with me. I suppose my people had - had enough of kids by that time, they didn't want other peoples
. Not that it was ever discouraged, I don't ever remember them saying that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did they mind who you played with at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No, I don't - ever remember anything - any attitude at all. I don't ever remember them saying you mustn't play with so and so. No, I don't remember that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Would it be mostly boys or boys and girls that you'd play with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh no, no girls. I never knew any girls. To me girls were outside the pile completely. I never knew any girls - until what - what age would I be - oh, abo
ut eighteen or nineteen. Never took the slightest notice of them. Never took the slightest notice of them. I didn't want girls. Plenty of men to play with. What I - thought were very sensible things to do, like playing billiards or football or cricket or 
tennis or - but with regard to girls, no, not a bit of it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you go fishing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No. Never went fishing - that's very funny isn't it. Fishing is the very favourite occupation here you know. Oh my God yes. No, I never went fishing. Used to go rowing. Never went sailing, chiefly because we had - never had a sailing boat.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Swimming?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh yes. Yes. I was lucky there. Because all my brothers could swim, except the one - little bit older than me. And my brother having a bit of a pull in the Navy -
 he could - have special facilities at the Naval baths. So for some time he used to take me down, with - any other brothers that were there, and he and I or - any other brothers that might be about, would swim in the baths all on our own on a Sunday morni
ng. Oh it was very good.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What about country walks, did you ever do that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Not a lot. Sometimes - we would probably walk - and this is in the latter days we'd probably walk - to - a little village - the reason being - that - there were no buses, an
d the reason being that when we got there we were going to have a little open air meeting. And we would build our little - platform, and - and start.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You didn't have a bicycle at that time then?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 I never had a bicycle. Never had a bicycle until 
- I would say 19 - 1912. And the only reason I got a bicycle then - I - a secondhand one - was because I'd - we formed a tennis club, and - but our tennis - court was a little bit outside the town. And - we used to ride, I used to ride up and most of the 
o
ther lads used to ride up. But that was the only reason - that I had a bike. But biking was very popular in those days you know. There were clubs - clubs galore. And they were jolly good too. They taught - they taught a lot of things that are not in the -
 
in the curriculum at a school. And - they gave, I should say they gave people - a bigger sense - of the beauty of - in the country, than all the teaching and all the pictures and that sort of thing. They - they were actually participating in it, and altho
u
gh they were always - in a cloud of dust you might say when they were going along - because that was the days before tarmac - they were still - it was still beautiful, you could still see trees and - apples and pears, I mean a lot of people in Sheerness -
 hadn't seen apple trees before. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You didn't collect birds eggs I suppose?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No. I never collected a birds nest. Was never tempted in any way, was never interested really in it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you collect anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No, marbles, that's all. And t
hat was only to-play with. No, I never collected anything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 As a boy what other games besides marbles do you remember playing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mostly improvised. Paper chase. Have you ever seen a paper chase? Paper chase, kick tin shop. Eye spy. Kick tin trot. W
ell that was a - you would get hold - of a treacle tin. I say a treacle tin - tin - because that was - just happens to - be the size, and - the thing was - that - somebody would have to look after the tin, somebody would have to kick it. Now the tin was s
tuck up in the - in the middle of a road, mostly these games took place in the road by the way. Which - somebody would - lose the toss or be told to - it was his turn to be }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 he}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 , they called 'em he, and somebody would kick the tin. And soon as the tin was kic
ked everybody would scamper away and hide away. Down alleys and all that sort of thing. Behind lamp posts and - and - the bloke who was he, his job was to go to and collect the tin, bring it back, put it inside the - the circle and - look round to see who
 
he could spy. And his job actually was to spy somebody, and - they would then be he, do you see, and he would be free to go and hide himself. If he was - a bit venturesome, left the - custody of his tin, and went, say across the road to get a better idea 
of somebody, and somebody kicked the tin, then he had to go and put it up again. And so on, that game we played. We used to play for hours like that. With - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 
disastrous}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  con - effects too. I've seen many a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 treacle}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  tin go through a window you know. Do you see 
there no front gardens in those days, not in the neighbourhood that we lived in anyhow. And - used to be remarkable how quickly - the whole road would be barren and boys. When anything like that happened. Nobody had ever been there.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you play any pranks then like knocking on peoples doors?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh yes, that used to be - a favourite thing of course was to - tie - a knocker - on one door - to the knocker on the door immediately opposite, right across the road. And then bang on the door. Of course th
ey would open the door - and - the - the thing was for to - for two people to come on opposite sides of the road to open the door simultaneously. There was a lot of that - sort of horseplay and - sticking buckets of water on top of - gates and - garden ga
tes and all that sort of thing. Nothing very harmful but - what used to be called very funny.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did your mother mind if you got dirty when you'd been out playing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
I don't remember that. No. No, I don't remember that. I do remember this, that she wa
s - she was very - important that I shouldn't get my feet wet. So - that had the effect - the opposite effect from which she thought actually. Knowing that she would object very very greatly to my having my feet wet, I used to hide the fact that my feet w
ere sodden - through - running into the water to get a ball - and - put up with it. Which was of course the reverse effect that - she wanted. But apparently it didn't hurt me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 The main club that you belonged to was this one that you were mentioning bef
ore, the one attached to the chapel was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
That's it. Yes. That was a good club really. We had everything there, we had a gymnasium, we used to box there, we used to wrestle - we had all the - oh Indian clubs, we had parallel bars, horizontal bars. 
We'd - good equipment. We had a billiard table as I say, ping-pong table, chess, draughts, oh we had a - canteen where you could buy - cakes and things like that. We ran a football team, we ran a cricket team. And they were al - always of high class. Now 
that - that little club went up to the outbreak of the first world war. And - a lot of people like myself I suppose left the town, and the next time I saw it it was an awful shambles.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Were there concerts when you were a boy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh yes. Yes, all chap
els would - gave a concert each year. Always. And it was always local talent. Some of it good, some of it bad. But whether it's good or bad we all went. In - in the particular - chapel - to which our club was attached - we always gave a - used to give a g
ymnasium display, always. Horizontal bars and parallel bars and - Indian clubs, always.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What about the theatre or music hall?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Not a lot. I suppose that was - money that was the main point there really. We did have a theatre there. And - when I w
as finished my apprenticeship I used to go. We used to have band concerts too by the way. We used to have in Sheerness - concerts they don't get in the - best towns today, we always had a military band right through the summer, out in the open air, in a b
and stand, always. Had some good choirs there too. The Co-operative choir in Sheerness was - very noteworthy.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What sort of things did they perform in the theatre?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh - East Lynne. All those old plays. Can't think of any how.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you go to music hall then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
That was a music hall actually, that was a music hall theatre. Some weeks they had variety turns.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You were saying they had performers alternating with the plays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Can you remember some of the occasions you went to them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
I remember seeing Little Tich. I remember seeing Marie Loyd. Now there was a fellow who had a marvellous - what I thought was a marvellous - baritone voice. And he used to sing the Anvil Chorus Song from - Faust. And while he was singing it
 he had a beer bottle in each hand and he used to click these two together. Made a most marvellous affect. I believe it was Harry Brough, was - is there a Harry Brough, an old music hall turn? I believe it was him. Oh I forget all those you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Could you take a drink into the auditorium?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No. But they had bars. No, couldn't take it - there was one music hall in Sheerness that was run by a pub, yes, just outside the dockyard. That was called the Criterion. And there they had the old fashioned - c
hairman, who sat - just on the side of the stage with his little table and his candle and his - pint of beer and he used to announce the - turns as they came on, little bit of patter. Most of the turns were pretty awful. I can remember that - when we fini
s
hed our apprenticeship - we had a sort of a celebration. And four of us decided to go to this - it was called the Criterion, and it was at the back of the Criterion public house, and four of us decided to go there and hire a box. And - these boxes in thos
e
 days were immediately above the stage on either side, there were only two, so that you were looking right down - sideways, and looking down, there's the stage there do you see and the auditorium was there, and - we were all sitting there looking, four of
 
us, and - there was a couple of knock about comedians, and really they were - they were outside the pole completely, they were rotten to the core. Everybody was bored, and - they had all sorts, such silly things, they - one would be - truing to sit down a
n
d the other one would take the chair away, he would sit down with a gang and - you know, elemental, and - I remember a bloke named Eddie Scott - he had rather a large laugh, and he was - rolling over - rolling over the front of this this box you know, col
l
apsed with laughter - at the - the silliness of these blokes on board. And one of them had him spotted. And he went - walk - gradually worked himself across to this side of the stage, and - presently in a very large or loud aside he looked up at the box, 
he said, two can play that bloody game mate. The joke of the thing was that all - everybody heard it who shouldn't have done. But - that was the only theatre that ever I'd been to, where they had a chairman.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did they have a cinema in the town before the first war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No. Yes. YES. It was silent of course. Yes, that was in Towers Hall. They did have a cinema there. But the only thing that I saw there was the Horsemen of the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 
Apocalypse}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  I think it was, I think that was it. I}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 t wasn\rquote t}
{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  a good film. I saw lots of things there after a time. But what the - films were I don't think there was anything of any great note anyhow except that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What sort of people would go to the cinema in the early days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 I would say the ordinary run of people really. I kn
ow Edith and I used to go sometimes. We were courting then. But - it wasn't a good - it had an air of improvision really. You know, you hadn't got the - the things - as they are today. You had a felling that everything was sort of makeshift. You were - yo
u had a pianist there of course. And the - the particular things that he played didn't always suit the picture. But - the - screen was very small by the way, quite a small screen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 When you left school did you give up going to the chapel or did you carr
y on with that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No, I went to the chapel - for some considerable time after. Not - not as a chapel, but on Sunday afternoons as an institute. All this is really bound up in sport. The superintendent of the institute was quite a young chap, he'd be ab
out - thirty I suppose, awfully nice chap, and he was superintendent - superintendent of this institute. And - he also ran our football team, and most of us - who had any conscience at all thought that we }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 ought}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  in some way to give him some return for his l
abours, and we always went to the - this institute on Sunday afternoon, always. Consisted - quite free and easy - we would go there, have a hymn or two, which we rather enjoyed. We would break up into various classes, and each class would have - a tutor. 
Biblical stuff do you see for about half an hour. Then - Bert Rule who was the superintendent, he would give a short address, mostly about football, and - we would have another hymn and go on - go home, it was quite enjoyable.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 When you became a Socialist did you cease to believe in religion?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No. I don't think I ever have believed in religion actually. No, I - I really can't - can't believe - I - I can't recall - any particular day - when - I felt the urge - or any belief in religion at all. It's 
what an old friend of mine always used to call a - lot of old tripe boy. But - I've never regarded religion as seriously - never. It's always seemed to me that to - for the most - most important times in your life I suppose is when you're in danger. And t
h
at's the only time - when you feel that you're - you're going to suffer, that I think that the great proportion of people feel religious. It's all right for these people to say that we only pray about spiritual things, that's all my eye in my mind. I thin
k
 what they pray for is something - that is going to benefit themselves. I certainly think that. You - there's an old story of course that - shipwrecked marin - mariners always pray, they always do, I don't blame them. If there's any chance they were going
 
to grab it weren't they. That's what it amounts to actually. But I've never been a shipwrecked mariner - or anything of that description so it near - really - never has affected me very much. And if ever I was tempted to pray, which I was as kids - I alwa
y
s - used to pray for material things. I've - offered up - some very very fine prayers - and given good reasons, as to my - why my father should buy me a cricket bat. Yes, very very good. The only point about it was that it wasn't answered. No, I - as I sa
y
, I've never had any time for religion. I'm not against it. What - people believe is entirely their own - their own opinion. But I think that I live quite a decent life without - this - that sort of thing. That's all there is about it. But I think that th
e
se people who do pray - they get a large amount of consolation about it. I think - I've only - I haven't ever met - people who are so happy as Salvation Army people. Now I've got funnily enough, I've got a lot of Salvation Army friends you know. A lot of 
t
hem visit - visit us. And - never - never any of them has ever tried to convert me. And I haven't - advanced the other ideas at all. But we are terribly good friends. But I've never seen people so happy. Well you know - I've often thought - there must be 
something in it mustn't there, to make these people so happy. I mean -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Do you feel there was any difference socially between the people who went to chapel and those who went to church in Sheerness?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 I didn't mix much with the church people. Frankl
y I always thought the church people were damned snobs. They would be the officers of the dockyard, things of that sort, which I didn't have much time for because I knew them too well. You know - you can't - have a profound respect for a man whom you see 
-
 at work - and - speaking and acting in a vulgar manner, even although he happens to go to church. It always seems to me - that - if a bloke wants to go to church, that's all right, but I don't see any reason why - he should be so different - when he's at
 
church - as when he's at work. I'm not talking about the language now. I'm talking about his normal morals, the way he's acting. As man to man you see. It doesn't seem to me to be - to add up to anything anyhow. Anyhow, the - the people that go to church 
-
 with all their a means and all that sort of thing - that seems to me to be a large amount - of artificiality about it. I mean contrast that with the people who go to the Salvation Army. I mean - at - at the last - at least - they believe in it - they're 
sincere about it and they're }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 enthusiastic}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
, you've only got to hear them haven't you, to see them, no doubt about it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You felt that when you were younger did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh yes. Yes. Always felt that. No, I think there's a very large amount of insincerity about religion as a whole. And as I see it - the higher you go - in - sociology if you call it that - the worse it gets.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you see anything of the vicar when you were younger?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No. My wife would. She went to a church school. It was incidenta
lly the best - church - schoolgirls in the - in the town. She would know all about that. But - to me, no. I used to mix quite freely with the - the preachers we used to call them at the chapels. Always.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 But they were ordinary working men were they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh yes. Mm. And I don't remember any of them ever wanting to convert me whatever. I mean this Bert Rule - he was a fine clean upstanding living fellow, lovely to - he never spoke religion to me you know privately, never.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Do you think that becoming
 a Socialist affected your attitude to social class?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No. No, I don't think so. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 How did you see society divided at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Well I would say that I saw the society divided in the only way in which it is, economically. It has always st
ruck me - even before I heard of the word socialism, that there was something wrong with the world where decent people like my father - were living as my people did live - and - people who I knew were damned hypocrites were living in nice houses, and - ha
ving plenty of money. Always struck me as very very unfair really.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Who were the most important people then in the town when you were a boy?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
In Sheerness? I would say really - the most important people were the - solicitors. They were - and docto
rs - they were outside, altogether - the narrow world of the ordinary man in the street. I mean there was a solicitor for instance - you know he didn't toil - he toiled not, neither did he spin - but - he seemed to have plenty of money. People seemed to t
a
ke notice of him. You knew that he could pull strings. The same thing more or less applied to a doctor. Although a doctors were - in my view more humane. Or more human as well. Than solicitors. But solicitors - I didn't have a very big - opinion of solici
t
ors really. That always seemed to me - to be some - what shall I say - some solicitor at some time - who had decamped with somebody's money, in a small place like that. They got on the council when they wanted to. Following them, after - solicitors and do
c
tors I would say that the people who were on the Town Council were the most important. And they - almost were men belonging to the Conservative Club. And the Conservative Club - as a tiny tot I always knew - that the business was settled in the Conservati
ve Club. Things haven't changed have they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Were you brought up to respect people like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
I don't know that I was ever - brought up to respect people actually, that's a funny thing to say isn't it? No, I don't - ever - remember having these peo
ple put - before me as examples. No, I can't remember that. With regard to the town council, when I got a little bit older, when I could - talk a little bit more I thought less of them than when - when - before I did - before I - did know much about it. I
 thought they were a very poor lot.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 But I suppose one was expected to life the cap or something?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh no. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Not to people like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Was there anyone then that you would sort of show respect to in that kind of way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
I would say that lifting the cap - was out of date in Sheerness. That's rather peculiar really, considering their - bringing - upbringing. No, I would say I never remember anybody lifting their cap anyhow. Of course you had a lot of saluting because
 it was a Naval town. And - one bloke would say well cheerio Bill - in the normal way you see, but - nothing - no cap lifting. And no siring. No. Very very little in the dockyard even. No, very very little. I remember these Naval people you know they can 
n
ever - get out of the habit - that they only address a sir - yes sir, no sir - and they always seem to feel, even today you know, they always seem to feel that they are a little bit above other people. I used to tell my brothers this. It's all right for t
h
em, they come in - in our house, and I tell them what I think. They laugh like hell. But they wouldn't do it abroad the boat. I remember - a few years before I retired we had - an engineer - captain retired, who got a job at Farnborough. And he became the
 
- appointed to Farnborough - as assistant director. I won't tell you his name, but - in my view he was one of the world's lowest. He had - he had a belief - that - they way - to a man's heart was a smutty story. If there's anything I hate it's that, but a
nyhow, that was his - that is his attitude. And I remember him coming into my department one day and we were - we - he was in - he was very interested in a bit of research, and we were trying to refuel, this is before the days of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 refuelling}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  by the way, and 
we were working it all out, and he came round and I said to one of my fitters, I said, Bill, explain to Captain so and so exactly what you're doing. And he - he said all right Stand. And he - he told him all about it you see. And it was quite a very good 
e
xplanation. Anyhow I said to - the Naval Captain, well is that all right for you? He said, oh yes, so we walked away and he said, here - he said, I don't like the - the way that man addressed you. I said, what do you mean? He said, well he called you Stan
.
 I said, yes. I said, nobody in Farnborough - calls me anything else, except you. I said, anyhow, have you ever thought, I said, what they call you behind your back? My God, he said, no. But it's perfectly true. I mean, I - I can't for the life of me - yo
u see, he had the old Naval tradition. Sir, yes sir, no sir, and all that sort of stuff, well, that doesn't - create discipline. Nothing to do with discipline at all.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
What about the idea of calling somebody a real gentleman, can you remember that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh Lord, awful tripe isn't it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Do you remember that though?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh yes, he's a real gentleman.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What sort of person would they say that about?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Well he had to have money, that's the main qualification. He had to have money, and he had to
 have a reputation of being generous. And if - with a reputation of be - being generous and having money, he would talk to a few poor people, then he would be - that was a - be a real gentleman, he treated me as an ordinary person. My God, how I hated tha
t phrase. And that phrase incidentally - is not in common use, but it's - it's in use today you know. Oh yes, no doubt that. Treats me as an ordinary man. How the hell should he treat you.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Were there divisions within the working class, some poorer and some -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
I suppose there were really, yes, there were, there were - must have been, between the mechanics and the labourers. Yes. But I would say that the - to a fair extent anyhow - the different - financial positions - in Sheerness at those times - 
was during - was - owing - to the misuse of the money that a person had. See a - quite a number of people - used to get drunk. Quite a number. You - you very very rarely see the people - people drunk today do you. But in that dockyard town they did get dr
u
nk. And although beer - and spirits was very cheap - they cost something anyhow. And what they cost had to be taken out of the home. You see, the public houses - were open from six in the morning until eleven o'clock at night you know. All day. I had a - 
a
 friend in the - dockyard for whom I had a very very great regard. Very clever chap. And he used to get drunk. Not habitually, he would have periods when - he would never be drunk. He and his wife would - go out - dressed up, frock coat, high hat on Sunda
y
s. Walk along the promenade, and Yank would never go into a public house, and then suddenly something would happen, and he'd get drunk and he would be drunk for a week - he had a lovely wife, charming wife, I knew her very well, she was very kind to me. H
e told me that - those that knew him very well said that - it was in his blood. I don't understand this but - when he was a young man he went to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}America{\*\xmlclose}
{\*\xmlclose}. And he was a born engineer by the way, wonderful engineer, and he became manager - of - a very big engineering works, this is in the very ear - early - industrial ages - age of {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}America{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} by the way, I'm thinking now before - the end of last century. Anyhow he got a big - very big job as manager of a big in - big works there, and - some people say it was worr
y. He began to - start drinking. And there was a time when half the time he couldn't - be without a whisky bottle on his desk. And he had the good sense to see - see it. So he sent for his brother, a younger brother of his in 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}England{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}, to go out to him. And 
he said to him, look, he said, this jobs is getting me down, I'm drinking. I'm gong to chuck it up. He said, but before I chuck it up I'm going to train you for the job. And he trained this brother, and he came home to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname 
place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}England{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} and the brother took his job. And he came home to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}England{\*\xmlclose}
{\*\xmlclose}, he came to Sheerness dockyard and he took a job there. An ordinary fitter. And I - came under his influence to a very great extent. And beyond the fact that - I knew he drunk - I never knew him to do a bad thing, never. Lovely chap.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Were there some families which were thought of as rough and some as respectable?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh - oh yes, but they - that was - that had a background of drink really. A friend of mine, by the name Alf Springett - one of the best scholars we had in Sh
eerness - used to come to work - come to school with - without boots and shoes and stockings. That wasn't because of the poorness of the family, his - his people were no more poorer than my people. But it's because they both drank.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 How would your family think about a family of that kind?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
They were outside the pale. Yes, they - were completely - don't talk to them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
But you don't think that they would feel a labourers family, just because they had less income, would they treat them as different?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No, no, I don't - I don't think really you know that - it didn't seem to me that income mattered much among - the average poorness of the community. I mean it's not like a man - being very rich and looking down a poor - upon a poor relation, ther
e was only a matter of two or three shillings in it anyhow wasn't there do you see. No, I don't think that entered into it. But - I think what did enter into it was whether - they looked after their home, you know, whether they had a nice home or - not - 
w
ith a lot of baubles about, but a comfortable home, to bring up a family, I think that counted a lot. Of course it's very difficult you know in those days because - I can go back to the days of candles, as illu - an illumination you see. I mean it's all r
i
ght for these posh - restaurants - to - have their dinners late at night with a candle. They haven't - still haven't got the atmosphere. Oh no. That's - the first lighting I can remember was a bare gas jet. It used to just out - over the fireplace, just b
y
 that - so that lamp is now, it was just an ordinary - anchored a piece with a pipe - and it's just a gas jet. Had no mantle or anything. Used to - whistle like hell all the time. And give of course a very inadequate light, the rest of the - room was in d
a
rkness. And we were considered - that was quite good. Oh yes. And many of our - our people had candles. And although we had a gas jet in that - in the room and in the living room and in the drawing room, we used to call it the front room - we had no gas j
et in the - bedrooms. We always went to bed with a candle. There was no hall lamp.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 So you were rather looked up to for having the gas then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh yes. I can remember as kid, my mother - knew somebody who was - a little bit poorer than us, and I reme
mber her saying to me, take so and so down to - this house, it was some food you see, to old Mrs so and so and I went down there, and I knocked at the door, and went in, and - there was she sitting at the table with a candle. And do you know it - that sho
ok me, I thought myself, my God. This - this is terrible. Wasn't terrible really because - a very very large proportion of people - at some or other had - used candles.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Do you think that when your brothers became clerks they were looked up to for being clerks rather than manual workers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Yes. I wouldn't say they look up - looked up to, envied perhaps. Yes, I think so.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What about being a shopkeeper, was that felt to be a step up or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Well the shopkeepers yes, they were - they were dif
ferent. Yes, oh yes. They were eminently respectable too.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
But your family did include shopkeepers so that you sort of crossed over really?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Yes, well no, I don't think that my family were - were - would have called themselves in the same class as Shopsalls, and - Linghams and - {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname State}}Berry{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 and Stations and shops like that you see. Theirs was a very modest - sort of shop. You - you might say it was a general shop.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Where do you feel that the sort of borderline between working class and middle class could be drawn then, or do you think it was very difficult?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Well obviously the difference of course is only in the job. And that was - best recognised - unfortunately today as well - if you have a better job for some reason or other you're considered 
to be a better person. It's always - always struck me peculiar why - why the hell, when you get promotion you suddenly develop - develop virtues you never had before is beyond my }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 comprehension}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 . Of course it just simply isn't true. Set about - the - about h
alf a dozen boys in your {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceName}}National{\*\xmlclose} {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceType}}School{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} and rolled them in the snow.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 And you were about five or six times bigger?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 I know. I - I'm just telling that, and numerically stronger as well.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Why was the board school better for the dockyard though?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh they specialized in it. No, we - to give the - the board school their due, they did definitely specialize - they did definitely specialize in the dockyard examination. They laid themselves out for that, that was their reason for being really. And
 they made a good job of it. But not such a good job as {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Chatham{\*\xmlclose}, {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Portsmouth{\*\xmlclose}, {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}
}Plymouth{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} and all the other dockyards. We were nearly always last. Yes, but - the size of the school doesn't - doesn't matter about -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 How big was the church school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs 
R. Where I was? Mm. No, I really taught at the - what would be the - the board school, now you don't call them board, but we used to call them - forget what they were called here now, no, I think there were about three hundred girls I should say, but I wo
u
ld say the boys were only about a hundred and fifty, only about half I should imagine. Because we had an infants school, that's where I was student teacher, started off, well we had - half - our girls all went up - but our best boys all went to the other 
school then you see. They didn't go up - didn't go into the other school.</subject2>
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
People thought the church school had a really sort of class tone then did they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Well I don't know about that, about the tone. I think the - better class were th
ere and - they take the tone with them don't they. You get the backstreet children they bring the backstreet ways with them, usually, this would apply but - but - better class girls were there undoubtedly. And we hadn't a good - private school in the plac
e, either, so that made a difference. You could pick - really the - lot of the children who would normally have gone to private schools.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
You were talking about this fighting, were there gangs inside the school as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 I don't think there was muc
h fighting in the board school. There were one or two - known bullies, they were fairly old too, they were - they would be the oldest and bullying the very young you see. The Record, I remember that name, Jack Record, he was a bit of a bully.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs. R.
 But we - at - at school we had to go down the same entrance as the boys. Go the same entrance as the boys to school. We were a - weren't a mixed school but the - school was divided into the infants and girls and boys, and we all went the same way in. But
 
I can't see our head putting much up with much of you boys coming out there fighting, 'cos he wouldn't have had it. Even if he had to get the police, there wouldn't be much of that there. I don't remember any fighting, and we had - although we had to go t
hrough the boys playground to get out, I don't remember having anything to do with the boys whatever. And I don't remember being told we weren't to. But we just didn't mix, that's all.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 There weren't even between the different neighbourhoods 
in the town, sort of groups of boys?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. No. No, none of that there wasn't, no.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 It was a mixed school you went to was it, girls and boys?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No. Boys. I only went to a mixed school when I started - work, when I started school that was the age of three. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Was that a private one then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No. That was a school - that was the - school - starting age in those days.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You went for the whole day at three?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs. R. Yes, well I first teaching 'em at all - t
hree year old. Didn't know their names, that was the terrible part of it, at the - beginning of the term you get a - whole lot of kids coming in, the little ones, and you'd try and make up a register, they were put down because their mother had bought the
m along, and you'd try to mark your register and they just didn't know their names. And somebody, the blas\'e9 one would say, that's him. He wouldn't know.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What age would it be before you started to teach them to read?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Well, I suppose you started really - r}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 ight at the start, but not - th}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
at they would know they were doing it. You'd drill and they had - sand and - plast}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 cine and all that sort of rubbish and - you know, you'd make letters and - they'd say - \{BLANK\} Mr. R. Not on paper by the way, on slates. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 Slates}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 .
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You weren't obliged to go at three?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
In my age I was. Oh yes. Oh yes, that was reg - that was regular age then. Oh yes. I went there until I would say I was about eight I should imagine. I know - the flood, 97 wasn't it Kit? Well I was attending the - infants school at that time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did they use the cane at your infants school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
I should think they did actually, I can remember - I can remember - one of the teachers at the infants school - was Alice Moyle. Well Alice 
Moyle was the sister of my brother's wife. And I thought that gave me prior claim to all the privileges that - a school should give. Until I - was disillusioned by Alice Noyle, who gave me a good hiding. Now then I can remember that so - caning must have 
been - I don't know what it was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Did you ever have any lessons from your parents, before you went to school or while you were at school, did they teach you the alphabet or something like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No. It's quite possible that I might have learnt some
thing from my elder brothers. That's very possible, but I don't remember that really. But I know that - neither my father nor my mother in any way interfered or - helped in my education at all. No - no way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 They didn't take much interest then in what you were doing?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
They did, in a way. In any little success that you had they were very very pleased about it. But they certainly didn't help, put it that way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Could I ask how you first met then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 This - this sounds a bit daft really. We wer
e both brought up in the same town. And it's a very small town, Sheerness you see. And although I for many years I've seen her walking about - I'd never had any idea of speaking to her at all. My first recollection of her - was when she had irons. You rem
e
mber those - horrible things that you used to have, kiddies used to have - when they had something wrong with their legs? Well she had a pair of those. And I remember thinking - poor little devil. But that was all. And - and then many years afterward, we 
-
 I belonged to a chapel - mainly for sporting reasons really, we had a good football team and a cricket team and that sort of thing, and they took an interest in the sport you see, and we were running - or they were - running a social evening. And you all
 had to take some lady friend. And - I thought myself, well I'll take her. And - I asked her and - she said yes, much to my - surprise, and - as far as I know it went on from there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 But you had spoken to her before then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No. No I hadn't. I can re
 - I can remember - I can remember - I can remember quite definitely what led up to the - asking. I decided in my own mind that I would ask you, but the point was then to get at you. And - I used to go out in - in the evening and sort of look for you. Pre
t
ty complimentary for you too. And - if I felt brave enough I would follow her around and - make out that we'd met accidentally, anyhow that did happen. And - I asked her and she said yes. Actually I didn't have - honestly I didn't have the pluck to stop h
er. She was much braver than I was in that respect. Much. Knew my brothers. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you have a sort of circle of friends at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh yes, yes, very wide circle too.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 This was mostly - people from work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mostly people from work, some
 people in the sporting line, some people in the trade union world and some people in the political world. But - it's fairly wide circle.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 And all boys?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh yes. Yes, oh my God, yes. I never - I couldn't ever walk out with a girl. That's perfectly true, I was too shy to do that, but anyhow - I was too occupied.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did your parents want to know who your friends were at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No. My - my father had died many years before of course. My father had died when I was an apprentice you see. And - my mother wasn't particularly interested in my friends I don't think, really. She trusted her son.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did she want to know where you were?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No. No. Never questioned me in any way at all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What about when you came in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Were you giving her some of your wages at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh yes. Yes. A very very small proportion. But - we had - I had pocket money. I thought it inadequate but everybody thinks that I suppose.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You met at this social?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mm hm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 And it started from there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Then your sort of pattern of life changed did it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
I'm not sure that it did. I'm not sure that it did, no, not really. No. No. Nineteen or twenty, somewhere about that anyhow, nineteen or twenty. I know I wasn't twenty-on
e, because I can remember - seeing you some time after I was twenty-one and I showed you a ring that - my brother had given me, or one of my brothers had given me. Which incidentally I lost.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 So there was a point when you would say you sort of started 
walking out together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. Oh - later, I wouldn't say we did - we - if we met we met and that's all, we might - talk away but - if I found that if I - might go with another - a walk with another fellow I mean I wasn't sort of tied in - any way then.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 How many years before you married would you say that you were courting?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
We got married - we got married 1916, I was then twenty-five. Twenty-six. No, twenty-five, twenty-five I was. I would say that - we were quite serious about getting married for about three years before. I would think so.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Do you remember a moment when you sort of said will you marry me or something like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
I didn't ask her that. I can't remember a moment when - when I didn't - have the idea of getting married to her at all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You always had the idea?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Yes. Mm. Mm. Oh yes. Yes. Oh yes, there was no - occasion upon which I - went on one knee and all that sort of thing and said will you marry me, we just - as far as I know we accepted it didn't we. You didn't even have an engagement ring did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 So you were never sort of formally engaged at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Was there a point when you sort of introduced her to your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Yes, I suppose so. I - I think - I think on one occasion
 she heard it from outside, and she said, I understand that you're - walking a - out with Miss Brett. And - I coloured up and said, yes. She said, well she's a very nice girl. But that was all there was about it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You didn't then bring her home to introduce her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 I don't know when you started coming in the house do you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. Well there's such a number of them, you sort of got - went in amongst them, you - you were mixed in, you didn't know, you know, wasn't - formal like, was about half a do
zen brothers wasn't there. First thing I remember is playing bridge - with half a dozen of them, I don't seem to remember your mother. In their house, yes. First thing I remember.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. I can't remember you first coming home - with any formality at all.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs. R. When we used to have a - a musical evening, when Harry Wood was around, I should think that's the first time I went in your house. And I don't know that your mother was there at all, I don't remember.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr. R. We
 used to have the old fashioned musical evenings you know. And - most of my friends could sing in some way. Some of them rather - they had rather good voices. And we used to like all these old fashioned ballads you know.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What were your main sort of leisure activities?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What was what?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
What was your main leisure activities in the years just before you got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh I - I should say football really and cricket. And - played tennis, not much but played tennis. Activities in the trade union and - political movement.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 How many of these would you come along to then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. Nothing, that was easy. We - I played tennis but not with you. I played hockey but of course he wasn't in that. And musical evenings and - with various - interes
ts that he wasn't in at all really so - no, we didn't meet a great deal, not - socially did we.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You went to the cinema?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. Occasionally. Mm.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 And you used to go round playing music in the pubs you said?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No, no
t - no, no we used to hold - we used to hold open - we used to hold - open air meetings - outside a pub. And then of course we used to go in afterward. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 But you didn't have any music mixed up with that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Yes we did, we - we always started 
our meetings with music, we always used to sing the Red Flag or the Marselais, and it sounded damned good too. No, I'm not - I'm not - thinking so, but people used to say that's - they're jolly good, we had a little quartet party. You know them all. No, t
hat - but they could sing and that was quite good.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Was your father a church of {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}England{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} man or a chapel man?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. He wasn't either, but he was Church of England brought up, well he's - on that side.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 I think you said he was a shipwright?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 He was, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Were you introduced into her home?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No, I just walked in I think. No, I don't ever remember that. We used to make arrangements, I used to call for you didn't I, and we used to go in and - sit down. But I never had a lo
t to do with the family, in that respect. Although I always knew her father when I was in the dockyard naturally as an apprentice you see. Although we were at different ends of the dockyard - you always knew all the - chargehands and the foremen and that 
sort of thing naturally.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Did he sort of take a different attitude to you once you started courting then or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 I don't think so. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 He didn't sort of strike up a kind of friendship with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh no. No. No. Oh no. No. No, I don't know
 whether - most people do, I - I'm sure really, do they? Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Once you were married you didn't have much contact because you'd moved away?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
We'd moved away before that. At least I had moved away before that. And - Edith came down to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Guildford{\*\xmlclose} - a
 place she hadn't been to, oh you had - you had come down there before hadn't you, you had visited me. But you'd never seen the house that I bought for you. Yes, but we went to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Guildford{\*\xmlclose} didn't we.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 That was after you married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No, before we were married.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
So then you did decide you were going to get married, how long was the interval between deciding that and actually getting married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs. R. Well we were married in March weren't we. I would say from the summer onward wouldn't you, the p
revious summer. When Clare got married I should think. My sister got married in the summer, I should say from - then onwards. When Clare got married in August and I - I should say from then on we more or less were - thinking about it.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you start saving up then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
I think - my recollection of that you know period is that - I got utterly fed up in living away on my own, and we decided to get married. And you in Sheerness got utterly fed up of me not being there. That's what struck-me ab
out it. Well it's during the period of war you see. And - I think that's really what happened, then we decided and we fixed a date, and - that was that. And you went and bought the furniture didn't you?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 So you bought furniture and before you got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you get sort of help from the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You paid for the whole lot yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No, no. Oh no, we had - I had a cousin down in Ramsgate who was in the furnishing line - and - Edith had the money from me or what s
he had herself - and - it was arranged that she would go down there, spend a weekend - with a brother of mine who was then stationed down at Ramsgate, and she would buy all the furniture. So actually I never saw the furniture until it arrived in the house
,
 and she never saw the house. I bought - I bought the house in Guildford you see, before - we were married, about - fortnight before I should imagine. Did all the measurements - the windows and doors and all that sort of thing, sent them home to her, she 
made the curtains up, sent them back to me and I tried them up and all that sort of stuff do you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. But the man that brought up the - laid the linos and all that, put the curtains up didn't he?</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. Oh he may - he helped a h
ell of a lot, oh yes, we had a bloke in to put the lino down and that sort of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You actually bought the house, this was your own house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mm. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you have to ask her father's permission to marry her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 If I did I didn't. Well
 actually that's always struck me as rather peculiar you know. It isn't his business is it really. No, no. Oh no. Well actually the only people it concerns is the two major - people in the party isn't it really. If - she suited me and I suited her that's 
a
ll there was about it. I think the people who were shocked at our wedding really - were those people who - when I told them we were going to get married at a registry office. I think that shook them more than any other - you know, asking the - the bride's
 father and that sort of thing. But many of my friends whom I - was very surprised at - were quite shocked that I was going to get married at the registry office. They began to think there was something spicy about it. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Why did you decide to do that?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Didn't want to go to church, that's all. We got married - got married on a Wednesday I think wasn't it. And I'd been working up till - Monday afternoon. At {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Guildford{\*\xmlclose}
. At Farnborough. And - I saw the furniture in that day - and - it was all stowe
d in in some way - you weren't very pleased about it when you saw it were you. It had all come - it all come in these big packing cases do you see, and I had a hell of a job to - get everything undone because I had to go to work at night. I was on night s
hift you see. And - from night shift I went home to Sheerness, spent the day there and the following morning we got married. So you can see that - we didn't have a lot of time to furnish the house.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 So you got married in Sheerness?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Yes. Got member
 - married in Sheerness - her father came down to the registry office with me - with me, and a sister of mine - who - muscled in, she came down. Did Kelly, did she, I didn't known - remember that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Who's Kelly?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. That's a friend of mine, Miss Kelly, she came.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 That was the whole party at the ceremony?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Where were we.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 We were talking about the day you got married. What happened on the day.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh yes. We got married, and we left - Sheerness, we went to Blu
etown to - to the station didn't we, Miletown station wasn't open then. And - as we went off by the train, the following - the - within about an hour or so another train steamed into Sheerness with a couple of my brothers on board who had come down for th
e
 wedding. They were very annoyed. But actually - I did that purposely. I thought myself, some of these blokes that want to muscle in you see and play up hell, so I told them at a certain time in the afternoon for the wedding, so that was all there was abo
ut it. But that time we had - left, Edith and I, we met another brother of mine and his wife in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}London{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
, and we had - lunch with them, and then we packed off and - went home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. Didn't we go to a show? We went to a show didn't we in 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}London{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}?</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr R. I don't think so ducks. Did we? Well - was that in the - was that in the evening then? Oh - I don't remember that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 So the nearest you had to a party was this lunch?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh yes. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You didn't have a wedding party of any kind?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. No. Well not many people did in the war, you couldn't get anything to eat or anything like that. Then people were working, there wasn't any chance of a party.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Your mother didn't come?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. She - she didn't go to the -</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr R. She didn't do to the wedding, she was at Edith's home - when we got back. And I can remember her words. She - she said, well my boy, I'm glad you've got married but I'm very sorry to lose you. And she'd never looked happier in her life.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 So you did have a little kind of reception back at your house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. Well that was all like -</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. We only had a drink as far as I remember didn't we. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 But there was a slightly larger gathering of people there, who e
lse would have been there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. No, I don't think so, Clare didn't come up did she?</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. OH no. No. Clare was on the Isle of Wight then wasn't she.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Would your mother have been there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh yes. She was there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Can you remember what you wore, both of you, on the day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. Costume I had anyhow, I know that.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 This was a sort of going away dress you mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. Well you didn't have - you weren't married in a - wedding dress in those time - in -
 in the war, you - couldn't get the material or anybody to do it you see, you were married in a costume, you were married in an ordinary suit weren't you.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr R. I had an ordinary suit on, I don't know what I wore. I expect it was dirty. I 
do remember this, that when we got home - to - to Guildford, incidentally I had bought as much as - I possibly could of what I thought we would - need you see, and all that sort of thing. And when - when we got home on the wedding day - and looked round f
or something to drink, we had nothing to drink. And didn't we - create us some - chocolate. That's right.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Were there any things that happened at work the week before, like some kind of jokes played on you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No, I had a presentation. But nothing else as far as I remember.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You mean you were given presents actually?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh yes. - Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 But no sort of tricks played on you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Do you remember anything happening?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. Yes, we had a - I had some - what did I have?</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. You had presents from school didn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. Cutlery if I - mm, had a sort of a - a meeting and - think it was cutlery, I believe so, that was given. Yes. That was about all. A week before I was married.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Were there any other sort of wedding presents on the day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. Oh a lot of wedding presents but I don't know about on the day. Lot of wedding presents, yes.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Who would they be from?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. Friends and relatives and - oh heaps of wedding prese
nts weren't there? Heaps of wedding presents. We had a fair bit of money too from your brothers, as far as I remember, they - yes, we had quite a lot of - wedding presents.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What sort of things did you get then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. - I suppose the 
usual, there was - I can't remember much about it. I know we had three cruets.</subject2>
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr. R. I was going to say, I can remember one thing about our wedding presents, we had a lot of cruets didn't we. They were - they had a utility value, rather than - any emotional value I suppose.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you meet on the day of the wedding before the ceremony?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did what?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you meet on the day of the wedding before the ceremony?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No. No. Well it's fairly early in the morning wasn't it? And - and
 I had got home the day before, and I'd come round - I think I had brought my mother round to her house, and then we tootled off together didn't we. We walked down by the way. Yes, we walked.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. We had a taxi for something or other.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr. R. No, couldn't afford it. Well we - we walked, I can remember walking down the High Street. We probably had a taxi down to Bluetown, that was quite different. And I can remember walking - and I can remember walking in and seeing - I remember walki
ng in and seeing the Registrar, and that was - and that was - and that was Filer wasn't it, and he - he was a fellow who went to school with me, he was a little older than me but he was always considered to be a bit of a dolt. And I thought to myself, oh 
my God.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Looking back on it do you feel your wedding was very different from the sorts of weddings that maybe you'd been to before in the family or friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Speaking from my family's point of view the wedding was very different from any other wedd
ing in our family. I was the only one married at the Registry Office to start with. And - they all had - some sort of festivity. But I think had we not been married in the war kid, I don't think the same - I think the same kind of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Can you descr
ibe a typical type of wedding about the time you got married, maybe just before the war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. Well, that - that is the type you -</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What sort of reception would they have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. Oh they'd have a - they'd have - plenty to eat wo
uldn't they. Plenty to eat when they got round the table, but - you all sat on - you seemed to sit with your own - side, you know, your - if you're on the hus - husband or the wife's side, whichever the case might be, and you more or less talk to each oth
er and - the other side talk to the - the same and you - you didn't mix in prop - you know, you had no interest really. There was nothing, no organisation to amuse you was there. You were just bored, that's all.</subject2>
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Not speeches?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. O
h there was speeches, the - ordinary you know, praising one and praising the other. A few truths and a few untruths. That you always get, but - otherwise there was nothing to it.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. I think the most people did - have - some sort of - fe
stivity, and I think they - but they were all very happy to have one, I think they all looked forward to the se weddings. As far as I remember - since then the weddings that I've been to, I mean Ernie's wedding, Vic's Wedding, Ivy's wedding, the rest of t
hem, they all had big parties after them. With speeches and all that sort of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 But before the war was that what you'd remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Before - before the war I would say that most people in Sheerness got married at a church or a chapel - and - they had a do, that sort of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 A big reception really?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh yes. I would say so.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 How many people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
That depended on - I suppose upon the - what sort of a family they came from, if they came from a family - that was a large family natura
lly they had all sorts of friends and - of their - brothers and sisters coming along you see, so quite - they were quite big.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Do you mean fifty or more?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh yes, I should say that easily. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You mentioned about how you didn't want any trick
s played, what sort of things were you thinking about?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Well, my brothers - had a caustic sense of humour. And the two that came on that day, one was - he was a commissioned officer in the Navy, and the other one was a commercial traveller. Well I thi
nk that's mixing the two breeds. To the - to the extreme really, an - I think they came down to have a bit of fun. That's what I wasn't going to let them have.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Were there lots of pranks played then on a bride and bridegroom?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 I wouldn't say, no,
 I wouldn't - I wouldn't say that. I've got an essay that I wrote some many many years ago of a - of a - my sister's wedding, I'll show you. No, I wouldn't say they were - there were pranks played upon them, there were a certain amount of leg pulling but 
nothing extraordinary, I don't think, nothing indecent in any way at all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
But there were all sorts of things like putting rice in your clothes and so on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No, I don't think - I don't remember that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 MRS R. I only know when we went - after we 
were married and - month or two we went to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Brighton{\*\xmlclose}
 didn't we, when your mother was down there, and - to one of your brothers, and I remember they put - put brushes in the bed when we went to bed that night. Don't you remember that? Lil I think. Don't you 
remember brushing the bed, when we went down to Will's?</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr R. Oh when we went down for - there for a holiday afterwards. Well, Lil who she's talking about was the - the wife - of the Naval bloke who came down to see me, on - on our wedding
 day. So she was probably getting her own back. Well when there are - a lot of brothers - of - very worldly brothers in different - professions, you do get a lot of fun you know, there's no doubt about it. And - we certainly excelled in brothers anyhow.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Can you describe the house at {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}
Guildford{\*\xmlclose}, how many rooms it had and so on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Now you would describe it as you - you - you had never seen it you see, I got quite used to seeing the damned thing because it worried me. Oh yes, I - when you buy a house a
nd you're only about - twenty-five, and - you haven't had any previous experience, and you're not quite sure whether you can quite afford it - and - the furniture keeps coming and you've got to measure up for the curtains and all that sort of thing, it is
 a bit of a strain you know, and - when you're also on night shift, working twelve hours a night - it isn't too good. But anyhow you describe it as you - as you first saw it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. We were isolated weren't we. Well the house was - absolutely modern f
or the time, it wouldn't be out of - a long way out now would it. There was six rooms, three up and - three down, and a bathroom. And it was - you know, double fronted in the front. With a hall and the - and the - lounge was on a level but at the back the
 
kitchen and the dining room came - on a level with each other, it wasn't one of those long houses through that - old ones were. And upstairs the - bathroom came in the front which was unfortunate, over the hall. And the bedroom, the other two bedrooms cam
e - over the two - rooms at the back. And there was quite a long garden. And there was a wide entrance. And there was a garage - down the - garden.</subject2>
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Was it a detached house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 It was a semi-detached. And there was a - it was - well it wa
s the last house in a row as far as it went but the - other houses - along the next row came round to the back doors you see, so there was a - a wide space - back and side to us wasn't there. And it wouldn't look, as I say, out of place - today really.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr R. Actually it - it fetched a lot of money after we left. Mm. Yes. It was the only - it was the only - house in the - only house in the row that had a garage anyhow. And that was unusual in those days you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You went by car to work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No. No. Talking about going to work by car - for nineteen years I - I }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 travelled}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
 to work on a pushbike. And when you come to think that I biked eleven miles, to and from work - it's not bad going.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Is that to Farnborough?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mm. Well I can remember the 
first week that I had biked - and I've never - been so full of pain in the whole of my life before. I thought to myself, I can't get through it. The whole of my back ached, and my legs ached there for some }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 wired}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  sort of reason. It was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 pitiful}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 . But - it wore off. Fortunately.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. But he went by train first of all didn't you for a time.</subject2>

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. Oh yes, about two or three - after I started }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 push biking}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
. Well it's a matter of fining - trying to find the cheapest method of getting to work. I mean you don't like to add to your overheads - by trying - paying to go there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Can you tell me about the housework, did you have anyone to help you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. Not right at the start. But we - I did afterwards didn't I?</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. Oh yes, you were very lucky really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. Yes. Used to have a woman come in -</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. You used to have a char didn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. Mm. And of course they were good in those days because those - all those women you got in those days -
 had been servants hadn't they. They knew their work. Not like they come in now and they - leave you to do it all and - say they can't do this and that. But they were very efficient and of course I didn't know anything about it. And didn't pretend to.</su
bject2>
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 That was after how many years?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. Oh right at the beginning you see. Our boy was born fourteen months after we were married. And I think as - probably as soon as we knew he was on the way we had a woman didn't we.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. I would you say you had Mrs Dray soon after we got married. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. Well that's what I say, I should say - three or four months afterwards. And - of course they more or less me taught me how to do the housework. Well I didn't know anything about it.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. They were rather - they were rather nice weren't they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. They were sort of both good, they were all - married women of course and their husbands were in the Army, that they were glad to come out.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 How did you have two then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. Oh - one after the other, one first, Mrs Dray came - first wasn't it, and Mrs Nash was it or Mrs - oh well, I don't quite remember which it was. But both their husbands were in the Army. And they were both very efficient.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr R. I think kid what happened was - what happened was that Mrs Dray was a charlady - and - Mrs - what was her name -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. Nash. Nash.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. Oh, I wasn't thinking about Mrs Nash, I was thinking about the lady -
 the - the - midwife.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. Oh she wasn't a charwoman. She - she only came when boy was born. But -</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 But she would help for quite a time when the boy was born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. Oh she helped for about a month.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 She came in daily?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. Who, the - midwife or the woman. Midwife was there all the time for about a month. But the women still came, the woman I had - well that was Mrs Nash at that time wasn't it, so - yes, and after Mrs Nash first and she - came as usual, to
 - did the work. Mm.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
What sort of preparation did they give medically at that time, did you have sort of classes or anything like that beforehand?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. Well - no. It was in the war, if they had there wouldn't have been any I don't suppose in that war. No, there was nothing whatever - in that way at all.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Did you have to go round to the doctor's surgery or anything like that beforehand
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No, nothing at all. Only to - engage him, that's all. You didn't go - you didn't go any more.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You had the boy at home then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Yes. Well you had to. All children were born at home at that time, unless I suppose - was no convenience at home, I don't know, I don't -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr. R. I never remember - anybody in Sheerness having a
 - a birth in a hospital do you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. No, I didn't - don't remember in Guildford either. Not at that period. No.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Were you sort of kept out, did you sort of have to go out of the house when the baby was born, this sort of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No, I - no, actually the - you had had rather a bad night as far as I remember, and - I rung through - to the doctor, I should say about seven o'clock in the morning. And he very casually - I suppose having just rolled out of bed, said well I'll be along
 later. If you've got any difficulty ring up again. Which I thought was a bit thin.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. But you got the midwife first - second, she came in didn't she?</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr R. Yes, I know, but I - I had to go - she told me to go to the doctor. And - then it hung on and hung on and there was no birth, and I went for him again. Under the advice of Mrs Nash or - what - what was her name?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. Mrs - Chudley.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. Chudley, that's it. And eventually he arrived didn't he? Did he c
ome twice?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. I think he came early, yes, he came - twice. He came in the morning he may have came three times, I - rather think he came three times. He came that once, he came in the morning about ten, and he came again midday. And he wasn't bor
n 'til night then. He came again then. It was a bad time altogether.</subject2>
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
You'd no preparation at all, so you just didn't know what to expect or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. No, not really.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 When he was a baby did your husband have any
thing to do with looking after the baby?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
I don't - I think when he was very small he was more or less afraid of him weren't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr. R. Oh - oh me. Oh I beg your pardon, I - did you mean me? Oh I beg your pardon. Oh my God no. No. I - I can rem
ember - being scared stiff - he had long clothes didn't he. And I thought he was going to slip out of his clothes when I held him, I can remember - I thought myself - how shall I know where I've got - when I've got hold of him, you know, with all these - 
t
hey were about a yard long weren't they these clothes. Oh no, I - no, I took no notice - no - help in that. I do remember that - he had trouble with his eyes didn't he. Right at the beginning. And - Mrs - Chudley said she was going to stay up all night, a
n
d she said, will you stay up all night? I said yes. And I remember - you went to bed, and she and I stayed up all night, because the boy had to have his eyes bathed about every hour or something like that. Yes, well that's - that's actually what happened.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 One the nurse had gone after the first month, would you look after the boy?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 I - I didn't. I didn't. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
When would you say that you started playing a sort of bigger part in bringing him up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh I should think a long time after. I - they're too small }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 aren\rquote t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 ' they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Taking him out yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. No. Well I said today, we saw an old gentleman - pushing a pram along. Grandfather I presume. Quite a - well dressed old gentleman. I said now that wouldn't have happened in 
our time. A - a man wouldn't take a pram out with a baby in. Like that, in those times, wouldn't be seen with it would they?</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. And he was quite at home walking along the front there today, this - while we were out.
 No, I don't know. I suppose I had a good neighbour really to do a bit of shopping if it was necessary and - shops weren't far off some of them. Otherwise you went to - town with the pram really.</subject2>
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You had quite a bit of help from this neighbour did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. Well I came home didn't I. I went home for about a month after he was born. So that made two months. Two to three months I should think, before - I was on me own really.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. Oh yes. Your mother - your mother an
d father came down and took you home. See, talking about - taking - more of an interest in the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 kiddie}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  - we were working at that time - I was on night shift. Six o'clock in the evening until eight o'clock in the morning. If you add that to that - an hour ea
ch way traveling, it doesn't leave a lot of time at home you see. That first year - I used to go by tra - by train. Well - to the station - from our house - took about twenty minutes to walk. And then I used to go by train to North Camp, and I had twenty 
minutes walk the other end. If you add up all these times you'll find that the amount of time that I got home was very very limited you see. Naturally.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Do you think you both had the same idea about how to bring up a small child?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh that was her job.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You left that completely to her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh yes. I don't - I don't think that any - well very few men anyhow - know much about bringing up kids when they're that age, I don't - I don't think it's - somehow to me it's some - doesn't seem natural. Fur
thermore it's so easy to - shift the responsibility isn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you ask your mother when you were staying with her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. Yes. No, I had a step-mother and she had no children. Had no children. No, I - I should say the neighbour helped. She ha
d been a nurse. A childrens nurse. And she was Scottish. Very thorough wasn't she, and I should say she helped more than - anyone really. Yes.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. Would you? She was Scotch, they're very hard.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. It doesn't matter, she was very helpful.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
What sort of age do you think that you would start trying to teach the baby what was right and wrong, the sort of things it oughtn't to do and so on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. Of course that would depend upon the baby I suppose. He wasn't - he
 was - quiet wasn't he? He's always been a very quiet - retiring sort of child. No trouble hasn't he. Not tiresome in any way really. But - he didn't need it, no. He didn't need much correcting at all. Better to let him go if he could - do what he wanted 
to do. Than correct him, I should say.</subject2>
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr R. I don't think he needed much correction in the way of behaviour at all actually. Which is rather amazing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. Well he was very - interested in doing things himself, he was very - self-c
ontained really. Didn't need a lot of out - outside - I suppose he didn't get it so he didn't need it in a way. He's the same now, he's grown up though, he's not like him.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. No, he's a very brainy kid, no doubt about that. It's not my 
fault. But he is, he's very - he's very brainy.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. I used to say when he was young - whereas - he wanted patching on his trousers, the boy didn't. He was - he was more the trouble than the other one was. Still is. He rushed off, I remember, the d
ay the boy was going to be born, came back with a great slit didn't you in your sleeve when he'd caught himself on something. Great big slit in his coat he had I remember.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. Well - that was - that wasn't - that wasn't funny, that was -
 tragic actually. The nurse said to me you'll go - have to go and get the doctor quickly. Well - from our house - the nearest phone was opposite the pub up the Royal, that was bout a mile away. Between our house - and this pub there were some fields. That
 was - after it was turned into a - {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Woodbride Road{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
. I dashed down our road - jumped over what I thought was the wire fence, got entangled with the barbed wire - and - and - being a little bit impatient I suppose, I tore me trousers, or - or something, I don
't - not sure what I tore but I know I was in a bit of a mess. That was one of the worries of parenthood. That didn't touch you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What about playing with the baby, you'd do a little bit of playing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh yes, we used to have much - used to do a lot 
of playing. Mm. Oh yes, we - we did a lot of playing, we used to play all sorts of games on the table, table games didn't we too. We used to play tennis, aye and I used to play tennis a lot when he got older. And - table -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Be difficult then. And ther
e was no extra milk for babies or anything else. Get on as best you could, which wasn't - particularly easy in those times. I did get a bit friendly with the milkman. That sort of augmented the milk supply really but otherwise you - you know, there was no
thing extra, you had to go out and - line up for butter and - it was much worse than in the second war really the food problem was really.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What did you cook on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. Oh I had a - gas stove. Gas stove. And there was a big 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}kitchener{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} in that kitc
hen, but I didn't cook - used that for cooking, it - it did heat the water. But we had a - elec - a gas geyser put up for that afterwards. The {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}kitchener{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 really in the kitchen was big enough for a mansion. It was a huge thing. More - a lot bigger kit - I always said the - the {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}kitchener{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 was bigger than the kitchen, although the kitchen was a good size but - much too big for - you know, a small family. But the food - was very very difficult.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You'd eat in the kitchen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No, in the dining room. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Could you describe a typical day's meals, what would you have for breakfast?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Well you see, he went off to work early, he'd have egg and bacon for breakfast always. But - I wouldn't. I never do eat bacon. I'd have just toast probably. And - of course the baby'd have baby food, whatever might - might be - necessary.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Would there be tinned baby foods?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No, he was breast - no, he was breast fed. Mm. Then he went on to ordinary foods gradually onto - well - half and half, you know, gra
dually on. No, there were no - not all this tinned stuff, when they put them onto food now when they're about four months old don't they. I don't know whether that's any good or not, they grew up too quickly. Don't you think they do? Mm. Because they were
 
babies longer. Of course he was a good - big boy really, wasn't a tiny little one. He's about twice as wide as he is, now. He - he takes after me more, he's not - he probably isn't quite as tall as he is, very little difference but he's - half again as br
oad. Quite strong really. But - then I used to get - cook when he was old enough to have a proper meal I had to cook midday. Then I had to cook again in the evening you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What would you have midday then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Well, if I could get meat it would be m
eat and vegetables, proper meal you see. And the same again, cook in the evening. If I could.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You mean a joint?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Well, you couldn't get a joint, you just had to - if I could get little steak or - pudding or make a meat - pie or - that type of thi
ng, you couldn't get enough meat to - get a small joint at the weekend usually. But - you wouldn't get a joint in the week.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What would you drink with meals usually?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Don't know - teatime we'd have tea of course wouldn't you. Don't know lunch tim
e. Nothing I suppose. Don't know as I drink now with it so it didn't make any difference, I - wouldn't have - tea afterwards but - of course we didn't drink wine if that's what you're referring to. Wouldn't drink beer.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 At breakfast did you have coffee or tea?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Tea. I don't like coffee so - I probably would - now I wouldn't have it you see. Stan likes coffee better than I do, I'm not fond of coffee. I can't quite remember what boy had, he never had any tea 'til he went in the Army. He didn't like t
ea. And when he went in the Army he had to have it suppose, when he come out of the Army he could drink more than anybody. But - prior to that he - he never had tea. I rather think he had - Ovaltine or malted milk, you know, what he - that type of thing. 
Don't think he - he never had tea anyhow. He drinks tea now all right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 The vegetables, were they ones that you grew yourself or did you buy them?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Well, we had a big garden, we did grow quite a lot, there was an old gentleman down the - road who'd
 been an old farmer, he used to come along and do the garden. And he did it his own way, he wouldn't do what we wanted, he used to grow things that - and - huge - he'd get huge great onions and things and - bigger than we could grow. But that kept us more
 or less supplied with - ordinary vegetables.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Potatoes you mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Potatoes and parsnips and - greens and that type of thing. Then we had a lot of raspberries I remember.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Any other fruit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No, not 'til I bought an apple tree, that was som
e time later thought, it wasn't there at the time. I think it was only raspberries, and then we had some - blackcurrants I believe, bushes we - put in, gooseberries. Had a bit of everything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you buy fruit at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh yes, if we hadn't got any
 we always had fruit, we've always had fruit. We always had fruit at home when we were young and all you know, plenty of fruit.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you buy bananas do you remember, early on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Not - I don't know whether - we didn't have bananas when we were chil
dren I don't think they were about were they, not 'til we were older, I don't think there was any bananas - and - I used to give them to the boy when he got about - five or six I suppose, mashed them up. Prior to that I wouldn't say we had a lot of banana
s
. And he couldn't take orange. He had to have a little lemon but he mostly had to have - have - cabbage - water and - cabbage and vegetables water always. Or Swedes and that sort of thing. He didn't have much in the way of - orange because he was inclined
 to be bilious. Couldn't take the - orange. I can't either so I can't now. Seems to take after me, take - takes after me more than he does after - Stan really. 'Cos }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 he}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  can eat anything. He can eat anything at any time. And four times as much as anybody else
 and he never gets a bit fat on it. Yes, a big eater really and he doesn't put any - weight on. The boy's going to be stout when he gets older I think, my father was a big man. And he was on the stout side and I think he takes after - after my family.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you have any sort of tinned vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No. No tinned vegetables, don't know whether there were any. The only - tinned fruit I can remember, pineapple. Pineapple and - salmon, I can't think of ever having any other -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Corned beef?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Not 
very often, no. Was corned beef about. We didn't have it at home, I suppose what we didn't have I didn't - sort of have when I got older, when - I got married. My father wouldn't have it you see so - I wouldn't buy it probably. I don't buy }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 corned}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  beef now.
 Not very often, no. Especially after that typhoid business with it. I - rather - mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What about fish?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No. Fish at home, not fish - in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}
Guildford{\*\xmlclose} much. Fish was - you could buy fish alive in - in Sheerness. Flapping about on the barrows. Fish was dead in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Guildford{\*\xmlclose}
, and - it never looked nice. No, not much, not a lot of fish. I might buy herrings and some of that type but - not a lot of fish, I don't buy a lot of fish now. Do you like fish? 'Cos I'm - I don't like this polluted water. I've got to h
ave - I've got to have - fish that's big, that's cut - from the {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Arctic{\*\xmlclose} you now, like the - large - haddocks and things. I don't want local caught - stuff, I'm - wary of it. 'Cos the water's }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 filthy}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 .
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What about rabbits?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 There used to be wild rabbits didn't there about.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Could you get them at all when you were in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname 
place}}Guildford{\*\xmlclose}?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
In the war, yes, a little. 'Cos there's no value in them, no food value much. We used to - have them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 How would you get those then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 I think the butcher used
 to have them - occasionally. Maybe greengrocer I don't know, but the butcher used to have them. But - there's - there's no value in a wild rabbit, food value. I don't believe in cooking for - for the sake of cooking. I've got to think whether it's - it's
 got to have some value else I don't want it. And waste my time on - on - cooking stuff - just for the value of what it looks like.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You did make jam didn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 We'd make jam, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What other sort of home made things did you do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Every - I could - cook - cakes and puddings and - make -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you ever bake bread?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 I have done. But not
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 But not usually?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No, no. Well people didn't. Not - not - prior to that. I've known people who do - who did bake their own bread. My mothe
r used to at times. Yes, she would bake bread and when we were children we used to learn to bake it. I can remember baking it all right. I like it too, I would like it now. Mm. It is, yes. I would if it wasn't so much bother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You didn't make sort of wines, elderberry wine or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No. Didn't like them. I've taste - I don't like - home made wines a lot.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What about homemade pickles?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Well - I might - make some of them, used to make - pickled onions and - pickled cabbage, that sort of thing. I still think it's no good to you so I don't often make it. Not now, not now. I did then, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you bottle anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Yes. Do all that, used to bottle fruit too. Bit of fruit bottling. Blackberries and - plums and all sorts of things we used to bottle, yes. Didn't we? Heap of it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You didn't keep any hens or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No, I don't think you were allowed to. But - we didn't want to anyhow. Hens, chickens. Oh no, nor rabbits. No, we never kept anything like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
There wasn't anybody else living in the house, there wasn't a lodger or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No thank you. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What about the washing, did you do that at home or send it out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Yes, no that was done at home - at the beginning any
how. Then the - some went to the laundry later on. When we - the second war came long it was done home again because you couldn't find a laundry. But I should say when - I should say when - boy was about nine or ten I suppose it - went to the laundry agai
n, at that period when he got a bit older. But - otherwise it was done at home. It's still done at home, a fair bit of it. Because I don't like laundries.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You have a weekly wash day don't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Wash on a Monday, yes, always - no. I wouldn't say al
ways washed on a Monday, I wash - generally wash again on a week, I generally wash on a Monday, but I generally wash again about Thursday, a little bit. But - I don't - absolutely keep to it at a time but it suits me better to wash on a Monday. Because th
e
re's usually some food in the house for one thing. I don't want to go shopping and you can - as I say, you've got all week to dry haven't you? I don't like washing on the end of the week. And having to cook. But - it went to the laundry at - at that perio
d and laundries were more efficient than they are today. I think, and much cheaper. I did say when the war was on we was mending - mending and sewing, that when the war was over I'd do more mending and no more washing. But when -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Is that the first or the second world war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
The second war. But when it comes to the laundry and the price of it - and the price of everything else you find you go back and do your mending and your - and your washing again don't you, because it - well you get more sense re
ally, I don't like laundries to a great extent unless things are going to be boiled. I don't like unboiled things going to a - into a laundry with other peoples washing. Think you do it yourself you - aren't picking up germs all the time are you, You don'
t know what you're getting otherwise.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you do the mending at first, when you were first married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you make clothes as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Well - yes, to a certain - certain extent. I made - all the boys when he was young, all his clot
hes and - knitting and all that sort of thing. I could make myself dresses, I can sew now if it's necessary. I would say I - I - I could be good at - at it if I wanted to be. I don't want to be now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. You've got - you've got no hesitation in - if
 you buy - a dress or anything of that description - of taking it up or letting it down or making alterations.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. Oh it's always remade halfway remade again. Yes. I can - I can do anything in that line really.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 In the early days you would buy most of the clothes, or make them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Don't think I would buy for boy when he was young. Made all his things didn't I? Knitted or made when he was little, yes, I could make coats for him, yes. Until he was - old enough to wear a little suit 
I think I would make his clothes, when he was young. And I would make light dresses - for myself. Don't - I did make a coat once for myself but I don't know whether I liked it or not.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What about your clothes, would those be bought in a shop, your own 
clothes at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Yes. All of them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. You'd have a suit made though wouldn't you, suits were made always weren't they?</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. Oh yes, but that is - that is in the shop.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 MRS R. Tailormade, they weren't bought ready
made I mean, not a suit, only -</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr R. Oh no, no. Very very - very very rarely. Very very rarely. The first suit I had made I can remember quite distinctly - was - my mother said to me - I want you to go to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}
London{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} with Edgar, that was my ne
xt elder brother - on Saturday to - get measured for a suit of clothes. Now that to me was something - out of this world actually. But that was the first - made to measure suit that I had. I - I wasn't quite out of my apprenticeship then, that's - probabl
y why I remember it more.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. Why did you go to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}London{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} for it?</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr R. I've never made that out kid. Whether - whether mother saw - an advertisement in the paper, or not, I don't know but - Edgar and I went to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}London{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
. I was under his supervision and - we were both measured for a suit of clothes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Shoes though would be ready made, when you were first married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Can you tell me would you at that time do any of the housework, you obviously do a lot now?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No. I would say no, I didn't do much - housework, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No cooking for instance at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No. I - always - cooked my own breakfast. And I cooked that from the time we got married to the time I left off work. Edith never got up in the morning to get my breakf
ast. I always used to get up and get my own breakfast. And I always had a - egg and bacon breakfast, and take her up a cup of tea, and then push off on the pushbike. So from that point of view I was a very clever cook wasn't I? But - but normal housework,
 I - I didn't do a lot I don't think no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No cleaning?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Nothing. Well the spring cleaning I suppose - if there was anything that you wanted done. I would help. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Would you paint the house, help paint it and that sort of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh yes.
 Yes. I painted the house soon after we'd bought it. I painted the - the house twice completely. But - but the later -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You'd do improvements?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh yes, did improvement, made a little porch and that sort of thing. But - latterly we had the house painted. They made a better job of it than I did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 There weren't fires to light were there?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. Yes. Yes. Fires, all fires.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Who would light the fires then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. I would - usually.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. If she was ill - 
I used to light the fire. And - if she was ill I used to go to Farnborough to work, and come home midday. And steam some fish for her, I hated that damned stuff.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. One thing, I wasn't very often ill so that's -</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Would the neighbour not come in if you were ill then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. No, we had different neighbours then, the other neighbour - had gone be - Scotch one. I don't think neighbours do do now like they used to years ago any of them now, neighbours are different aren't they? Do 
your neighbours - would they do anything where you live? They wouldn't here, you wouldn't expect them to.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr R. There's a new generation of neighbours now, who - are more interested in - hiring themselves out for a couple of bob a week, or
 a couple of bob an hour or whatever the case may be, than helping their neighbours. You don't get that - oh I'll come and clean you up Mrs so and so. Same as you did when we were kids. I mean it was quite normal - in Sheerness, for anybody to help their 
neighbour out if they were ill, it would be - you were considered pretty awful if you didn't do it. But you don't get it now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. I don't think a lot of 'em know how to do it to start off with properly, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 haven\rquote t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 ' the confidence. I mean most women in
 - back when we were children - would - well were good housewives whatever it was they could do it couldn't they, cook or - sew or - tend in illness or anything else, how can you - you can't find anybody who can nurse - nowadays. There is nobody. They can
't do it.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 It's all much more professional isn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. Yes, but there aren't enough of them so there you are, not enough of the to go round so - consequently people are left with nobody. But a neighbour would always come in years ago, and the poorer a district they more they would do it.</subject2>

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 But you didn't find {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Guildford
{\*\xmlclose} like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. No - oh - {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Guildford
{\*\xmlclose}, not guildfordians, but the people who came in - were better. But the old Guildfordians no. They wouldn't do anything.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. Guildford was a very snobby place you know.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 How much contact did you have with other people when you were in 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Guildford{\*\xmlclose} then? You did make friends there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. Yes, I had some friends there but - you don't make
 the friends when you move - that you have where you left where you lived you know, nothing like 'cos in Sheerness we all knew everybody, everybody knew everybody. But there you only - you only came across your neighbours or anybody that - you know, you w
e
re - who were interested in something you were interested in, and probably would - you wouldn't - want to be friendly with the under normal conditions but you're just thrown together. You didn't have - you had no chance of picking and choosing really.</su
bject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What sort of interests do you mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. Well, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 your\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  were more political weren't they.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr R. Well you - you had - I was just thinking - you had a very big circle of people who knew you if you didn't know them. I was se
cretary of a trade union for nineteen years - I was - chairman of the West Surrey - Education Com - Employment Committee for - six or eight years, and you got to know people, everybody, you are in - in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Guildford
{\*\xmlclose} to an extent. Whether you wanted to know them is quite another matter but - but they knew you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. Mm. Probably I'm not very sociable. Maybe that about it. Don't - I'm not really, not a - not a lot of people just to be intimate with, I - I can make friends and keep friends but I don't - mak
e a lot of - just people to - know slightly really.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Would you not have people calling sort of casually then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. Oh, I suppose we would.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What about in the early years when you were first married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 MRS R. Oh - n
o, we - well, we did didn't we, some of 'em, used to have 'em come round. Young people then yes.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Those would be friends rather than neighbours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 MRS R. Mm. Mm. Oh as neighbours, no. No.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you share your friends or would you have some women friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No, more or less they were all mixed in.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr R. They were all - they were - all men - more or less man and woman weren't they. A lot of them - you see if you were a - secretary of a trade union a lot of people ca
lled on you, they want to know something or they want you to do something, and any amount of people used to call us - on us, always - over a long period of years.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Would you offer them something to eat or drink when they came?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs. R. All depends how friendly you were with them.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr R. Well - a lot of them - with all due respect to - to them, a lot of them were people that - you dealt with them in the official manner, or way, but you didn't want to make friends with them really. Al
though a hell of a lot in the trade union movement I - I think were perfectly wonderful blokes. But there were exceptions. But - being a member of a trade - secretary of a trade union, particularly in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Guildford
{\*\xmlclose} - where - I think most of those people - date
d back to the feudal days - they seemed to - have a profound admiration for anybody - who was a boss. And that's all there was about it. That is Mr so and so and that is Mr so and so and Mrs so and so and all that sort of stuff. But they hadn't evolved ou
t of that age, they certainly hadn't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Who were the sort of most important people in Guildford at that time then?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Tradesmen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. No. You had two groups there, they wouldn't mix. Tradesmen were one and the - and the better class people the other and they didn't mix.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. The tradesmen -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Who do you mean by the better class people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. Well - the - the Earls and the Dukes and the Lords you had round about and the people who - who hoped to be friendly with them.
 The hope - the hangers on, and they didn't want the tradespeople. But they had a - a - big carnival there once - which went very very well directly after the war. Some - I don't - forget it was now, one of the - some - somebody well up in the Army - daug
h
ter was the queen I think. Well then they tried to organise another one, a year or two after and they chose one of those people again, not her I don't think, but the trades people were coming into this one, and they absolutely dropped out the others, they
 wouldn't have any more to do with it. It was left entirely to the trades people. Those people would more likely mix with the backstreet people - than they'd mix with tradespeople. They don't like them. Why is it? The same thing applied down in 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Plymouth{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} wouldn't it, down there, just the same. They won't have the tradespeople.</subject2>
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Who would the tradespeople mix with then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. Themselves. And those - they think they're a bit better than the - poor people, but you find the others would - h
elp or take the others in but they won't have the tradespeople. 'Cos you get a lot of ignorance with tradespeople you know. They make the money, but they're very ignorant very often aren't they? And I think that's what annoys, I don't know but I think so.
</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr R. If you wanted to see the mixture of the classes - you wanted to go to - Doctor Williamsons - garden parties. Now Doctor Williamson was the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 Honorary}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 Remembrance}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  - of {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Guildford{\*\xmlclose}, very ve}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 
ry wise old man, wonderful chap}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  I think. Very inte
resting, he's written any amount of books incidentally, and - I became fairly friendly with him. And he used to - send me an invitation each year to come to his garden party. The first year I got an invitation - I - came home from work early, about - half
 
past three in the afternoon, and - changed and got on my pushbike and rode down. As I neared his house - there were lines and lines of cars. I thought to myself, where the hell are all these cars going to? And they were the people who were inside. So I - 
b
iked off a road or two and - put me bike there. And I walked down to - through the gates, inside the gates was a standard bearer, the - the standard bearer for the council - the Mayor. And - he said, your name sir? And I told him, Mr Ratcliff. He said - w
a
lked along a few - few yards and then he shouted out, Mr Stanley Ratcliff, and in we went. Old Mr Williamson came forward, lovely old chap, and shook hands and - his wife came forward and - then I was ushered along, and I mixed with the others. But you co
uld see the classes. See the - there were Lords and Dukes, the Lord Leiuteant of Surry was there and all that sort of people you see, Knights and - then you had - the - what shall I say, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 successful businessmen, like old}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  Harvey, who had a big shop in the Hig
h Street. Angel, he had a big shop. Successful - solicitors, people of that description. They would be - obviously having a talk about the affairs of the town, didn't affect us of course. And then you had what I used to call the ordinary people. The peopl
e
 that you could really associate with, whether you knew them or not you see. Among whom was - that - engineer, the chief engineer of the electricity works, I've often told you about him haven't I? He was a Scotchman, and a lovely engineer, and a very inte
l
ligent man, and he had - a supreme contempt for all these people you know. Anyhow, he and I got quite friendly, and on one occasion, the first time I saw him at this garden party - Williamson had a big garden, and it was a sort of - let run wild. And - he
 
and I were walking round and I said to him - proper old time garden isn't it? He said, well - anyhow I knew it in those days, and I said to him, it's a - it's a so and so garden. He said to me, it's like a bloody jungle. But you could - quite seriously yo
u
 could see these little gatherings - like to like. And ne'er the twain shall meet. As a matter of fact Williamson tried like blazes to make me stand for the council you know. And I said to him, well why are you so anxious - that I should go on the council
? He said, well do 'em good.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. Wasn't he a - Quaker. Was he a Quaker?</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. I don't think so, I don't think so.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What date is all this that you're talking about now?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. What would it be, 34, 35. 34 or 35 I would say
. I don't know, let's have a look. One of the authors - who contributed to - Queen Alexandra's dolls house library. I don't know whether you knew there were twelve authors. And they - they were asked to contribute to the little library that - was going in
to the dolls house that Queen Alexandra had. And he - he wrote on cameos.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 So he lived on the Mount?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Down - down the High Street, right down the bottom and up. YES.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You say he was a Quaker?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 MRS R. I believe he was a Quaker.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. I don't know whether he was, I didn't know that part of him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Did you notice sort of a church group and a chapel group in Guildford at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Well we didn't move in those circles tell you the truth. But - the Quakers, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 As 
far as the working classes in Guildford were concerned would you say that there was a sort of poorer rougher group or were they all very much the same?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. All the same as far as I know of them weren't they all more or less the same.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr R. I would say that - very definitely - ignorance - was their main characteristic. When - after a time when the ware bro - when the first world war came - they found at Farnborough that - a lot of people were not turning up to work because they coul
dn't get there, you see. And they }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 instituted}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
 a scheme of having a bus run from Guildford to Farnborough, collecting the people in the morning and taking them home at night you see, of which I was one. And the main topic of conversation - of all these peopl
e, they all seemed to me to be carpenters - were old Mt so and so, do you know I did a job for him one day, he was pleased, and they'd go on and - all about this - some little repair they made to this mansion knocking about, and they all seemed to be the 
old type of carpenter on the - estates. All of them. And what they didn't know - would fill a book.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Was there a sort of poor working class area in 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Guildford{\*\xmlclose}?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh yes. No, the - just off the High Street there, do you remember - just off Chertsey S
treet there was a little opening and I told you how I went down there one day to see one of our members. Well it was a - it was a terrible slum. Most awful place. The sort of place that I never imagined existed in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}
Guildford{\*\xmlclose} anyhow.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. There wasn't a lot of slum property in 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Guildford{\*\xmlclose} though really was there?</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr. R. Well, we probably didn't come across it but I should imagine there was.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
There was a part of Sheerness which was much worse, isn't it true that there were three parts?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. Mm.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You mentioned Bluetown and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. Miletown.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. Marinetown. Marinetown.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Which was the poorest?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. Blue. Bluetown. Well that was dockyard end you see, the - but it - or
iginally wasn't, there were big houses down there, but the - dockyard officers lived in. Nicely built - like you get in the East End of London. But of course they'd - gone in - the houses were built in the dockyard afterwards, and they were full up with -
 
families you see, absolutely crammed in, they were filthy, lot of them. The back of that was filthy. But there was some up in Miletown, on one side of the road, that was - very nearly as bad, long alleys and these little houses - sort of - opened onto the
 alleys didn't they, there.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. Fronts of the house - houses down a little back alley.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What kind of people would live there then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh some of them were grim. They were. Some of them were rather nice. But some of them were terrible people. You know, looking for trouble.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You were in Miletown?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. Miletown, yes. We're on the other side of the road.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr R. Of course - Bluetown existed only for the point - from the point of view the Army, Navy and the dockyard. Along that }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 work}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
 - bordering the dockyard wall I suppose - was about half a dozen to twelve - public houses. They were - right - alongside of each other. The other shops in that row were mainly caterers for the Army and the Navy, and the dockyard you
 see. So really it existed - the whole of - Bluetown existed only from the point of view of the Army - or Navy. Now behind that wall - that - were all the slums of creation. And there were some there weren't there? No doubt about it. You know people who h
ad fallen by the wayside sort of thing. It was a terrible place.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 How did they earn a living, that sort of person?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
I really don't know. A lot of 'em were in the dockyard but there were a tremendous number of people who never did any work at all a
s far as I could see. In Bluetown in particular. Miletown - up the long alley and that sort of thing, most of those people had some connection to - with fishing. Old Blower Johnson for instance. Well he lived down there. That's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Who was old Blower Johnson then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. He came round with a barrow - with fish, and he was always drunk. He could - hold up because his barrow would hold him up.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr R. Do - do you know, Blower Johnson started off in the morning - he had a barrow - 
with a slab on the top, and with a lot of fish on. They were nearly all alive too incidentally. And it was nothing to see Blowr Johnson going along and a fish jump off the - the barrow onto the floor, onto the road and he'd pick it up, throw it back again
,
 that was quite normal. But anyhow he used to start off perfectly sober, and go from street to street selling fish. And - as he explained, his bloody barrow wouldn't pass a pub. And as the day proceeded so - Blower got - more and more - drunk. And - but t
o see old Johnson pushing his barrow home late at night was a picture. If any - any comedian - could have emulated him - he would have made a fortune.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Was there no one like that in Guildford then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No, the funniest - character you knew in Guildfor
d, or we knew - was that bloke who had a pub. And used to ride a horse. And what was that joke that - that you heard about him, when they had burglars once?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. Oh well, the - somebody burgled down where his public house was and - and - I don't kn
ow the - the police went after him, somebody discovered him and he was up - got up onto the roof to escape. And he said - his potman it was I suppose come out, he said - go and get your gun. He said, silly fool, he knew I hadn't got a gun. Idiot. Great bi
g
 - fellow - you know, little bit of a - little bit simple he was. He used to go up in the - bus, he had a little bit of a - holding somewhere, I don't know whether he had cows but he used to go up in the bus for about a mile and come back with a little ca
n
 always about so big in his hand. Would imagine he looked like John Bull more than anything, always got a red waistcoat, and he used to say - whatever the bus there, I don't know what it was, I might have been threepence, threepence to go up, threepence t
o
 go back and this little bit of milk, you know, and this is in the middle of the bus and he's a great big fellow. The - the place caught on fire in the end. It looked as if he'd caught it on fire, but - they couldn't prove anything. He said, as if I would
 - would - as if I would burn my little childrens toys. And his little children were grown up, and got their own children I should imagine. He got off anyhow. But he used to ride a horse didn't he? Looked like John Bull.</subject2>
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Can you remember ei
ther in Sheerness or Guildford any sort of incident there was somebody who was sort of disapproved of and people sort of -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Shunned them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Have you heard of rough music ever?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 I don't think I have. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Well people get lots of sort of
 pots and things like that and go and bang them outside the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No, no, I don't think - no. No, I don't - I don't remember anything of that. In fact I don't remember - people shunning others really. I mean talking from my own point of view I didn'
t give a damn who it was. If he was all right as far as I was concerned that was all right as far as I was concerned, we just got on with it. But - I don't remember anything of that description. Neither Sheerness nor - nor {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname 
place}}Guildford{\*\xmlclose}. I do remember that - you remember Alf Springett? Well his - he was a very clever lad, he was contemporary with me at school, and he lived in - one the - one of these - back all}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
ys that Edith was talking about. And his - his father was a good craftsman in the dockyard, he was a 
fitter - a shipwright, and he used to drink and his wife used to drink. And Alf Springett was the only - kid. And - they used to knock him about unmercifully, and he had a hell of a time, no doubt about it. But I do remember - very strong }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 disapproval}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  - of 
the old man - in the dockyard, with some of the men said they would beat him up one day if he knocked his boy about. I - I remember that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 But they didn't in fact?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 I don't think so, no. I don't think so.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 When you were in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Guildford
{\*\xmlclose} could you describe a typical weekend, what would you do over the weekend? In the fairly early years.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Well you've got to remember we worked }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 Saturday morning}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
. I got home about one o'clock I suppose. We had dinner. I suppose you went out shopping did we or not.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. I don't think so, I don't think you ever went shopping. You used go to football - sometimes.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. Not very often in those days not very often.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. Well we - we'd stay home in the garden I should say mainly. A bit of 
gardening.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. Do a bit of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15361306\charrsid2252871 gardening}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 , we used to go to the pictures sometimes didn't we.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. That was - teatime, that was when - boy was a bit older, yes. Yes, we didn't go to pictures when he was little.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Were there any sort of theatres, concerts and so on on at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. Well he was only a baby you see or very young that we didn't - we were sort of cut off at that period from anywhere.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 There was no one you could leave him with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. No. No, we never left him with anyone. But we didn't, I don't think.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr R. No, going to - places of entertainment, was very awkward really. From the point of view of leaving - the boy in the house alone for some hours wasn't it. But we used to go to the theatre quite a bit didn't we after a time? Remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. When Len and them used to come we used to go, yes. What happened to boy then?</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. I think he was with us but I'm not quite sure.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. He di
dn't - wasn't much interested I don't think. We used to go to a pantomime and take him, I think we were interested and he wasn't. Didn't - he didn't want to go.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you keep up your interest in sports then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh yes. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 All of them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
I've always been a sport fanatic, although I haven't always done it. But I did play football fairly late after we were married actually. But - I've always been very very interested in sport, I think it's wonderful.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Would you go out on sort of bicycling outings together at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. I never rode a bike. No. No.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Or country walks?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. Oh walk, yes, we used to go walking, yes. Take the - take some - food, some summer for picnics and that sort of thing we used to do.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr R. We used to go out for walks. And black - blackberrying and that sort of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. Yes, we used to go out quite a bit - walking.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. There was some good walks - out toward 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Wood Street{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}. We were alm
ost the last house in Guildford up there do you know, and on the opposite side - or just on the corner of the road on the opposite - were fields, ploughed fields and all that sort of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you have any hobbies then at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 I don't think so. No, I don't think so. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Not collecting anything, or fishing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No. I've never fished, and I - I don't know whether you have to be a special build to take fishing, but it would drive me up the bend.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. We used to walk more than a
nything about the country, but then - boy used to go home didn't he, my people used to have him quite a long time at times, didn't they, and we used to - go about a lot, quite a lot then on our own, walk a lot. Discover the country round, so that we knew 
all the country round really well.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr R. Well - I had fairly long holidays and - I had no holidays, and he used to go home for fairly - fair time, and - Edith used to have a fortnight's there with him too.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. But they used to have
 him when he was very young though, at times, for - when he was -</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
So you would go off by yourself for these holidays, you go home, just you and the baby?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. When he was young, yes. Well you used to come down didn't you for a time, used to come down for part of the holiday, yes.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What would you do on a Bank Holiday for instance?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. Well we might go down to Bognor or Little Hampton or something of that when he was big enough.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. Well when
 he was big enough, when he became portable we used to go away quite a lot on Sundays. Excursions. Bognor, Little Hampton, Portsmouth - Portsmouth we were very fond of. And that sort of thing but - right through the summer that used to happen. But - as I 
say we had no holidays - from work, until - Snowdon - Snowdon gave us - when he was Chancellor of the Exchequer, he gave us a couple of days extra. In 1930. But - beyond that we had no holidays until quite a late period.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 In the early days did you do th
at sort of thing or would you spend a Sunday at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh we'd spend a Sunday at home, when - in the - early days, because the boys wasn't portable.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. We'd go for a walk probably, when we could push a pram, go - of course you couldn't go a long way then, we'd go for a walk just round about.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You said you didn't go to chapel or church at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. No.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you belong to any clubs at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 None at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. I think we 
went to chapel once didn't we, when he was young?</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr R. Yes, and you got on to me for wearing a sports coat. You said it wasn't right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. I don't remember that. I don't - probably it wasn't. But what I objected to most, we went i
nto this blessed chapel, that was Congregational, and they left us standing there like a couple of muts and they never gave us a hymn book. And we never went again. Did they, they didn't offer us a hymn book, do you remember that?</subject2>
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. Yes. Absolutely.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Was that fairly early on after you'd arrived there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. Yes, that was - must have been - probably it was before - }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid16646548\charrsid2252871 Harold}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
 was born, while we were quite young. I thought well they can keep their chapel.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. They had a couple of potential victims and they ignored them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 I think you said you'd left the British Socialist party when you moved to }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid16646548\charrsid2252871 Guildford}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  didn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No, the - let me see, let me get this right. The first - the first Socialist party that I
 remember - was the SDF. Social Democratic Federation. I believe that merged into the British Socialist Party. And the British Socialist Party also took under their wing at that time - the SPGB and some other - Socialist organisation. When war broke out, 
I was fairly - I did a fair amount of work then - for them. But - when war broke out - and I left the town - more or less my political activities for that period ceased. Chiefly from lack of time. And - it wasn't convenient anyhow.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 So you didn't take it up until after the war was ended?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mm. Quite. No - sorry. During the war you know - it's - it's very hard to - think back - but - when you come to think - of a night shift, you know I always complained about this at the time, a night shift that was 
longer than the day shift - as I told the director one day I said you know - I've never - in the whole of my life heard of anything so draft. Honestly I haven't. Oh, he said, it's all right, he said, you're the only one complaining. But anyhow - six o'clo
c
k in the evening 'til eight o'clock in the morning, a night shift. I mean it's unheard of. My God. And on Saturdays and Sundays you see. Saturday you - almost we worked - a seven day week for about three - three or four years. And nobody thought anything 
about it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
So it wouldn't really be until about 1920 that you'd take up this trade union and sort of Labour party work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 I became secretary of the trade union at Guildford in 1921.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. You didn't join the Labour party. Didn't join the Labo
ur party.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. No. I never joined the Labour party. No. No, not there. No. No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. But I think we went once at - at a - when there was a - election coming on. And signed envelopes and - all - messed about with the addressing didn't we.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr R. Oh yes, I did work - I was asked to - I was - asked to join the Labour party many times. I was asked to be a - a Labour candidate for the council on many occasions. But - the funniest thing that I remember about being a candi
date was when - three Conservatives got hold of me and asked me whether I would stand. That was all - that was old - that was old Mr Chaldercott - Potter, both of them were Aldermen, and - what the hell was the name of the other bloke - I forget what he w
a
s - what his name was, but he was a - retired surgeon captain in the Navy. And - after - meeting - of the employment committee of that night, Chaldercott said - can you spare us a minute Mr Ratcliff? I said, yes. So we went into a corner, and he said - we
 
wondered whether you would consider standing - for the next general - local election, for the council. So I looked at him, I said, oh - I said, of course you would - you would understand that if I did stand I should have to stand as a Labour man. Now, he 
s
aid, we were afraid of that. But anyhow what they did say was that they were very very much - would like me to get on the council. They apparently didn't care a damn about the politics at all, it didn't matter. But - they called themselves independent duc
k
s, but they were just as Tory as they are now. They used to have their meetings, I can go back to a time when old WI Penny in Sheerness - and - the bloke - the bloke - the bloke with kay legs, they used - they used to have - have their meeting - council m
eeting actually in the club.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. Well he wasn't Conservative. I don't know anybody with kay legs. But We - Penny was not a - a - Penny never went to a club. He was very much chapel, he didn't, Walter John Penny was chapel.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. We
ll they all - they all went to the club and chapel. They were dual purpose.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. But he didn't go to the club. He didn't. And he'd be Liberal, he wasn't Conservative. He wasn't a Conservative, I know.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. Anyhow kid, there - quit
e seriously - seriously there always has been politics in local -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. So there always were but they never - they never - went in under any - political name at all did they?</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. Local councils. No, I know they didn't. No, that's 
perfectly true, they were - they were damned }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid16646548\charrsid2252871 deceitful}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 .
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you used to go to pubs at that time?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No. Very rarely. Very rarely indeed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 On an outing for instance would you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 If I went into a pub - I used to go with my brother Herbert.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 This is after you were married I mean.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Not at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Very very rarely. Very very rarely, there were occasions upon which - the way home I might have a puncture or something like that and I'd call in the country pub and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You wouldn't go together, if you were out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh no, no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. I wouldn't go in a pub. I might in a country pub - now, I wouldn't go in a town pub now I don't think. Well we'd go if we had a lunch in a public house I might but - I do't like publ
ic houses. But I like country pubs. When the old country people came in we used to go in those sometimes didn't we when - that was of course when boy was older, when he wasn't there. But not - not when we were young we didn't - public houses.</subject2>

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 And your interest in football, did it carry you as far as the pools?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
No. I haven't really got any time for the pools. I did - do for about a year, something like that, I thought to myself, well - I'll see what I can do but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Who would this be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. After we came here was it?</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Fairly recently?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh yes. Easier said - the more you know about football the less money you earn - you - you got. Maybe something in that. No, I -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Early on did you belong to any savings clubs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Any what?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Early on in your marriage did you belong to any savings clubs?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You had to pay national insurance by then didn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Does that mean that you didn't have any other insurances?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Wait a moment, no
, I belonged to the Forresters. The Ancient Order of Foresters. Yes, but I re - I retained my membership - I - I'm a Forester now. I retained my membership until I reached the stage - when I was old enough to have all the benefits without paying. And that
's my position now. And when I die - you'll col - you'll - oh yes, yes, I was a member of the Forresters.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Were there any kind of activities concerned with that though?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Oh yes, they were very serious. Yes, they were - they were a very serious organisation. With their taking and their eating and all this sort of tripe.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You went to that though?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
I went once or twice yes, but - frankly - I was highly amused, I thought it was most absurd really. I mean, emulating the idea of - the Forresters 
in the olden - in the old days - going round to the trees and picking a grape and eating it and you'd - got to put it in actions, you know. But it was quite a good organisation from the point of view of benefits, what it's for. Of course the same thing a 
- same thing applies to the Buffs, doesn't it? The - all their - those organisations were - based upon history I suppose really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
At the beginning of your marriage how did you sort of decide about budgeting and how you'd spend your money, did you do it together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh well, that was her - that was her job.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did he had the pay packet to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. I - I don't know how he'd have got on if - if I'd have been like him, we should have been - last three days of the week we should never have had anything. That's how we should have been.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr R. No, as - as far as I'm concerned - Edith has always looked after the money. And I've always know that if this - if I wanted anything I only had to go to the box and take it. And that to my mind is a very fine - way of running the job.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. But I think that - the one that can do the job best whatever it is should do it. It's thedre and if the other one can use it if he wants to.</subject2>
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. I think - I think - and it shows a 
lot of trust on both sides in my view.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 So you gave her all your earnings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Nm. Yes. Except - tobacco money and that sort of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you keep back a sort of steady amount of pocket money?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs. R. Yes. No. He had steady money,</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr R. I had - just enough to buy tobacco. I didn't want to buy anything else anyway. And when I - when I was biking to work I usually carry - about a couple of bob, in case I had to buy - anything for the bike on the way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 The decision to buy the house on the other hand, that was yours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Pardon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 The decision to buy the house was yours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. The decision to buy the house, but I - I - paid the money for the }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid16646548\charrsid2252871 mortgage}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  always. All money, gas - all the gas, electricit
y, everything I ran those really. I do now come to that.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr R. I bought the house through the Amalgamated Engineering Union. Mm. And - while I was secretary of {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Guildford{\*\xmlclose}, I carried out the - what shall I say, the preliminary arrangements f
or about twelve other members of ours to buy their own houses. Because I thought it was a most excellent way - a mortgage was low, we paid - five percent on the amount that we - owed - for the first five years. And after that it went down to four percent.
 Well you can't get mortgage for much under four percent can you. And - that's - that's how I bought it. But having bought it - Edith - used to produce the - the monthly money that was sent up. Always.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you ever have sort of music at home when you were first married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What sort of occasions would those be then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. Anybody that was there. We anybody come in - we used to play a lot ourself, I used to play the piano a lot really yes.</subject2>
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. I don't know, anyb
ody that called in. We used - we used to play in on our own. We both played the piano. Oh yes, we had -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 And you'd have a sort of group of friends in and play and sing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. Yes, and - sing, yes. Well - your cousins like - Len and all those were all good singers weren't they?</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr R. OH, Len had a lovely voice. Oh no, a lot - a lot of our associates had good - jolly good voices, no doubt about that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Were you taking a newspaper then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Yes, Daily News. And the Daily Herald. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What about getting books, was there a good library in 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Guildford{\*\xmlclose}?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh yes. Yes, we had a good library in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}
}Guildford{\*\xmlclose}. I used to get a lot of books from the library in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Guildford{\*\xmlclose}, tremendous number. But before we left - the best library in Sheer
ness in my view was the Co-operative library, I think so. And the Co-operative also had a very fine reading room, that I used to spend hours in as a kid. And they used to take all the - get the magazines, the {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Strand
{\*\xmlclose}, I read a lot of - Sherlock Holmes stories up there, there in that reading room.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. Still there was a big social side to the Co-operativ}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid16646548\charrsid2252871 e in Sheerness, it was a - an instit}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
ution really, biggish institution, whereas in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Guildford{\*\xmlclose} it was nothing it didn't count. Didn't mean anything at all, it was much poorer - poorer place.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr R. Well that was the - that was the - tradesmen's influence you see. Different town altogether.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you take any magazines?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 No. No. As far as I know -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. He used to bring home o
ne from work, we used to have the - some -</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr R. Oh I used to bring home, yes, yes. Well of course - we used to have the Graphic. And - there was another contemporary - another - picture book something like that that dealt with - photograp
h in high society and that sort of thing. Well now this might seem very strange, but I ran a library in the department in which I worked you see. The blokes used to pay a penny a week, and we had a fine selection of books, and we also had many periodicals
.
 And two of the periodicals were those things there, and - owing to the fact that I ran the library she always had the first - look at the pictures. But - it was a good library. Oh The Wide - Wide World magazine wasn't it, the Wide World. I think it was t
he Wide World. But that - that library existed right up to the outbreak of this last war you know. It was very interesting, I found it - I - got into a position when I could walk down into W.H. Smith }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1781692 &}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  Co. and they'd say, hello Mr Ratcliff, come to buy some
 books? And we'd spend a couple of hours looking all round and - you know, taking their recommendations and all that sort of thing. It was jolly interesting.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Can you remember Christmas Day when you were first married, what you would do then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. Home.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. Did we got home the first year?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. We - went home the first year, before boy was born. We didn't go home the second year 'cos he was too small to cart in the winter. But every year after we never spent another year - another Christmas in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}
Guildford{\*\xmlclose} 'til - 'til he was old, no, we went home. Long as your mother was alive we went home. Then after that we went up to Aunt Annie's always. Oh we never had a Christmas home, at all, ever. They used to come down to us in the
 summertime but they were up in London, so that was nice of a Christmas, that was a big party, and they used to spend - holidays out - in Guildford in the - summertime with us. Which - well they were sleeping out in the garden and everywhere weren't they.
</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 That would be later on would it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Yes, that would be - when - from the age of - boy was about four onwards wouldn't it be.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. I'm just trying to think, about 21 or 22. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. Right up to the war really.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 So you used to really have quite a lot of relations come to stay?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. Quite a lot of visitors, yes, yes, we used to have people to come, quite a lot, mm.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Any sort of friends from Sheerness for instance who would come?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Con.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. We only had her once. We only had her once as far as I remember, because you didn't get on, it was just as well probably. No, we didn't - I don't think - Sheerness -</subject2>
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. Oh Kelly used to come.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. She came, yes. Yes. Yes, she came.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. She was a character in her own right actually.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 What do you mean when you say she was a character in her own right?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Well highly intelligent, very well educated - and a card of the first water. And - and -
 she hadn't got the faintest idea how to dress. She used to look like nothing on earth, with colours that - used to fight each other on the way. But - very highly intelligent and - I should say intellectual actually.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. She was very good at languages. Mm.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. And she married - a private in the - Army. Well }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid16646548\charrsid2252871 Sergeant}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  when she married him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Can you describe any other of those sort of {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname 
place}}Guildford{\*\xmlclose} friends? The ones you saw quite a bit of?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Any of the what?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Guildford{\*\xmlclose} friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. Well my - main friend married a Dutchman. That's the - photograph she went this week. I still correspond with her. She married a Dutchman. She's still over there, she's a widow now. She would have liked to have come back. She's - she was a
nother one who could sing.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 How did you meet her then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 School. When we were at school in Sheerness.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You met her in Sheerness?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh yes, a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid16646548\charrsid2252871 school friend}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 .
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 She didn't come to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Guildford
{\*\xmlclose} though?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 She didn't come to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Guildford
{\*\xmlclose}, no. She never came to Guildford, she came here once a year or two back, came over from {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Holland{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} didn't she. She didn't come to 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Guildford{\*\xmlclose} no. Did we have anybody else from {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Guildford{\*\xmlclose}. Seemed to cut them all off didn't we.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. I would say some of
 the - one of the characters would be old Frank Callard and his wife.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. Yes, but they didn't come from {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}
}Guildford{\*\xmlclose}. You've got to remember, most of our people got -</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. No, but I - no, what Mr Thom - Thompson was wanting as I se
e it - were you asking for any characters that we met in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Guildford{\*\xmlclose}?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You obviously did make quite a few friends in 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Guildford{\*\xmlclose} and I was wondering what sort of people they were and how you met them and so on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Well that would come under the category
 of a - of meeting - Callard and etcetera wouldn't it. And he was a character actually. He was a bloke with - now what was the - what was the name, his second name. Do you know General Outram, have you heard him. Any how - this is his - he was his uncle. 
Anyhow, he had - he had quite an amount of money. He was a fitter working at Denniss's, and naturally when he came to - {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Guildford{\*\xmlclose}
 he got into contact with the secretary of the branch and - we got on very well together. His wife - had all that Frank didn't h
ave. Frank having the money he was completely unsnobbish in every way, would talk to anybody, and his wife - having no money, was just the reverse.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. She always talked stocks and shares and you always got it. All about the stock and shares were 
doing. But he was one of those people, he was a - he was a perfect gentleman to look at and in his ways. But he was a very happy - fitter. Quite happy at his work wasn't he.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. Oh yes. Very very happy indeed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. Very very - ve
ry very nice sort of fellow. She was bright, brighter than he was I should say really, I expect she married him really. Yes. He was - Welsh.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. But he was very happy in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}
Guildford{\*\xmlclose}. Frank told me when I saw him in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Bristol{\*\xmlclose} - he said, I would - I wouldn't have left {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Guildford{\*\xmlclose}
 you know, he said, I wish to God I didn't, he said, but the wife wanted to go. But he was very happy, he used to come along to our branch always one of our best - members in that respect. And - enter into everything, all
 the fest - all the - entertainments and that sort of thing, and we had quite a few in those days. They - they - yes, they used to come once - once a week they'd come to us and once a week we went to them to play bridge.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. And he couldn't play b
ridge and she could. I mean, she partnered him and I had poor old Frank.</subject2>
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr R. Frank couldn't play bridge and didn't care a damn whether you knew it. And Mrs Callard couldn't play, but she hushed it up. But anyhow - they were quite good c
ompany really, I was sorry when they left. But she got a bit windy and wanted to get as far west as possible - at the outbreak of war. And that was why she went down to Bristol.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. They had a car too which we hadn't got then. They used to take us
 about quite a bit didn't they, we used to go down to the coast on Saturday, we'd go on Sundays sometimes. With the car and - nobody else did much you know. His father I think was a parson, but he was dead - the mother was a widow. He was an only child.</
subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr R. They used to get a house - rent a house, a nice house, it were always a nice house - live in it until it wanted spring cleaning, then get another one.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. That was her idea, not his.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. Most remarkable. They had about half a dozen to a dozen houses in 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Guildford{\*\xmlclose}
. But Frank Callard was a very nice bloke, very nice indeed. Then there was old - old Seventy. Old farmer he was, and - very highly intelligent bloke too. And - he could swear - very very naturally. As
 if it was a part of him. Can you imagine that? It wasn't offensive in any way at all, but he'd - he'd swear in normal conversation.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 How would you see him just when he came in to help with the garden?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. Mm, he didn't live far from us, he li
ved down the road and he'd come up and do the garden, yes, and he did - say he did the garden, as he wanted it didn't he.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr R. Used to do the garden and - you were more - you were more friendly with - his }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid16646548\charrsid2252871 niece}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 , he lived with his }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid16646548\charrsid2252871 niece}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  and you were very friendly with her weren't you. He used to come along - and - the garden was his as far as we were concerned.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. He wouldn't cut our lawn 'til that was up here. Then he'd cut it all out and take - and make a little haystack down in his own garden with it didn't he. Kept a few chickens you see, he had a few chickens.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr R. He always scythed a - a lawn, he never - roll - cut it with a mover or - clips or any - anything of that fort. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Was there any friend that you'd have in for a meal sometimes? Early on?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. No, meals were too dodgy at that time, we were}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid16646548\charrsid2252871 n't having - see he was on late}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  end - days, there were no regular - no.</subject2>

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. Not that I know of, no, not that I know of, not in 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Guildford{\*\xmlclose}. We had a lot of visitors of course.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. Peacocks might have done opposite, sometimes.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. Peacocks - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Who were they then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. Well they went to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}America{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}, they were just a couple that lived opposite to us which we got friendly with.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. They were a member of - he was a fitter.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. And they had a couple of kiddies about our boy's age so that we were more or less friendly with them. They would come over. We'd go over there. But - o
therwise I said meals were all over the place, you couldn't - entertain as - at a regular time.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr R. In fact during the last - during the last war Peacock's son - visited us. From {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}America{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}, he came over with the American Army.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Did you make contacts with the music with anybody?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. They weren't musical were they, not particularly, no, No.</subject2>

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Were there any friends that you made through your music?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. Guildford wasn't musical very. Was it, nothing near as 
musical as Sheerness was. A very musical place, but that wasn't.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr R. No, I can't remember - no, old Tommy Poulter was a good pianist and all those sort of things but - he lived outside the town. He wasn't a singer. No, I can't - can't think of anybody like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. No, I can't remember anybody musical down our street at all, can you, any of them.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr. R. Musical?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. Mm. Nothing. They were all tradespeople and all trying to be better than the next door neighbour, that's about all I remember about them, that type of person. I don't think they - had any music about them.</subject2>
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 When you say a fitter you mean an artisan do you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. Yes, an engineers fitter. Yes.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 There are various kinds of fitter.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr R. Well - when - when I went into the dockyard there were - many grades of fitters, there was - electrical fitter - engine fitter, ship fitter - there was another sort, I forget what the other sort was, and we all had our p
articular - lines of demarcation about the work you know, and all that sort of thing. The - as you were - passed on the list or as your name occurred down - down the list of the examinations, so you choose your - chose your trade you see. I believe you he
a
rd this before hadn't you? I know that the ship fitters - were supposed to be the last. The engine fitters were first, then the electrical fitters. But - fitting today - is more or less - a back number. They're more or less all - only assemblers aren't th
ey.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 How was this other fitter than you mentioned so well off?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. Oh his people -</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr R. Oh you mean - Frank - Frank Callard? Oh no, he inherited his money. No, he inherited his money.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Can I just go back to bringing up chi
ldren, what did you feel as parents that a child ought to behave towards you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. I don't know, we never thought about that at all I don't think did we?</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr R. I don't ever remember consciously thinking of it, as a matter of fact. As far as I know - he was a very happy kid and - he behaved himself, he was rather exceptional in that way I should imagine.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. When he got a - when he got about - eight or nine I think he was older than we were. I think - I think so really, he had more - I was going to say more commonsense but - he wasn't so stupid then put it that way.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr R. I know we - well some - some years after he was in the sixth form at the Grammar School - one - his housemaster there - was a member of the
 political society called the Douglas People, do you remember them? That's right, Social Credit. And I used to run a series of lectures in our branch meeting, when the - when the business was finished, to make it interesting for the chaps you see, I used 
t
o have lecturers along there to - just talk about all sorts of things. And I said to the boy one day, I would like to get hold of - what was his name - Bowie, like to get hold of Bowie, Leiutenant Colonel Bowie. He said, why? I said, I want him to - give 
a lecture at our - branch, do you think he would? He said, yes, I think he would, he'd ve very pleased to. So he got hold of him. And on the - on the particular night of the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid16646548\charrsid2252871 lecture}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 , I arranged to meet Bowie - where we held our branch meetings which was in 
the pub, and - I met him outside the pub, that was at the Royal, and - he came along and I said would you like to have a drink? He said, yes, and we had a drink. And - we talked about all sorts of things before we went up to - into our meeting room, and -
 
he gave a very nice lecture. He was questioned about it and all that sort of thing, you know, I think he thoroughly enjoyed himself. Well when we - went home - I went to the end of our road with him and - I said, well, bye-bye, many thanks. He said, can I
 say something Mr Ratcliff? I said, yes, say what you like. He said - I've been looking at you, he said, and I think - the son is the father to the man. Now -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Looking back on the early times what did you feel that you ought to give to a child, what's the most important thing that you ought to give to a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. Education I think.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr R. I suppose the important thing was - to do what he - what he - what he - we - what we did give him. He had a good education. He had - he had n
o financial worries or anything of that description. He was always as far as I could see highly respected and - by the fasters and everybody else. And - he and his mother were very good pals. And still are. I think he had a - he had what - a normal happy 
kid should have actually, as far as I can see. That was out - without consciously thinking what he ought to have you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Suppose there was a conflict between pushing him on and enjoying himself, which would you think was the more important?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Oh, I shouldn't interfere.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. Enjoy himself. Yes. I don't believe in pushing him on, really at all. If they don't - pushing them on, enjoying himself comes first.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mr R. No, no. Oh no, didn't - he was never pushed. He - studied as he 
wanted to and he didn't study if he didn't want to. He had a room for himself down in Guildford, that - he could - had a little desk there and - he had everything that he wanted to study and he used to do a lot too. The thing that messed him up - was when
 he got pneumonia.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. Pneumonia when he was - sixteen, no, just at the wrong time.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr R. And pneumonia in those days - you didn't treat them with - MB tablets or whatever they call them, it was a very very serious complaint. And i
t took him - oh some years to get over it actually. No, he had to - pass - let - let go the - exam - examination the Civil Service that he had prepared himself for actually.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. Mm. It's not so bad with a young - bronchial pneumonia, it's not so 
bad with a young child really, as it is when they get older. He won't get it again probably, not if he got it then. But when you get it older you're liable 'cos you carry the germ don't you. Mm. But - she was very good really, with us, both of - really bu
t - no, I got on all right with her, my sister never liked her. For no reason that I could see really. But - and when we grew up older she wasn't much use to us.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Your stepmother wasn't?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. No. No, she - as children she was, she was
 ideal. She put herself out to play with us and take us everywhere and do this and that, but - we hadn't much in common when we got older really. And - my sister just got - you know, drifted away in her own way and - could - disliked her really. Mm. But I
 
liked her, I liked her to the end but - she didn't. It's funny isn't it. And - we were brought up the same, same way. Because my father was more or less like a mother as well to us, he had to be, in a way, yes, he was - wonderfully good with children.</su
bject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Very affectionate you mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. Mm, yes, and patient and - talked to - everything, yes, very very different. He was with my boy, more or less as I say, he - he learnt to read without being taught, but he - he would sit him on a lap and
 just - get his books and read known, the boy would follow and gradually - learnt it. Never no teaching at all, he learnt to read that way. And it was more from him really, he'd - talk to him and - like - terrific lot of patience. Yes. YES? HE'D come back
 
with a - childs book and he'd read it to me. He'd learnt it you see and there was no - of course that's another thing, you - there's no method that you can adopt to teach a child reading, they all want different, one child will learn to read under any met
h
od whatever. And the next child wouldn't learn - probably - slower, but then as the others - want teaching all the time, all the way, they've got to learn from memory haven't they, every letter and sound and word. It's all different. It's a job to know re
ally.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Do you think it was an advantage to you having had that experience with infants as a schoolteacher?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. It was with our boy because he was delicate, he didn't go to school 'til he was eight you see. When he went he could - he could -</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You taught to him yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. Yes, he was well - well away before he went. But he's - very very bronchial then as a - didn't go to about that age. That - there was that advantage because - I wouldn't have been able to hav
e taught him without - having - been a teacher I suppose. Of course he was very quick, I used to say then - he had about half an hour, an hour a day probably, no more, until he was eight. And he was really in advance of his age, with that little bit, that
 it shows - how much - is wasted doesn't it really.</subject2>
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 When did you first feel that he was sort of in advance?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. Well I had an idea what he ought to be you see when he got to school, they - they said he was, yes.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Were there any other women with children of the same age that you knew?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mrs R. Oh there's a girl next door, pretty dull. He'd fall asleep.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5447395 SR  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Mr R. Freddy - Freddy - Freddy Smith, oh quite a number of kids round about. Peacocks before they went away, Sonny Peacock.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 You wouldn't go pushing the pram around with some of the other mothers?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 K2  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 Mrs R. Oh no. Don't think so.</subject2>
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid4940319 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871 
Off the tape Mr Ratcliff told me that his grandfather, who died aged seventy-eight sometime before 1890 was a {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Thames{\*\xmlclose}
 bargeman, said to have been a smuggler, who invested profits in Sittingbourne small property, which he later lost. His father never drank, never swore, died in 1907 aged sixty-two, which I think was confirmed later on the tape. His mother 
was much the same age when they were married. When they were twenty-two, the eldest son born next year. So that the age range of the children is over twenty years. She died in 1919 aged seventy-two. The medicine he remembers at one point was licorice powd
er. Mrs Ratcliff's grandfather was a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid16646548\charrsid2252871 boat builder}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid13846497\charrsid2252871  from 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Cornwall{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}, and as an oldish man came to Sheerness dockyard and her father was a shipwright in the dockyard.
\par }}