{\rtf1\adeflang1025\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\adeff0\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang2057\deflangfe2057{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}{\f38\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f39\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f41\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f42\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f43\fbidi \froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}
{\f44\fbidi \froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f45\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f46\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f48\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}
{\f49\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f51\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f52\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f53\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f54\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}
{\f55\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f56\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden 
Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs20 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}}
{\*\latentstyles\lsdstimax156\lsdlockeddef0}{\*\revtbl {Unknown;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid752558\rsid1009338\rsid1377173\rsid1461268\rsid1967946\rsid1983817\rsid7030205\rsid7607523\rsid7618163\rsid8213171\rsid10178391\rsid13847602}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 11.0.0000;}{\info
{\title Information about interviewee}{\author PRASAD3}{\operator lhorto}{\creatim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min9}{\revtim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min9}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords27471}{\nofchars156585}{\nofcharsws183689}
{\vern24613}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 http://schemas.microsoft.com/office/word/2003/wordml}}\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1800\margr1800\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0\ltrsect 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\donotembedsysfont0\donotembedlingdata0\grfdocevents0\validatexml1\showplaceholdtext0\ignoremixedcontent0\saveinvalidxml0\showxmlerrors1\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace180
\dgvspace180\dghorigin1800\dgvorigin1440\dghshow1\dgvshow1\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\splytwnine\ftnlytwnine\htmautsp\nolnhtadjtbl\useltbaln\alntblind\lytcalctblwd\lyttblrtgr\lnbrkrule\nojkernpunct\rsidroot7030205 \fet0
{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}\ilfomacatclnup0\ltrpar \sectd \ltrsect\linex0\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ltrpar
\ql \fi-461\li461\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid752558 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\ul\insrsid752558\charrsid16072257 Information about interviewee}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid752558 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid752558\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\ql \fi-461\li461\ri0\widctlpar\tx2057\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid752558 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid752558\charrsid16072257 Date of birth}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid752558    \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid752558\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid752558  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8213171 1899}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid752558\charrsid16072257 
\par Gender}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid752558           \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid752558\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid752558  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8213171 F}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid752558 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid752558\charrsid16072257 Marital status}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid752558 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid752558\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid752558  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8213171 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid752558\charrsid16544153 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid752558\charrsid16072257 Occupation}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid752558 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid752558\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid752558  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8213171 Cook}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid752558\charrsid16072257 
\par Geographic region}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid752558 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid752558\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid752558  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8213171 London}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid752558\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\qj \fi-461\li461\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid752558 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Can I ask your name?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Rose Embleton.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What was your year of marriage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh - 1926.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What year were you born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 1899, November the first. 1899.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Where were you born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 London Road, Gayward Street. Elephant and Castle.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Do you remember how many years you lived in the house you were born in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Well not very long 'cos we went
 to live with our Granny in Bower Street. That was in - same as London Road and my granny lived in her house fifty years to the day she - she died.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Why did you live with your grandmother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Well we all went to - we all - my mum went to live there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 With the whole family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Yes. Yes. My granny had the house and my mother had the rooms - on top.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 How old do you think you were when you went to your grandmothers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh, I suppose I was about - twelve months to - two years, 'cos my sister
 was born within that time. She was - there's thirteen months between me and my sister. And there was thirteen months between my sister and - the boy. But my mother lost the boy when he was nine months old like through fits how they used to have these fit
s. So that was that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 So you've only got one sister?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Well I don't know where she is now because it's a long since I seen her but - so - I know she used she used to live at Walworth somewhere but - whether she's moved from there I don't know.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Do you know how old your father was when you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Oh he was only a young man. Well my mother - my mother really - as - the year as I worked - I was twenty and my mother was thirty. So - that's all I know, that my mother was - she got married w
hen she was young. But - but as for me father, I - I don't know how old he was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 You think he was quite a young man?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 He was a young man, oh yes, yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Do you know where he came from?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh Ireland. Dublin.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did he come over as a child or as a young man?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Oh he come over as a child - like. And - he was over here I think and - it wasn't 'til later he brought his mother and - 'cos she couldn't hardly speak - she spoke more of a - Irish brogue or a - you know what I mean, that - o
h nice old lady she was but - nice old lady. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What was your father's occupation?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
He was - he was a - to do with the horses, a stableman as you could call 'em. He worked at - now when we had the - when they had the - horse buses, I think in t
he Old Kent Road was - Tilling's - can't really - Tillingly's but - he used to be, then he used to go to the sales at the Elephant and Castle and - where every Monday and Thursday used to be - a - sales for horses. Yes. Then if he - if anybody like bought
 so many horses and he did, he used to have to take 'em - like and they used to come out from the stables on the -on the loops and he'd - he'd - like walk 'em to where they had to go. Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Is that the only job you remember him doing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 He never done no more. No, he was always a - to do with the horses.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did he ever have any part time jobs or casual jobs besides that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Who?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Your father.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No, not as I know of. 'Course he was - well I can't say that - he wasn't a very good fath
er. Not with my old mum, she was a good woman. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Was your father in the war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
No. No. Because when I was eleven - I was eleven, I think I was eleven, well - getting on for thirteen, my sister was - getting on for twelve then, he left home and 
he took every penny my mother had. Pinched every penny she had. She was hardworking woman. Yes. And my old mum used to go to work, my old granny like - she - this morning she go up and make the beds and she heard the door go and he hollered out, he said, 
S
usan. Always called my old granny Black Eyed Susan, from me old grandfather. Susan, tell Tops I - I met another. He went out with what he took out the drawers and that and he took my old mum had - so many sovereigns under the - the carpet in her front roo
m
 what they had them days, and - he went away and he took every penny. Well when - when my mum came home from work on the night time my old granny said, she said, James has gone away Tps. She's gone upstairs and come down, she said, well he's took every pe
n
ny I got. And 'course - I had a very good aunt. And - like - with her first children was twins. Well she lost 'em. She never had no more after that. Well she always looked after me and my sister. And 'course - my mother went over to her, she said, he's go
ne and - she says, get out a warrant for him, you know. My mother said, no, let him go. 'Cos he used to come home and - pull her, 'cos she had a fine head of hair, used to pull her all round the room like of a night.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 You - remember that even as a girl?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
I - well - me and my sister. And - any old how - my mother said, no, let him go, she said, perhaps I'll be better off without him. And my aunt said, all right. Well of course she - really - looked after me and my sister like you know, having no chil
dren of her own, always helped my mother with us two. But we always had a good life you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 You didn't see much of your father after that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 We - we never seen him for thirty odd years. Well I never. But it was after this last war - he went and 
knocked on my mother's door. And - I weren't - well I wasn't there anymore, my mother lived with my sister. And - they - they - he come to the door with my uncle, he was a - he was in - well years ago he used to be in the - Fifth Lancers and - in the band
,
 'cos he never got married 'til late in life and 'course, he always knew where he was. And of course I suppose after the war - he was - took - took him round to my mother's 'cos he knew where we lived - where my mother lived with my sister. 'Course my poo
r
 old mum's opened the door 'course - my uncle says - that's all I can say well what's my mother told me. My uncle said - Tops, I've brought you a stranger. And - my father said to her, do you remember me Alice? Always call her Alice my father. 'Course soo
n
 as she heard his voice she said, get away from here. Get away - how comes you coming here, after all them years, thirty odd years? Well of course - on the night time - knock comes on my door, it's my sister. So I said, whatever's the matter? Oh, she said
,
 Bella - 'cos they never call me Rose, it's always Bella, so she said, Bella, she said, you don't know who's turned up today? I said, I don't know, I said, well who? So she said, dad. I said, dad? I said, I'd like to see the bastard, I said, excuse me, I 
s
aid, I'd kill him. So she said, oh, she said, mum's in a terrible state she said. It's so upset her. So - any old how I said, all right, I'll come down. I went down, I said - oh, she said, Bella, she said, what a - you know, God, she said, when he spoke. 
S
he said, I wouldn't have known - I wouldn't have known him. She said, but how he spoke, he speaks like you. Cor, I said, I'd like to have been here. I said, I know where I could land one of them. Of course - like - after that no more, we never heard no mo
r
e 'til - he was - like his - he'd been took ill. I think he went away to the Welsh mines and I think and he lived with a woman, know what I mean. Don't really know but that's surmising. Because his landlady, this landlady sent for the priest. Well I said,
 he ought to have a priest, he was never a good - he sent for the priest for the last - you know, rites and everything, what he wanted. But there you are. Well that's the last - that was him. And that's me life of me father.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 You didn't really know your father well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No. Only as we was kids. Yes, but he was a - no, he was a real right - really right bad man, he was really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Was he good to the children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh, there was only one he -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Was he good to you children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh to me, to my sister, but - he'd always go for my sister, I don't really know. I don't know, really know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Was he an affectionate sort of man, did you feel very close to him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh, he was very - he wasn't - no, he never made a lot of fuss of us, no. But - I will sa
y that - if ever there was any trouble like such at school one day he did come round to the school for us, know what I mean. And I was always a bit scared of him because he - he could be a very - very nasty kind of a man, but he come through and - that wa
s
 because - one of the teachers at the school had hit my sister and she suffered with her ears, she'd been under - like operations with her earns and - I'm going through to put - and I used to be the - the monitor for the - the headmistress at the school a
n
d I used to go and put her potatoes on, that's about half past eleven and as I walked through I could see this Miss Sheffield - Miss Bates, I can never forget - I can always remember - and she did I could see her hit my sister. Of course I run round don't
 
I - I said, don't you hit my sister like that. I said. And 'course - when I goes home - my old granny was a good woman. I said, 'ere gran, I said, that teacher at school has hit Lil round the ear, see. My father's coming through so - so he said, what did 
y
ou say? I said, nothing. He said, what did you say? I said, well, I said, that teacher at school, I said, been and hit our Lil round the ears. Oh, he said, did she? Said, I'll be up there see about it. Dad, don't come up, I said. He said, I'll be up there
.
 'Course I used to - being the monitor I used to - if anybody rung on the bell afternoon I used to have to go and - and one of the girls I used to sit with, old Ada Heath, I said, oh, I said, got an idea my dad's coming up today. I said, oh, I said, over 
m
y Lil this morning. All of a sudden the bell's gone see. She looked, she said, 'ere Rose, it's your dad. Cor, I said, I gets up, goes and opens the door, says, oh dad. It's all right, don't worry, don't worry, don't worry, you see. Goes in. So the headmis
t
ress said - who is it Rose? I said, it's my father. She said, your dad? She said, what for? Oh, I said, well he'll tell you. Of course she says, hello Mr O'Rorke. O'Rourke. O'Rourke. Hello Mr O'Rourke, she said. Well, he says, how comes that teacher hit m
y
 daughter round the ears? You know she's been under - operations with her ears, see. So she says, who? Well, he said, that's what my - my girl told me, my Rose, see. So of course she's had me in, said, Rose I want you. I said, yes, I went to put your pota
t
oes on, and, I said, I see - her hit my sister round - then I went round to her, see. Oh out comes her and that see. Yes, she said, admittedly I did. And my father said, don't ever hit my - daughter again because she's been under operations with her ears.
 
And if you look round - 'cos she did. She had a lump of - skin grafted from her thigh and put to the back of her ear see. She always suffered with her ears. So that was that. But - otherwise he - that's all I can ever remember him - standing up for us at 
- I suppose he would have done if we - but we never got in no bloody trouble. Ah well, that's all there is that kind of thing then So -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Do you ever remember him being out of work when you were a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Well - no, he was always in the - it wasn't
 much money like, but - he - although he went - he never give my mother no money. No. No. No, she was very lucky if she got any money off of him, I'll tell you that. She always had to go to work, my mother. Always. Worked hard. Seven - seven in the mornin
g to gone seven at night, and on a Saturday - she never got home 'til nearly half past eleven where they had to scrub all the stools in the restaurants before they come out. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Your mother worked in a restaurant?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 My mother worked hard. Yes, 
in - in Covent Garden. Yes. Yes. That was Mr Beadles. In Russell Street. Beadles in - Covent Garden. And they used to have - early morning breakfasts' was like - baked dinners and early morning she used to be in there and do 'em. Yes, that's where my aunt
 
worked for him, and my mother worked. Then when my aunt left - that's when I went and worked in Covent Garden for her then in a little coffee shop. She opened a little coffee shop and that's where I went and worked for her - when I was fourteen. Left scho
o
l. 'Cos I always wanted to go in the print. And my mother said, well go and help your aunt Rose out, she said, for a few weeks, and then - I'll see if I can get - I said, I don't want to go in the Garden, mum. That's how it was. That's how - so - she had 
t
he - coffee shop and I used to have to take - 'cos we only had a little - gas stove in like this little place, and I used to have to take - all the big meats and the - trays of potatoes down to Middlemass' in Covent Garden, he was - Middlemass' was the - 
b
akers and - in Floral Street, and he used to bake it all and - a certain time I used to go down and pick it up and - take it all through and - they used to carve it up for the dinners. But - oh yes, you can - it was a - very - you know, good life. You kno
w, happy life really, because - Covent Garden market was full of life, you know what I mean.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Your mother obviously worked hard when you were a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Yes. She did. She did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Is that the only job she did, do you remember her working anywhere else?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Oh yes, she had to - when - when - when Mr Beadle - give up the job, sold over she kept with a man and then - all of a sudden like she used to - because it was underground kitchen, and I used to go down to meet her like of a night, and - she sa
id, I don't know, she said, something wrong with the gas here. I said, well mum, be careful, 'cos, I said, if you go and open that oven, I said, you'll - it'll blow up in your face, see. Well, of course, this day she's there. And they - where they used to
 be was all the drippings and - down the walls and all that used to - be all wet on the ground, well they have to put all straw, see. Well of course she's gone to open the oven. This oven's half blew}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid1461268\charrsid1983817  out, lit up with the other, bl}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 ew up, all the straws gone 
alight all in her face. Yes. Well of course they've - got a taxi haven't they, to take her to Charing Cross Hospital. Of course she had to have like a mask. Well of course the - the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1461268\charrsid1983817 \endash }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817  what}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1461268\charrsid1983817 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid1461268\charrsid1983817  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1461268\charrsid1983817  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
name, the - gas man said if there was ever a - a - you know }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1461268\charrsid1983817 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817  what}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid1461268\charrsid1983817 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1461268\charrsid1983817  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1461268\charrsid1983817 \rquote  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
name here he said - cos - when she was away he said, you'd better have your fortnight's holiday, the guv'nor. You can have a fortnights holiday and five pound. Of course, she took that money. Them days, once you took any money you was done, she co
uld have - she could have claimed like - a lot of money but - not a lot of money like today but she could have but she never. And of course after that they sacked her. Well yes. Well of course I've got a job in - in - Cambridge Circus in the Cock Tavern. 
A
nd I'm the kitchen there see. And - I was veg cook. So - our cooks, I don't know what happened to her, I don't know, so - the missus said to me, got any idea - else who's - could take - will you take? No, I said. No. But I - you know, I wouldn't take on c
o
oking you see. I could have done but I - I wouldn't do it, see. No, I said, I'll tell you what. I said, my mum's out of work. I said, she's a cook, I said. All right, she said, fetch her over Sunday night to see me. I went over to her, I said, here mum, I
 
said, there's a job going if you like to take it on. She said, I've never been in a pub have I? I said, it don't matter about that, I said, you've got a - go with the times now. You're out of the market. I said, it'd be no - I said I'm in the - I'm in the
 
kitchen, I said. 'Cos my mother couldn't read or write you know see. And of course - she said, how will know like when the - well, I said, I'm - I'll take the tickets up you know and I could call you out. But she'd got a wonderful memory. Didn't matter ho
w
 many dinners you called out, as they come up, they come up how they was see. So - she said - I'll give it a week's trial, see. So she said, all right, I'll come with you. And I went over to see the missus. So, like, you know, she said, Else, she said, 'c
o
s her name was Rose, the Guv'nor said, better name you Else you see. So - so - so she said, all right, she said, well, I said, she's a bit nervous you know, I said. So she said, all right, she said, Else, tell your mum would she like to do it for a week's
 
trial, see. So - we got on all right and all that like you know, calling out. I said, mum do you think you'll - you'll like it? Oh she said, yes - yes I will. 'Cos we worked for a very - a very good guv'nor. His name was Ingham, it was his own pub really.
 
Right, the - Cock Tavern, Shaftesbury Avenue, opposite the Cambridge Theatre. So - good guv'nor. So - he said, all right, he said, Else, your mum's going to start. I said, yes. So - got on all right and that. Towards the Christmas time - we always had one
 
big room, it used to be the Buffaloes room on a Monday, but - it - it was let out for - all the girls in the pantomimes. And this year - this song, whenever it comes on the tele. When the Red Red Robin comes bob bob bobbing along. Well of course - they wa
s
 every day dancing, when the red, red robin comes bob, bob, bobbing along. Any old how one of the girls come out and said - 'course they never got paid them days while they was rehearsing see. She said, could you give me a glass of water? So - any old how
,
 our guv'nors gong through, so he said, what are you -oh, I said that girl wants a glass of - I said, they're drinking water all the time. Give 'em a pot of tea, he said. Give 'em a pot of tea, and - and do some bread and butter for 'em and take it in to 
'em, see. Which we - oh he was a good man. We took 'em into 'em. Can always remember that song when it comes on. When the red, red robin comes bob, bob, bobbing along. Them girls had to work hard them days.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 They didn't get paid much did they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 We
ll they never got paid while they was ; rehearsing. No, never got paid, no. There you are, that's - that's just one of them things that - that's from that - although when I went to this man for a job - I'd been in the - Angel Street bars and I'd been work
i
ng six months - on the swimming department, 'cos I used to swim a lot years ago, see. So - I was out of work and I went up and - can you like - yes, and I can swim you see. 'Cos I was only a young woman then. So he said - right, will you take on a - looki
n
g after - in the swimming department? I said, yes, all right. That was Angel Street baths. I went from there, I used to look after the - going swimming, I used to look after the - the coppers used to from Bow Street, they - they used to have their - Gala 
nights and used to swim in their - we used to have to do coffee or - whether they had beer and all that we used to have to look after 'em. Ah we've had some happy times. Yes. Never mind.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Your mother wasn't Irish, did she come from London?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1461268\charrsid1983817 No, my mother was a London}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
er. My mother was born and bred in London Road. No, it was only my father, he come from Dublin. But - that's - no, that's all their - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Was your mother quite young when she had you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh - yes. Well my mother was only twenty 
years older than me - my mother was about twenty when I was born. So my mother was nearly always - twenty years older, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 That's not a lot is it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No, she was only a young woman my mother. No. No, she was good woman.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did she work before she was married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Well she had to - they went to work when they was thirteen, when they was eleven my mother used to have to - what, my old granny had - eighteen children my old granny. And when my mother got married - she had twin sisters laying d
ead, like, you know, they was - been - twin sisters when my mother got married and really - it - if - after my mother - I'd had aunts and uncles - younger than me because they died off. My granny had a - a big family. My grandfather was a blacksmith.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 A lot of her children lived did they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Yes. Oh yes, my - my mother - they always - yes, fourteen, my mother was - a - the - brothers and sisters of fourteen. Had Uncle }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1461268\charrsid1983817 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817  what}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1461268\charrsid1983817 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1461268\charrsid1983817  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1461268\charrsid1983817  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 name in the '14 war in the - on the submarines. My old - my Uncle Alf wa
s in the 9th Lancers. He - he left - he left home and went and joined the Army. When he was about - I suppose - fifteen I think, I don't know, my old granny always said. But he got killed in - 19 - got killed in 1915. He was out in - in India, all over th
e
 place for so many years, and then he come back here and then he got married here, and then 'course during that war time he got married, he'd - got a little baby and - then the war broke out, the '14 war, and - of course the 9th Lancers and all that they 
all got cut up didn't they at - Ypres they call that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 So when your mother was at work who used to look after you two girls?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh my granny. Oh yes. My granny, we always had our breakfast of a morning when we went to school. My gran and grandfather.
 We always said we had two mothers and two fathers, always. Good old girl. Yes. My old grandmother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 How many rooms were there in the house when you lived with your grandmother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh we had a six roomed house. Six roomed house in Bower Street, Lond
on Road. Oh yes. Yes, that's - that's like the - front room and the kitchen, two rooms and two at the top, yes. Granny and grandfather had the back room, me and my sister had the front, my mother and father had the back, she had the front room for her fro
nt room, my granny had that for her front near the kitchen. We all lived together. We all lived together, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 You didn't have anyone else living there, no lodgers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh no. No, no, no. No. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you ever have anyone to help in the house in your family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
No, me and my sister had to - we done - I used to have to - my mother was a hard woman where that was - I went to the baths when I was fourteen to do the washing. No, my mother, she used to go - come home on a Monday, that was her h
alf a day, and she used to take the washing, we'd go to the baths. And one day she said to me, come on you, she said, I'll take you to the baths, so you can see - 'cos when I got in there the women said, fancy fetching her in this heat. She said, well she
'
s got to learn to do it. Well then after a time - like - my mother said, well, she said - I went to work 'til I was about - after I left school went to work - to work for me aunt and - when I was eighteen I packed up work. That's it. My mother said, well 
y
ou go to the baths and do the washing.; You look after the place here and see to the house, I'll give you so much. Which she did. Oh she was very good, yes. I did, I used to look after the house, do the washing and the ironing. She used to be a cook, and 
she used to have - big white aprons and the old - blouses with the - stripes and the - used to iron 'em, they didn't iron and that you'd be found out - thrown outside your door.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you do your washing at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 I used to take it to the baths. Yes
, I used to go about half past eight Monday morning 'til - half past five Monday night, doing the washing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Who did it before you did it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 My mum.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would she take a day off work to do the washing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Half a day. Half a day. That was her day off. That was her day off, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did your mother ever mend or make any clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No. No. No. My aunt - we had a good - a very good - I tell you, my aunt, she always brought our clothes, brought all our clothes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would she buy them new?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh - well you - no, and my mother used - we used to - my mother used to take us to the - shop -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 You said your aunt used to buy your clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh yes. Oh - oh funny, I've got no photos. And - my sister's got all them and I - all our - she - she u
sed to - buy all our clothes, yes, because - really she - I think I said last week that she like married and she - had - had like a - like me - well - miscarriage like with twins, she never had no more children, of course that was really the parting of he
r
 and her husband like but - of course she always used to - my mum and all - like us, she always used to - you know, well she really kept my granny 'cos she - like - you know, lived - had a good - job with the guv'nor where my mother worked, they all worke
d under this guv'nor. And of course - she used to - well we used to go over on a - a Sunday morning to him and he had a - big old fashioned bat, straw bonnet kind, it's all filled up - with three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid1461268\charrsid1983817  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 penny bits. And he used to say, you're your hand in and take 
out as many as you like. And we used to put our - yes, we used to put our hand in and take out - and he used to say, well come on, I'm going to take you for a ride. And in - in - just off of - by Drury Lane Theatre used to be - a yard what they used to ca
ll - Colston's yard where all the horses used to go like from - Drury Lane painter}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1461268\charrsid1983817 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
man and all that, and he used to have a horse and trap down there and - we used to - go out Sundays and - he used to take us out, me and my sister with my aunt and - yes, yes. We'd have some lovely times. Happy times.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 How often would you have new clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Oh - oh every time there was a - the - such as these - Easter, Whitsun and if we was going away for a fortnight's holiday we all had - like clothes to go away for a fortnights holiday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Where would she buy clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Oh - in Walworth Road like. Old Herlocks, years ago there used to be a - a great big - place on the - left hand side like in Walworth Road, used to be called Herlocks and - they used to sell like all different things, costumes, men}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1461268\charrsid1983817 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
s things and - hats, draperies and - used to go there and - you know, she - if you - you say, couple of coats for the girls and - what do you like? Say, that. See how it fits her and - you always - that was yours. Yes, she was a very good aunt.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would your mother mend clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
No. No. I can only remember my mother once - she went - we went - was down the Walworth Road, where we're talking about, Herlocks, and outside Herlocks was - a - a rack with all straw ha
ts, they was a penny farthing. Penny farthing each see. So - oh, I said, I don't want one of them mum. See - they were like - nothing on 'em like. I don't want one of them mum. She - she said, hold your row, see. So - she's gone and got some ribbon and so
m
e cherries - they used to be about - penny or two, I couldn't tell you now. And she - sat and trimmed the hats. Funny, we had - row of ribbon on a - you know, bunch of ribbon here and we had cherries here. You never see such two pretty hats in your life, 
and she never done a bit of - you know, never, 'cos my old granny used to do the sewing you know. No, never done, because she used to have to go to work. Used to work hard, she had not time for - doing any sewing. My old gran used to do that. Oh yes.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would you have new shoes or second}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1461268\charrsid1983817  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 hand shoes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh no, no, never. Never. No. My mother, I can always remember, she had our shoes made for us. From Leonard}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid1461268\charrsid1983817 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 s, on the corner of Walworth Road, and I remember when my father left - left home and took all t
he money, she said that - well you'll never be able to have - your shoes and your boots, like 'cos they used to be boots more than - oh some - something's fell out the window. And any old how - she said, and I remember she took me to get a pair of shoes t
o
 go to school with, 'cos with them days we used to take - after a time we'd take our Sunday shoes or boots for days, and we'd have a new pair see. And - and I remember - she's took me and we've had a - put a pair of shoes on, I said, I don't like these sh
o
es, they're too hard at the back, see. And of course I've wore 'em and they've give me a bit of a sore at the back of the heel. Well - I said, I can't wear these shoes mum. She said, well I don't know, she says, you'll have to put up with it, she said, yo
u
 can't have any best shoes now. I said, I'll try to find that bastard. See, I'll find that bastard, I said. So she said, well never mind, she said. And it's funny, my mother had her fortune told. An old girl used to come round - tea cups, she used to come
 
and see my old granny and - she said, all right Tops, she said, my mum's come in this afternoon, all right Tops, she said, I'll tell you're your fortune, she said. Oh, she said - you're a bit hard up now, she said, but, she said, in time - you'll come rou
n
d, you'll never be hard up, you'll be able to - build up, she said, so don't worry. And it's funny, my mother - like after a time she - she always had a - always got a few bob that - she was never - never without, know what I mean? Yes. Yes, it's funny th
at. But - oh - she were - she was a good old mum. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did your father ever do any shoe repairs when he was at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No. Leave off. My old grandfather done all that. He used to mend our shoes and - although sometimes my mother used to send them t
o the snobs but he always - him, he was a very good old grandfather. Good old carpenter, he could put himself - he could put his hand to anything. Christmastimes when he - when he packed up work, he used to go - go and - go and get some wood and he'd make
 - engines, great big engines and - cart, like the old tip-up cart years ago, perhaps - well you wouldn't know about them. Like they used to be a tip up cart with the two wheels, he used to do that, put all - he used - have - ask us for the p}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1461268\charrsid1983817 earl off of our coats, like, co}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
llars, put on the horses. Make 'em all. Make 'em all out and I used to take 'em round the pubs and put 'em up for - you know, raffles for Christmas. And got him a - got him his - his beer money for Christmas. Yes. They lasted years. And the
 man next door to us - and he got talking to my grandfather, he said, do you think you could make me a - a wardrobe? My grandfather said, yes, I think - I can. So, he said, well, he said, so my grandfather said, what kind do you want? He said, well have a
 
look in - you know, the furniture shops. And see - like what you think. And he did, he said, I want so much, you know, like wood and all that. He made him a - lovely big - wardrobe and he just next door. He was a - he was a - a blacksmith but he was a fir
st class carpenter. Well a craftsman, yes, yes, anything, yes, he could. He could cook. Christmas he used to do all the mince pies. Yes. Yes. Used to make all the mince }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1461268\charrsid1983817 
pies for Christmas, my old grann}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 y used to make the Christmas pudding and put 'em in the old copper, like, used to boil you know. He used to make the mince pies. Ah yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would your grandfather help your grandmother in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What - well - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would he do any cleaning or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 He wouldn't do no cleaning
, he'd do cooking and - you know, help out like you know, or clean windows you know but - of course he - when he was a younger man, not so much as he got older 'cos - we used to clean the windows, me and my sister and that but - no, he would never - he us
e
d to clean our - we never knew what it was to clean boots or shoes. He used to clean all our shoes and put them all - all along the - the floor you know. Then as we got older, about sixteen or seventeen, we used to give a couple of bob at the end of the w
e
ek to keep all our shoes you know. That was his beer money or his 'bacco money, whatever you like to say. Oh yes, we had a - we had a really happy - really happy home, I can look back - on happy childhood. I can. 'Course there was - bits of squabbles at t
i
mes with me father and me grandfather but - I can always say - 'til he went away and it was - well it was peace on earth as you might as well say when he went but - no, we had - there was a - we was a family that always stuck well, like as kids but - of c
ourse then every Christmas all my mum's brothers and sisters used to come to the house and - like all those stop for, you know, make do and - yes, we used to have some lovely times. That's - that is -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would your grandfather do any decorating in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Oh yes. Yes. Yes. He used to make all the trellis work for our - all outside our door where the creeper used to come over. Gardener, he can do all gardening. Yes, he used to be - he was a very clever man my old grandfather.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would he light the fires at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Yes. What - used to - what, he used to do - yes, he'd - you never had to get up and make a cup of tea of a morning, he'd get up. He'd fetch us all up a cup of tea in bed with a bit of toast and - you know. Oh no.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would your father help in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
No, he wouldn't help. Him? No, not him, he got up when the - nearly time for the pub to open and out he'd go. I think that's one way I think I - take after him. Yes, yes. I'm not a - not as wicked as him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would your father do anything for the children when he was at home when you were young. Would he dress you or undress you, things like that?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh I don't know, well - of course - with that we never had to ask him, like, as we was ready for bed - and that, like, my mothe
r used to like - we used to be washed of a night and - she'd do our hairs and - my sister was always ready for bed, but me - with me, no, I - I'd never want to go up to bed, I always used to be - no, I don't want to go, I don't want to go to bed yet. And 
m
y old grandfather used to say, come on Lil, he always give us a piggyback up the stairs to bed, he'd give us always this piggyback up to bed. But - no. I used to say, don't - don't put that light out. Don't put that light out 'til I'm asleep. No, all righ
t, don't worry about the light, we won't put the light out until you're asleep. But - I was always a frightened of the dark. My sister used to go up - until - as I got older but - oh no, I'd never go to bed, I never wanted to go to bed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What time was your bedtime then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh well, we used to - we used to be allowed to stop up you know that - you know -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 You'd always have someone put you to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh yes, well - what, we was never left alone. Oh no, no. My old granny'd be there if - well my mo
ther never hardly used to go out. I don't think my mother drunk 'til she was about twenty-five. No, she always used to come home and - you know - you know, I suppose them days used to have to - do the ironing. Well she used to come home on a Monday and go
 to work - go to the baths you know and do the washing for us all. But - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 How old would you be when you put yourself to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Well we never - oh, when I put myself to bed? Oh I suppose about thirteen, I mean -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Quite old?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh yes. Yes. Oh yes, we never - no, about thirteen and we used to say goodnight and up to bed, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Can you remember your father ever reading to you or telling you stories?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh no. No. No, nor my mum. No, no. No, we never had nothing of that. My old grandfath
er used to tell us all tales about - you know, although I think it was all, you know, about when he was a boy and all that, I don't know, perhaps it was real because - he come from Wiltshire like, and he always - and then he always said that he had - he h
a
d twin sisters, but of course - although when he was - on the road to seventy - I writ to Wiltshire because he never had a birth certificate, I writ to the Town Hall there and it come back, it was right, he - he was there - he sent his birth certificate f
or - for his - seventy them days it was.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you ever go out with your father alone, would he take the children out for walks when he was at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh no, not my father, no, no. He - he - he used to either - he used to work opposite where we live
d in the bedstead place, they used to make all bedsteads. Well this Saturday morning he said, get the - get the girls ready, he said, and I'll take them for a ride down the country. So - I said, well can we take - a girl we used to be mates then? He said,
 
all right, take her. So my old gran, she said, all right, I'll do you up some sandwiches you know and that. So - it's funny, I can remember my mother's last words to my father, now, she said, you're taking - these children out. Now, she said, look after '
em. See? Well of course he's took us out, see, and we're all going along merry and bright and of course he's pulled up at a pub ain}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1461268\charrsid1983817 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 t he and - we're all there and out comes biscuits and lemonade and - you know. 'Course it's getting late see. I said, dad, co
me on, I said, let's get home, it's getting dark. So he said, that'll be all right. 'Cos them days they used to have to put a light on the side of the - horse and van, you know, like going along. Well of course he's going along, 'cos in a way he used to -
 
like he used to annoyed, and I mean the old horse I suppose was a bit - come on, come on, come on, he's hitting the horse. I said, no, dad, don't hit the horse like that. 'Course he'd - he'd hit the horse, the horse has kicked up the back and kicked all t
he shafts in. 'Course we're all crying ain}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1461268\charrsid1983817 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
t we. And we remember it to this day. Oh, I said, I don't know, I said, oh I said, I wish grandfather was here, I said. cor, he said, what am I going to do now? 'Cos he had to - he said, all right, stop there, he s
aid, the carts had it, the cart - and he pulled the horse out and put him like where the grass is. He's gone back to the pub. We've had to wait there. I don't know who come and got us home. Oh, my mother and granny and grandfather. Oh they was worried abo
u
t the girl that was with us you know. Oh - oh she said, you're father's done it. Oh, she said, Rose, I'm never going out with him again. I said, none of us will. My granny said, I don't know how you could have done that to them children, she said. Take th
em for a day out like that. Yes. Can remember in that kitchen. Well, he said, I - I said, you're cruel. You're cruel to horses. I said, look how you hit that horse, that's why he kicked the van in. He got the sack didn't he opposite.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would you go out with your grandfather?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
What, go all over the place with him, yes. Good old man our grandfather was. You know, really good old boy, yes. He'd - like if you - you know, granny went out, he'd get you your tea ready and - sit and do your toast or - you kn
ow, to make you a - 'cos as soon as we come in from school we used to say, well where's gran, you know. She won't be long, she's gone up the pictures or something. But - no, we had a good old granny and grandfather. Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you have anything you had to do at home, any little tasks?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Oh we - we all had to - I used to have to scrub my room out. And we - yes, we had to clean out and - and as we got older, our bits and pieces, my mother washed 'em but we used to have to iron 'em. Oh yes. Yes, we had
 to - and holiday times, when my mother, she had this - we - she always - we used to - oh - we used to dread Good Fridays, 'cos she used to pull the place all inside out because it was a day out - day off. Wash all the paint, oh, God, she used to be terri
b
le. My sister used to - and - and I remember when she first picked up with her chap. She married him after but - she said, I want to go out. So I said, 'ere mum, I said, it's holiday time. We want to go out. You get and - you finish what you've got to do 
t
hen you can go out. Oh - her bloke was waiting at the top. Oh dear. Yes. She was very - very strict there my mother in that way, although - it's - never done us no harm because we - we learnt how to - wash, cook and - clean a place, that's - never done us
 no harm. But we thought it was - we thought she was hard at the time but she wasn't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 How long did you go on doing these things in the house, when you left school did you stop helping?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No, I went to - into Covent Garden market like when I was - I
 told you fourteen like. And then fourteen - fourteen or - through the war - then after - when the war was - finished, the '14 war - I - was queer that was it, and I was at home, I had the 'flu and that, I was queer, so my mother said, well, she said - do
n
't worry about getting a job she said, show - be at home and look after the place, she said, and - she said, I'll you give you like - some - your wages at the end of the week. Oh, I said, it ain't like going to work mum. She said, well - wait and see how 
-
 that's how it was I used to - I used to clean the place and - do the washing and keep it all clean, six roomed house I used to do. My old granny was there and that you know but - suppose I done that like - and I - picked up with - like my chap, well I kn
e
w him before, like when I was - knew him when I was fifteen, he was a few year older than me. He was in the Navy and - after that - after that - war was over like we - went out and after a time we - like got married. That was that but - he - he packed up 
- he come out the Navy, he packed up and then he went in Covent Garden market, but I lived with me - lived with me mother for a time and then I - left there and went and - like in a couple of rooms. And that's - that's that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you have to help your younger brother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No, he died when he was - he died young. He died when he was about ten months old. No. There was only me and my sister. No, never.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would you have to do things for your sister or would she do anything for you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No, we all - 
we used to help one another. No. Help one another. And of course like my aunt, my youngest aunt, we - like she was a few years - younger than me, my mother's youngest sister, like, we used to all be practically at school together. Because like she got mar
ried in the '14 war but - but still stopped in like the house and of course then - when her baby was born I used to - practically look after him. And - at - at the finish he called me mum and called his mum May. Yes. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What room would you bath in when you were young?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Oh - oh the old kitchen when we was young we used to have a big bath on the kitchen table and - my mother and granny used to see to us, every Friday night, we had our baths every Friday night and - we had our hair dine up in a -
 a - rag and that's all - Sunday morning and then pulled down and we used to have - like - nice big bow and all that - Sundays mornings, oh yes, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 When would you have clean clothes to put on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Every week. Every week. No, every week. My mu
m used to go to the baths so all our clothes was - ready to put on. Sunday mornings we used to have our change. Clean clothes all put on for - like you know. And we always had - a best - frock for Sunday and the best boots for Sunday, and the old pinafore
s you know that used to be. Frills all round here at the front and that, oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Where would you have your meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 We all used to - feed together in the kitchen. We all had a great - we had a - a big table that used to come up on a - a big fl
ap on a Sunday, pulled right out and we all used to sit round. My old grandfather used to carve the meat. And my old granny used to put all the vegetable all on and used to give it all round to us. 'Cos it used to go to the - we used to have like - always
 
having like plenty of baked potatoes we liked, it used - the oven used to hold so much and then my old grandfather used to take the meat and another load of baked potatoes round to the - bakers on a Sunday morning and they used to - give you a ticket, you
 used to go round about one o'clock to get it and - fetch it home and of course it was - oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Were there any occasions when you'd eat in any other room?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Well all, no, we always ate in the kitchen, no. Unless there was a party and there was san
dwiches give out and it was in the - like what you call the front room and - they used to, you know, take the tray round with the plates and - you all helped yourselves for a meal, they put it on the table and you helped yourself from the plates. 'h no.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Where did your mother cook?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
What - oh the - the - the - the gas stove. And then there was a - good kitchen - ah, my mother never - my mother went to work all the week, she never done no cooking on a Sunday, it was my granny. She done - yes, grann
y and grandfather, they - no, ; my mother - that was her - Sunday morning she always had a lay in, no, being at work all the week that - my old granny used to get on with the veg - grandfather always done the - if it was peas in or beans. Out in the old y
a
rd we used to have another - a table against the wall what you could put up with a long - spike. He used to get out there and peel all the potatoes, put in a bath under the cold water tap for Sunday and the - peas done and - that, whatever veg was going, 
well cook - cut the cabbage up Sunday mornings and throw in the - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 When would you have breakfast?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh well, my grandfather used to fetch it up to bed. We all stopped in bed, he brought the breakfast up. He did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Was that every day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh
 no, no. I only said - on - only Sunday. Oh no, we used to go down like when we was at school, down - there used to be a boiled egg or perhaps - fried rasher or something like that. We always had something to go to school with, we never went without. No.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Was Sunday breakfast different?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
No, well - no, it it was - might be kippers or a bit of haddock you know. Yes, oh yes, because - on a Saturday I used to go up what we called the smoke hole and I used to get a shillings worth of kippers and bloate
rs and haddocks. And - 'cos there - they put in so many, if they was a bit broke the k}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1461268\charrsid1983817 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
ppers you had so many kippers - pairs of kippers put in, bloaters put in and - like the little haddocks. Smoked haddocks. Well you - you got a - you got a big koshel for
 about a shilling. Yes. You could all have a - you could all have a haddock and a poached egg on a Sunday morning. Eggs was about - what, yes, yes. And eggs then was about - I suppose - twenty-four for a shilling, 'cos they used to have 'em all in a great
 
big box opened up and you could - go and - you know - put 'em all in a basket and they'd come and - and then when it was pancake day you could go round the egg shop for cracked eggs. I - I have, I've took a great big basin round and got it filled up for s
i
xpence. Cracked eggs for - pancakes. You can go and get the lemons and they used to - my old grandfather used to make all the pancakes. Yes. Yes, pancakes. Used to go to school with a girl, she used to say, can I come home Rose? Yes. Old Ada, funny I ofte
n
 think of her. Can I come home? I used to say, gran can I fetch Ada Read home? Yes, I suppose you can, yes. Pancakes. 'Cos she was a - come from a big family and her mother - like she - like she aint never had no dad, her dad like died when they was young
. But - she always used to come home. Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What about the meal in the middle of the day, would you come home from school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Now - oh - our dinner was ready on the table, yes. We used to come home about - quarter past twelve I suppose. About quarte
r to one my granny used to put our - dinners up, had our dinner at quarter to one. Oh yes, always had a dinner and - our afters, always had a - a rice pudding or a - whatever was going, might be a bit of boiled duck, whatever they called it you know.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What would you have for the first course usually, what sort of meals would you have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Well we used to have - perhaps a bit of - steak pie. Or a - stew. Steak and kidney pudding, yes, oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What about Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh - well - what - was roast b
eef. Roast lamb. Roast - it used to be - one Sunday used to be roast beef, baked potatoes, Yorkshire pudding. If it was roast lamb used to be a big - boiled - pudding like with the gravy on it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What about tea, would you come home from school and have tea?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Oh yes, we always had like - bread and butter and - jam, marmalade and - perhaps sometimes my old grandfather used to get mussels, 'cos them days used to be - old boy used to come round with mussels lik}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid1461268\charrsid1983817 e about three ha'pence a quarter}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 , he used t
o buy a big - little - well a little bath like that, had it filled up and he'd - he'd have 'em on and you'd have mussels for your tea and - but - oh yes, we always had like a - little relish of some sort. No, we - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would your mother eat when she came in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Not 'til the night time, she had her supper with her - half a pint of - porter or - them days when I was a child.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you ever sing together round the piano?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh no, no, no, no, no. Not - when Christmas was on we all used to be sing
ing, know what I mean, but - never stood round the - I think me and my sister once stood and - I forget the song now. We stood and sang a - old song, I can't think of it now. But - not for us all to stand round the piano to sing. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would your grandparents or mother ever play any games with you girls?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Oh no, well my mother - my mother used to, you know, come home and sometimes, she had to stand ironing and - oh no, my mother could never - play games. Oh I know my old grandfather generally used 
to chop all the wood up like for the - winter and all that and - me and my sister used to have the whole - logs stood on the side, we used to think - we used to make out we were selling kippers and bloaters and we'd have bits of paper and put the kippers 
and bloaters in like we used to - you'd go and buy the kippers and bloaters, no, no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Were there any books in your house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No. Oh no. Oh we - perhaps have a couple of - oh comics or - couple of - story books, I forget now but - no, we never had
 a lot of books, no. Although we - we went to school, we was - you know - well I left in standard seven so them days - it was a - a good - a good - standard to leave in. My sister was a bit backward because she - she always suffered with her ears, she'd b
e
en under - bad operations with her ears and been away - like months from school that she was a bit backward that - but otherwise - we - we - like knew our drill. Well I finished up - the champion swimmer at the school when I left at fourteen. And I learnt
 my sister to swim. 'Cos they would never allow her to go swimming from school 'cos of her ears, well I took her and - I used to take her when I used to go like swimming of a night. I used to take her, that's how she learnt to swim but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you have swimming lessons from school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Yes. I - no, we learnt from - like we used to go to the baths and learnt - the - swimming teacher at the baths, used to be a swimming teacher at the baths.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 After school that would be in your own time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No, that - no, that was - like from - from school we used to go.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 As a proper lesson?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Yes, oh yes. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would you have any newspapers, would your grandfather read a newspaper each day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh well, they used to read the papers but we - we never 
had no - we never - 'cos them days used to be like a pink paper used to be with all the murders in that you wasn't - you wasn't allowed - no, not that, we could have a - buy such as a - one of my aunts used to have the Woman's - a little - a book like tha
t
, the Woman's Own or something, used to be about tuppence and - it - it told you how to make cakes and all that, that's how she learnt when she - like - 'cos she never could cook but that's how she learnt to make cakes and - all that when she got married.
 
But otherwise - although we used to go to - we used to go to cookery at school. And what else was it we used to go. Oh used to go laundry at school. Yes, used to have to take something to wash and iron you know and - then we used to go - to cookery and we
 used to - if it was pancake day we used to have to make a pancake you know that - yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 So girls were taught home making?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Yes. All that, yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Do you remember your mother or father reading much?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Well my mother couldn't read or wri
te. No, no. It was only after - years after when - she - like packed up you know and they paid her off her job and she went - she went on the labour and I took her up the Labour and - and I said to the lady - lady - woman behind the - said, my mum can't r
e
ad or write, I said. She said, all right, she said, not to worry, 'cos my mother said, I don't know whether I'm going to - I'm not going. I said, you go up mum and get a few shillings, I said, and - like - put a cross, you know, she - and after a time I s
aid to, come on, you try and write your name. Towards the end she could just write Topsy Rourke. Yes, she done that at the end, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 People didn't have the opportunities in those days did they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No, she - well she went to school when she was nine 
- she went to work when she was nine. Had to go out, yes. Yes. Yes, my - my granny had - well - to the average I think my granny had about twenty-four children by the way that - like she spoke. But - had one child every eleven months. And I mean them days
 you had to look after your own children, you never had the help what you get today. Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would you ever read to your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh no, my granny used to. Yes, now and a - like of a night, you know, well we used to have to go up to bed or that and
 - but she used to sit down and read to her and all that you know that - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Do you ever remember any funerals in your family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No. Oh no, only when my aunt lost a little boy, yes, a baby that - that was buried but - no, can't say we did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 You all went to that funeral did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Oh no. No. No. I didn't, no, not me, no. Not - my mother and granny did and like the father and mother but - oh no, 'cos it was only a young baby. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Do you remember if people used to wear mourning clothes at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Yes. Widows had long - long veils right down the back and all crepe all down here to the ankles. They - they wore 'em to - for twelve months. Yes, all deep crepe. Was terrible.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 So you could pick out a widow in the streets?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Yes. Yes, well she had a long black veil at the back. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 And people weren't allowed to go out much in mourning?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No. Yes, oh yes. Yes, oh yes. 'Course the - today they're more - they're more - what you can call - well I don't know, they're mo
re - they're not so - what can I say, they're not so - narrow minded. Years - years ago - 'ere - years ago if a girl got into trouble, my God she had to go - miles away out of it. Now look at today. Oh dear, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 I think this is a better attitude don't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Well I think so. Well all I can say that - you can always say like - if you've got a girl and like she's got into trouble you can always forgive her for the - first one, 'cos you never know that - you know, I'm not going to say - when they had 
- second or that, but - like - one, you - you can because you never know - you know - how it's occurred or what way or anything like that but - oh God. Well you - now you're talking about that, a girl I used to go with like when I was - well, I think I wa
s fifteen, and - 'cos she used to - like go out and all that you know, but - and - when I see her she said, 'ere, she said, Rose, she said, I want - I believe I'm going to have}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1461268\charrsid1983817 
 a baby. I said, what? Oh my Gaw}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 d, I said, whatever you going to do? 'Cos my mother}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1461268\charrsid1983817  always said, keep away - Maggie}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
 Jackson, keep away from Maggie Jackson. Oh, I said, my Gawd, whatever you going to do? She said, I don't know. Any old how she's gone into the - them days they was - like - our way was - Brook Street was like a work house
, so she said - if I go away, she said, will you come and see me? I said, of course I will, see. Any old how, her young sister she said, Nellie went away. So she said, she's in Brook Street. I said, all right, I'll go. I got cakes and - I don't know whate
v
er made me take 'em, I bought cakes and something. I've gone in. Oh, she said, hello. She had a little boy. So - hello, she said. I said, hello. Oh, she says, it's terrible in here, she said, I'm starving. I said, I - I said, I've got you some cakes and I
've got you some - fruit. Oh, she said, oh thanks, she said, thank you. Oh, she said, they're terrible in here. When they knew that she'd got a - had a baby and wasn't married it was terrible. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would she have kept the baby at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh ye
s. Yes. Her - her mother kept - oh they kept it for her. Oh no, well her mother after - her mother - her mother, when she went away, her mother didn't want to know but - then - not when I come out the hospital her young sister, of course they couldn't go 
i
n, not - you had to be a certain age you know, she's outside. Oh, I said, your poor Nellie, I said. Oh, I said, it's terrible, I said, she's starving in there, I said. Oh, I said, tell your mum to go and see her. So she said, you come round. Oh, I said, I
'
m not coming round to your mother, I said. So she said, you come round. It's funny, as we're coming along from the hospital like her mother's coming along. She said, hello, she said. I said, hello. I said, go in and see your Nellie, I said. I said, it's t
e
rrible. She said, do you - she said well - I said, don't know - I said, I don't know who it is. And you - that girl never divulged who that - who that was that - no, no. Never. And - I said, I don't - I don't know, I said. So I said, go and see her, I sai
d
, and take her something to eat, I said, she's starving. So she said, all right, I'll go in, she said, I'll go in tomorrow. Of course with that when she come out she took her home you know. And of course - oh - well after that she picked up with a fellow 
a
nd got married and all that but - of course I didn't know, it's funny though you talking about - Gawd, everybody in the street, they thought she was the worst girl in the world. But I said to her, Nell, I said, she said, I'm not saying who it is. I said, 
all right, I said, I'm not going to ask.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Was that a rare thing to happen in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No, it wasn't - it wasn't a - no, because your people were to strict you always had to - go in, you know what I mean that -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 You couldn't get the opportunities for these things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
No, no, no. I don't know - I don't know, well I couldn't say, she never said - I wouldn't - but that just shows you how it could - today they do it - they - although - you know, I think it's terrible though when you read some
 of these - things where they leave them little - look at that girl left that baby this week. She must have been - oh she must have been on her last -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did your grandmother ever bake her own bread, or your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No, well my mother's at - was al
ways at work all day. No, she never done like - used to go to work and come home, no. No, my old granny never baked her own bread. We used to go round the bakers and get the bread.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would she make her jam?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No. Oh no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Bottle any fruit or vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No. No. No, we - none of that, not there. Well really - them days it was too cheap to buy weren't, ay. You coul}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1461268\charrsid1983817 d go round and get ha'oorth of p}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 ot herbs. You'd have carrot, turnip, onion, any - no. Well it'd be - like - not London people e
ver done - I don't think so, might have been - country people done it. Not London people. Oh well they grew it and well they had it. No, not us, no. Oh no.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 So she didn't make pickles?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh - oh only - only Christmas. Used to get so many pounds of - pickled onions. Like pounds of - you know, onions, a little - pic}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1461268\charrsid1983817 k}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 ling onion, we all used to sit and - you know, peel 'em for Christmas, crying as well like. And she used to pickle her o}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1461268\charrsid1983817 w}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 n pickled cabbage you know. Get the old - red cabbage, you know, c
ut it and do that for Christmas but - no, no - never - never done - wines, no. No, all that kind of thing I think was only for country people.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 They didn't ever make beer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What about medicines, did your grandmother ever make her own remedies?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
No. No, we used to - she used to send us up the old - used to be a very old fashioned chemist at - used to get - although if - like there was ever - like a goose a cooked she used to save the - the - fat like to rub in your chest you know, b
ut - not to - not to - see used to go up the old fashioned chemists and get some - something like - used to be - epcechy wine or something used to be a - a red bottle and you brought it and it used to be about }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid1461268\charrsid1983817 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817  three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1461268\charrsid1983817  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
pence a bottle. Pippyannyquicky wine, it was a funny name and - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What was that for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Like a cough like. Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 It worked did it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Yes, and it used to be - Scotch emulsion, that was a very another old fashioned - that used to be like a - a - a white mixture and used to
 pour out very thick like. That was Scotch emulsion they used to call that, we used to have that sometimes if we had a bit of a cold but - oh no, they never made anything of their own.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you have a garden at all to grow any vegetables or fruit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
No, we only had a front - garden where my old grandfather used to do all the flowers and - and our - front of our house used to be covered in creeper, so he used to make like a trellis work for it all to - you know - run over, no. No, we never - no, we n
ever had much of a back, we had just a - little back yard you know but - never had nowhere where you could grow anything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would you buy fruit and vegetables?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh my old granny used to, you know, yes. Used to - you know, the greengrocers buy the 
veg and that, you'd have a few - oranges and apples a weekend you know for - or that. Or - years ago we used to go to the - greengrocers and what we used to call buy a ha'porth of specks. You got - orange or apple and it was bit bruised where they cut it 
out you'd - you'd have the - apple, pear or whatever there was in a basket he used to give it to you for a ha'penny or a penny. No. Well oranges and all that was about - oh - I suppose about eight a shilling and - orange - apples, golden knobs as \endash 
 three pence a pound used to be cheap all that kind of stuff. Not like today. You never see - what we used to call golden knobs was a little - lovely little apple that. Golden knobs, they used to be a lovely little apple. Be about three pence a - oh -

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Do you remember your mother or grandmother ever buying any tinned fruit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Oh - only - only Christmas we had like such as tinned fruit, like - you know, when - you know, everybody come Christmas, they'd open up a tin of pears or that. Pineapple. But - there al
ways used to be - you'd either have - apples cooked on Sundays for your afters and - apple tart made or - like a jam tart but - only practically Christmastime was - pineapple and - pears or peaches. 'Cos - years ago - I can always remember my mother alway
s - paying into what we called a - used to be like Littlewood\rquote s, they used to be a big - such as like Tesco\rquote 
s could be today but not as big, like was the old tea shop, the other side was the - the oil shop. Well Christmastimes, like all the year round my mo
ther used to put like perhaps ten bob or half a crown up to Christmas and - used to go in and get the sugar, tea, you know, whatever there was and perhaps say tinned fruit like you - you said, and that was all for like for the Christmas, for the - you kno
w
, 'cos like used to have a bit of - like a party, all her sisters and brothers coming. But - she always paid in for that and she used to go and get a big hock of bacon. Go up and get alike a turkey, leg of pork. Aitch bone of beef. All that was always coo
k
ed for all that. And then Christmas my old granny always ordered - was a great big loaf from the green - from the bakers, it used to - oh now what can I say - used to - be about - now - not as loaves are today, two pound. It used to be a big 'un, used to 
b
e a cottage loaf - all round - used to be - like all round there like that and a middle, cottage loaf, old - and it used to stay in the bakers - like - Christmas afternoon, great big knob of holly, one of my great - one of my uncles used to come home from
 
the Navy, he used to go round and collect it at the night time, put it on his head and take it. Oh dear. Yes. Used to cut long slice - who wants a slice of - who wants a sandwich? Put a lot - they used to put a big sandwich on a plate, yes. Yes, I can rem
ember all that. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What about tinned vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh no, never had tinned - oh no, never had no tinned stuff. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What about dried fruit or vegetables?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No, no dried - oh no, never had no dried stuff. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you keep any livestock in your family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Well we - we couldn't, there was no - no, wasn't enough room. No. No. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 How many times a week would you think you ate meat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 We only - we only had - we had a dog and a cat. Oh we kept a dog and a cat like. Oh we had
 meat everyday. Yes. You know, might be steak pudding or a - you know, like the - bit of fried steak and - what can I say, stew. Used to be - sausage toad. Or be - rashers of bacon put on top of the greens and potatoes to boil you know. Oh my - well old -
 my old granny used to - get our dinners as we come from school you know, and that was a favourite - dinner of mine was the old bacon on top of the - and she used to do a little bit of peas pudding you know, too. Oh yes, we -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Do you ever recall eating any tinned meat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
No, well we never ate nothing of that, there was nothing about. There was nothing like that - during our time, it's only during this - the Yankees over here with all these - no, we never had nothing of that. No. Never ate no tinned s
tuff, no. Well meat was cheap. It used to be steak and kidney used to be \endash 
 four pence, sixpence and eight pence. Yes. No, we never - and - there used to be - what - today well you could see 'em about two bob each now, breasts of lamb used to be about three
 ha'ence - tuppence ha'penny each. Yes. You could go in a butchers, they'd - bone a breast of lamb and put - like - stuffing inside. They used to be about - sixpence ha'penny each and \endash  eight pence ha'penny each you know. Yes. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 So you ate well when you were young?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 We did. I will say that, yes, we did, we did. We did eat well, yes, I will say that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you ever eat rabbit at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh yes, we had rabbit, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 That wasn't poached or bought from people at the door or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Oh no. They used to - no, no. Used to go and buy them from the - you know, the butchers and all that. No. Poached? No, we lived in London. No. Only in the country you got 'em poached, leave off. Oh dear. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Do you ever remember seeing your mother having less food so that the rest of the family could have more?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
No. No. Because my mum was out at work - was at work all day. I don't say she ate a lot of food at work but she always liked a supper at night. And my granny always give h
er like - whatever was cooked during the day like she had - that for her supper with her half a - we used to go - or I did, we couldn't - we was allowed - I used to go and get a - pint of - porter. That used to be three ha'pence. Half of it used to be thr
e
e farthings. Yes, in the - in the pub, and I can remember my old granny, 'cos - she'd say, go to George. Ask for a pint of porter and a pull up, because - they used to - as they - put your pint in they used to - give a good pull. And when we come home my 
mother always poured her glass out and she always give us, me and my sister, a little glass of - we had that nearly every night, a drop of porter with my mother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 You liked that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Yes. I suppose that's why I like me beer now. Yes. Yes, we always had that, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
When your father was at home when you were younger would he have larger helpings, would he be given more, or your grandfather because he was the man?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No. No. We always had a - my old granny, God rest her soul, all her - all our plat
es was full up and if you - like such as us, say - I used to - always me which - if I enjoyed my dinner I never used to want any helpings. Used to love me dinner and - perhaps a few more baked potatoes or something. I didn't want - she used to say, what's
 the matter, don't you feel well? If you never ate your afters, well - oh no, no. Oh no, we was never singe about food, never.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Were you allowed to talk during meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh they all talked all round the table you know, no. Although - you know, say th
at - like - me granny was talking and me mother and all that say we chimed in my mother always said, hi, children should be seen and not heard. You was always like - as case they was talking about something that - oh no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Could you choose what you 
wanted to eat from what was cooked or did you have to have a bit of everything, if you didn't like something were you allowed not to have it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh - I can always remember that - veal. I - I always said I never liked veal. But I can always remember - I 
- well I don't remember it but my mother - by all accounts they had veal, and - they said, you'd better say it's pork. So - my mother said, how do you like the pork? I said, very nice, you know. Nice pork? I said, yes. Said, well tell you now you've ate i
t
, it's veal. I said, if I'd have known it I'd never have ate it, you know. It was only that - and yet it's funny - as old as I am now I never like veal. I would never buy it. I don't know, it was always with me veal - well I don't know, it always seemed t
o
 be - like you was always told that veal was always drained, like it was always like - you know. Now, I used to work at - I've worked in a kitchen all me life. And say my guv'nor used to say, oh we'll have veal, you know. What about a leg of veal? I used 
t
o say, leg of veal? You carve into that it's all wind and skin. 'Cos I - you know, you get it - it's all like - it's all that - you cut it, you don't cut into nothing. Oh I said, don't get that, you'll never - you'll never - no, I never did like it, it's 
funny that. I don't know why.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 If you left food uneaten on the plate what would your parents attitude be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Well I don't think that they used to think you was ill, if you never ate your grub they used to think - they'd say, don't you feel well? No, well I can't ever - ever - you know - unless we was full up and didn't want no more but - I could never -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 They wouldn't force you to eat things you really didn't like?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh no. Oh no. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 If there was something on the table you wanted li
ke the salt could you ask someone to pass it to you or would you have to wait 'til it was passed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Oh well - no, they used to pass it round, oh yes. They'd pass it round. Well like - it's funny though, with us like being a big family there used to be 
- pepper and salt that end, pepper and salt this end. And - Sundays used to be a big - jar of - beetroots there and a jar of - 'cos we was big beetroot eaters. With - hot dinners. Yes. Anything - any hot - hot meats. I love beet - I - I can eat a beet - b
eetroot with - like, you know, how used to buy 'em in bundles and eat 'em after I've cooked 'em like an apple. Oh no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Were you allowed to ask for second helpings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 If you wanted 'em. Oh if you wanted 'em, yes. You wanted 'em.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you have to hold your knife and fork in a certain way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No, no, well we always - my - mother always said, now sit up and eat your dinner properly, or something like that. Oh yes, yes, oh yes.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Were you allowed to bring books and toys to the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh no. No. No. Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 When were you allowed to leave the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Oh well like - you know, when we was all finished and all that, we'd - one'd get up and the other - away - you know, 'cos like Sundays, after Sunday dinner we used to have to go to S
unday school that you got up to - you know, wash your hands and that to get to Sunday school. No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would you all sit down at the table for a meal together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh yes. 'Cos we had a - like a - old fashioned table in the kitchen, the flap was put dow
n during the day but when we sat - it - the flap was put up so the - there was so many could sit that side and so many here and so many that side. No, we all - we all sat round the table together. Although when there was parties - some was in the kitchen,
 some was in the front room, there was that way, know what I mean.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you have the same places, would you all sit in your same place each day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh yes, me and my sister on our stool, yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 How was the meal served, who would serve it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh granny and grandfather like - grandfather carve up and granny'd - put the vegetables on and - you know, and - oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Were you served in any special order?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh like sometimes the - if anybody come they was served first and - us children was give -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 The visitors were served first?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Yes. Yes. You know, anybody come to dinner kind of thing they were served and - although really with our family they tried to get everything cut that you come to the table it was all put round.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 When you were younger where would you sit, when you were a small child or a toddler, did you have a high chair or something like that?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Well, I - I couldn't really say.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Do you remember at all where your sister would sit when she was little?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Well 
we nearly always sat together like on the stool that - I couldn't say like when we was small 'cos - there was only really thirteen months between me and my sister, that - I wouldn't really - I wouldn't really know that way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Was your mother an easy person to talk to, did you find her easy to get on with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Ho, she was bit hard at times, know what I mean, but - although she was a good mother but - she was a bit hard you know. Well say sometimes when I would say, oh mum, you know. She'd say, I don't w
ant to hear your troubles, you know, if you've had a - argument you know, you sort it out between yourselves, you know, that -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 If you were worried about something could you go to her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh yes. Oh good mother that way. Yes, oh yes, she'd help you
 out in every way. Oh yes, oh yes, helped. Oh yes, she never - if you went for any help like you was in trouble or - you know, when after I got married and all that my husband fell on bad times, went up to - ask her you know, well I didn't ask her, I happ
e
ned to meet her and - she said, you don't look very - pleased and that. So she said, where are you going? Oh, I said, down the road and that you know. Well come on, come and have a drink you know and that. So she said, how's the - how's he doing? Out of w
ork. Well here you are, take this and - when he gets - when he gets - on his feet you know where to come, come and see me. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would you think she was an affectionate person?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh yes. Yes. Never showed it though. Never showed it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 How about your grandmother and grandfather, you were very close to them as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you get on well with your father when he was at home, was he an easy person to talk to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh - well - he was easy but when he was in his tantrums he was a - what you call a beggar you know what I mean, that -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would you have ever discussed things with your father when he was at home if you were worried?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No. No. No. Although if he thought there was anything the matter and you was in trouble, or, you kno
w - like with - children or at school, he'd - he'd come round the school. Oh yes. He'd - he'd do that, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 How would your mother expect you to behave towards her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Well we always behaved - all right because - really with my old grandfather you c
ould be - you could never be cheeky. He - he always like told you that was your mother and you was - had to respect your mother. Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did your mother and your grandparents bring you up to behave towards your sister in a certain way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh we was 
always - we used to have our squabbles, know what I mean, but we was always - we was always - you know, we was always give the same, what one had the other one had. You know what I mean, we was never - we was never like one had this and the other one didn
't have that. No, we was always - oh no.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Were you quite close to your sister?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Well we used to - used to - fight. But - oh yes, yes, oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 If another child hit you what would your parents attitude be, what would they tell you to do? Would they tell you to hit them back or not?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Oh my mother used to say, go and fight your own battle. Well my granny, 'cos she had more to do with us than our mother really 'cos my mother never come home 'til seven o'clock at night that - there was - w
e used to say, gran - you know, Bill Davis or - Maggie Davis' has - you know, all right, don't come here and - go back and do what they done to you, you do to them. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 People had to be independent then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 They had to fight their own battles, yes, oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What sort of person do you think your parents hoped you'd grow up to be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Well - oh I don't know, I - just grown up how I - I've wanted to grow up, know what I mean. I don't think I've ever brought any disgrace to 'em or anything l
ike that. Oh no, I've always worked hard - worked hard from - when I went out at fourteen, oh no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did - they bring you up to consider certain things were important in life?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh yes, always to - didn't matter about - as long as you had - your 
clothes was all clean and tidy, but always have a good inside lining, that you could always fight all illnesses and - yes, we was always taught - never go without your grub. Don't matter about your - to be in the fashion, but always see that you got a goo
d inside lining. Oh yes, we always - and we always did, oh yes. Yes, yes. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What did your family thing of swearing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh well now and again they used to - have a swear up, my father did, he - he used to bake a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7618163\charrsid1983817  bit of a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 laggard when he started but - oh we never - we never what}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7618163\charrsid1983817 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7618163\charrsid1983817  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7618163\charrsid1983817 \rquote  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 name, we never swore you know. Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 If you did something your parents disapproved of what would happen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh you'd get a good hiding. Oh yes, you'd get a - you'd get a - a - you know, you'd get spank round the legs or -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 By your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh yes. Never my granny, she would never - my granny never touched us but - my mother would, she -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would that happen very often?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh no. No. No. All I can remember once - my mother was like - she always used
 to do our heads before we went to - bed at night you know, combed to 'em and see to 'em and - you know, done 'em up to - and - my old granny, I can always remember her, she always wore a white apron and she always sit with - her - white - and covered ove
r one hand and - they were talking, my mother and my granny, so - talking, about something,}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7618163\charrsid1983817  I said, 'ere, gran, you know M}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
rs Bibbs? I said, she's going to have another baby. So my mother said, oh? How do you know that? Oh, I said, Mollie Davis said you can 
always tell Mrs Dibbs with a white apron, she's got a big belly. My mother give me one spank there on the ear. Oh I can always remember that. She said, you'd better keep away from Nellie Davis. My old granny said, never hit 'em round the ear'ole, she said
, hit 'em on the leg. Oh dear. Yes. I said, you - you - you - oh dear.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What would you feel about being punished?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh I used to think I had a terrible mother if I was punished. I'm not going to stop here - not going to stop here. No. Not going to s
top here, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Do you think you received the ideas you had about how to behave from your grandparents or your mother or from both of them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Both of 'em. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Not one of them had a stronger influence on you you don't think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh no, no. No
. Really - although my granny looked after us - my mother had more of a - a - like - you know, she'd say, that's enough of that, or - you know, say you was larking about and she'd say, that's enough of that. You know, you had to - you had to like pack up.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would a birthday in your family be different than any other day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh yes, you always got a card, you-got a present, you know. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Anything special to eat on your birthday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Well one of my aunts used to live with us before she got ma
rried, she was a waitress ins Covent Garden market and she - her day off used to be Tuesdays. When she come home Tuesdays she used to - empty a copper bag, used to count up the coppers, so one day I counted it, one week I used to count the coppers like. N
ext week my sister. So when we counted the coppers up what was left over - we could go and get - same as - six - six - six }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7618163\charrsid1983817 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817  six}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7618163\charrsid1983817  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 pence}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7618163\charrsid1983817  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 worth of - cakes, well we used to go round the cake shop and - ask for six}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7618163\charrsid1983817  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
penn'orth of mixed cakes, we used to get about a dozen then didn't you, pick 'em all out you know. - Next week my sister goes, she picked all what she wanted and used to fetch 'em in and put 'em on a plate on the table. Oh no, no.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would you ever have a little birthday party and have any friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Oh yes. And Christmas tree Christmas, yes. Oh yes, we had - a birthday party, yes. 'Cos my birthday used to be in the November and my sister's was in the December Near Christmas, the eighteenth that was - funny enough it was her birthday last Saturda
y. Yes. Oh yes, we used to - have a birthday party, and our schoolmates, couple of children in the street you know come in with the cakes and - my mother used to get a Christmas tree. One year she got a Christmas tree and all the children in the street wa
s
 invited. Yes. Had 'em all in there my mother. Great big Christmas tree. And all my uncles and aunts, they all brought - presents and put on and all the kids come in and - got their - a present off the tree, oh yes. Oh great bit - on on there - on there I
'm cutting their numbers, you know, their numbers and - cutting them off the tree.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 And your family always celebrated Christmas together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh, we had a lovely time. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Do you think Christmas was more of an occasion then than it is now?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Yes. Yes. Well - everybody - you know, your doors was open and - everybody - everybody - you know - how are you, all right, and even the policemen used to come round on beat, they'd come and knock on the door. We've had policemen in our house sitting on t
he stairs. Yes. Knock on the door, ay, aye, all merry and bright in there, all nice and quiet, you know, and - yes, come and sit on the stairs, or come in, take their old hats off and cape, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 You said your mother always paid in a club so you always had plenty?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Extra, yes, Christmas, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you buy each other presents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Well I don't know - like - we always got ours from like the aunts and - and that. Well - we - me and my sister never you know, we - not us because - we all looked fo
rwards for other people to give us presents, them days like. The aunts and uncles come and there was your Christmas gift, you know, whatever they bought.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would you have Christmas puddings, Christmas cake, things like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh, mince pies - my ol
d grandfather made all the mince pies Christmas. Oh - old granny, they used to - light the old copper up and boil the Christmas puddings in the copper, they was going for about - three nights then, boiling in the old copper.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 They were always home made?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Yes, oh yes. Christmas - and my old granny - she used - we all used to - always stir in and put the three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7618163\charrsid1983817  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 penny bits in, 'cos my uncle was out in - 9th Lancers he was in, and she used to send out a Christmas pudding to him. Yes. We all used to stir in. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Very happy times you look back at?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh - yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did anyone play musical instruments in your house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Me and my sister played the piano. But - not by music or anything. We used to have a - a - a - insurance man used to call 
about - every fortnight and he could play the piano lovely. And he used - every time he come he used to go in and - give us about hour's playing and granny used to give him a cup of tea and - you know - and 'course that's how we learnt to play the piano w
ith - with him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Were you ever taken out visiting neighbours, friends or relations when you were a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Well I nearly always - oh yes, we used to go sometime, but - they nearly always come to see us but - oh I used to go - and I went away to hol
iday at - like down the line years ago me and my sister. People come from - they lived out I think side Oxford. 'Cos like my Aunt Rose married a man from Oxford. And like we were sent down there on holiday. And 'course - she had about five children, and o
f
 course me and my sister you know, we used to have to go up to - oh of course, us, we never had to go to bed early like - not like - she used to get us all up to bed 'cos you know - then in the mornings was porridge which I could never stand porridge. Nev
e
r eat porridge. See. And - 'course when like we was home we used to have either - egg or that but - and any old how - cutting a - long story short, my old granny, God rest her soul, like her and grandfather, 'cos us always being home with them they said, 
well we'll go and visit the children, see. 'Course they come down. Well me, I was never a one to go away from home. Never. My}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7618163\charrsid1983817  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
sister - oh yes, she didn't care. When she come down, oh, I said, gran, you going to take me home? She said, why, what's the matter
? Oh I said, I don't like down here. I said, we have to go to bed so early. I said, we have porridge of a morning, I said, you know I don't like porridge. She said, is that all you have? So I said, yes. So she said, Jim, I think we'll take these children 
h
ome, my old granny. So - oh, he said, no, let 'em stop, he said, you know what she is. You know, me like. 'Cos I - really they give way to me a lot, I will say that, but - I said, gran. No, she said, you - stop another week and see how you get on or - you
 
know, words to that effect, I don't know. Any old how, I used to go up to bed, I used to cry me bloody eyes out of a night you know. Any old how, and she was - bit of a strictish woman. She - worked in a - like we - and it's funny, where we lived there wa
s
 about - five little cottages in a square. And over the lane was the schools. She - she - she used to go and clean the school. So she said to me she said, you'll come over to school and help me. See - I had - and I - had to push all the - all the desks, r
o
und that desk while she liked cleaned see. I said to my - to my sister I said, I'm fed up with her, I said. Got to - move all the desks so - the kids. I said, why don't you get your own kids to help you. She said, you're too saucy, to me. I said, you wait
 
'til my gran comes. Oh dear. My mum and - my mum and dad came down, I said, mum take me home. I said, I don't like here. So she said, why not, what's the matter? I said, she makes me go over that school, I said, and - and - you know. Move the desks. She s
a
id, what? I said - like, and we all had to go to church on a Sunday. And of course - we could either go over the field to church, church was over the field, or you had - well - there used to be a road of cows in the - I'd never go, I was too frightened. '
C
ourse the time I got right round the - the bend, church was coming out. I wouldn't go through that - I was too frightened of cows. Funny, no. I was frightened of cows. I used to say, don't let her have anything red on, the cows - you know, thinking like b
ulls or something but -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 How long were you there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Oh was there a fortnight like. Only a fortnight. Yes. My old - I said, mum, I said, take me home, I said, take me home. All right, she said, all right, we'll - she'd said, we'll come down Sunday a
nd take you home. I said, all right. But through this lane where we lived was the - slaughter house see. Like where they used to kill all the - and funny, one of the men, he used to say, you - I'm going to have you in here tonight and I'm going to chop yo
u
r head off, you know, like I do the pigs you know. And when I - I used to run by. And - and he used to stand at the door and I used to run by and he'd say to my Lil, I'm not going to go through there, I ain't going to chop our - oh she - oh dear. No, like
 
- you can look back and laugh because - they only had a lark you know, like - we would with kids say, you come in here I'll chop - your head off, but - oh I was - I'd say - I was really a funny kind of girl like that, I don't know why but - I really thoug
h
t that what people said to you they meant. Know what I mean, but - no. Funny old girl lived round the corner, she had a - you know - little house all like - and we used to go round and ask for - ha'porth of drops, that was the - apples. She used to give u
s, we used to pull up our frock, she give us a - a load of apples in our - ha'penny and they was like the - like what fell off a tree, lovely apples. And we used to sit and eat 'em you know. No I can - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you ever go out shopping with your grandmother, did she ever take you with her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Oh she - when I was a girl I used to go and - like round where we lived, on the corner used to be Littlewoods, that used to be a - big - what you call now like - one side of it was a - for tea, sugar and everyth
ing. The other side was for - oil, pickles. 'Cos them days pickles were served in with the oil. Jam all in one side. Well like I used to have to go and put - perhaps two bob or a shilling a week - that was for Christmas, like for tea, sugar and all that -
 
like Christmastime. Yes. And I used to go out with me mother. Yes. And then - when - well of course as I got older and - I left school and that and - I - I never went to work, I looked after the house and - I used to go out shopping, I used to go and shop
 and get the joint for the weekend and all that you know.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 You'd be quite young?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Yes, yes. That's why I think now - like with me like - not them - I was always a good shopper. Yes. And you - well then 'course like as we got older I went in the ki
tchen with me mother, well - 'course we learnt the ropes of - what meat was and what meat wasn't, see what I mean.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 You could recognise a good piece of meat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Do you ever remember going out with your father alone?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh only that time when we went on that - no, we never - no, we never went out with him, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would your grandfather take you out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh - oh all over the place with him. He'd - he'd take us like - over Westminster Bridge and - look at the - on the Embankment yo
u know. Or we'd have a tram then, it used to be about - ha'penny or a penny all the way and then - you'd get off at the Embankment, walk along and look over the - you know, look over the - to the - what was it called - oh Boadicea wasn't it and - along wa
s }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7618163\charrsid1983817 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817  what}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7618163\charrsid1983817 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7618163\charrsid1983817  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7618163\charrsid1983817 \rquote  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
name's Needle. Yes. That's it, yes, right there. Right along, then we - went right along, he used to walk us right to - Blackfriars, and of course there was always - between - between - Charing Cross and Blackfriars was - always used to be a -
 a boat, you know, like what the cadets always used to - and - yes, oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you ever go on any other outings with your parents or your grandparents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh yes, we - my mother and - the family used to have a brake out once a year. All of 'em use
d to - put together, collect for a brake you know, a four horse brake. And we all used to go out, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 How many of you would that be?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh - there used to be me aunts and their husbands, my mother, my father, my granny and grandfather. I rem
ember this time - we - you might think I'm telling a story, I'm not. We went out in this brake, and my granny was a great big stout woman the and so was my grandfather. And as we're going - up this - up this hill, this driver said, now, he said, you two '
l
l have to change over because the balance of the - well, as I can - remember it, I can see my old granny and grandfather moving about to - 'cos we're all going up here, oh yes. Yes. And 'course then, my father's had a few and he's - he's got under the - g
ot under the brake to fall asleep hasn't he. Me and my sister's larking about in the brake, you know, all of a sudden my sister's fell through it. Right on top of my father, and he - he - of course - oh - he - yes, I can - oh }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7618163\charrsid1983817 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817  what}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7618163\charrsid1983817 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7618163\charrsid1983817  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7618163\charrsid1983817 \rquote  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 name, you know, as I sit here and tell you I can - oh -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What sort of places would you go to, would you go quite a long way out of London?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Well like - I suppose them days - I suppose - we used to think like was a - oh what we - where we used to go years ago - on tr
eats was - Riddlesborough or something, we used to think was a long way but it wasn't was it, or - Epping Forest. You thought you was - miles away, but you - you wasn't. And then like when we was at school - we used to have a - a treat from the school, I 
think we used to have to pay so much, I don't know, and - I went to St Jude}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7618163\charrsid1983817 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
s school in - St Georges Road. Every year they had a - outing for the children, and everybody turned out. And - there was a band like the - what shall we call it now - the Boys Brig
ade, and - all the - all the - of course St Georges Road years ago - 'cos it's all altered round the Elephant and castle now - was all little shops, you know, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13847602\charrsid1983817 fr}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 uiterers and - greengrocers and - grocers and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7618163\charrsid1983817 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817  Fogden}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13847602\charrsid1983817 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 s, the old tea shop and that. Well they 
all collect - and they used - they all put up flags and lights all across this road see. So - we used to go out in the morning about half past eight leave - leave St Georges Road, we all had our tickets all hung here you know. It makes me - think. It does
 really. It's true.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did they go to the sea?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Sea? Well that's where we went, Herne Bay. Herne Bay. Can always remember that. Took us down to Herne Bay from the Elephant and Castle, you know, Elephant and Castle station. All got in the - train you 
know. To Herne Bay. Get out there, they took us to the - when we got to the front was - by the clock tower, of course it's years ago, I haven't been to Herne Bay for years. Clock Tower and they told us that we'd have to meet there and - you know - so - we
l
l I - them days used to be these sixpenny ha'penny bazaar. 'Cos - my mother like aunts and uncles, they all give us you know, money and all that. They said, don't wait for any presents or anything. Well me and my sister, we went - used to go in these sixp
e
nny ha'penny bazaar get a butter dish or a - cup and saucer you know. And then we'd buy a - a sixpenny bunch of flowers, have them - you know, pay for a bunch of flowers so as we was going home that they'd be like you know - but when we all got - home, th
ere'd be all the lights up, everybody round the - the - everybody down St Georges Road.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 It was a real occasion?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 It was, yes. That was from - from school. Now like if you don't believe it - 'cos - like if you - you write to St Jude}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13847602\charrsid1983817 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 s school in St Georges Road you'll find it is the - it is the truth. It is.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What would your family do on a Bank Holiday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh they - oh my mother used - my mother and that, we'd - take us to Hampstead Bank Holidays. Yes, me and my sister. Yes, at Bank Holiday, 
yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 There was a fair there was there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Yes. Got on the roundabouts and - oh yes. Not such much with me father, he never - he never - he'd stop out wouldn't he at the pub and all that lark. My mother used to get us on the - on the tram then take 
a tram over - tram to Westminster I think we used to get. Then get a - a - bus or something from there, I don't know now, forget now how we got to - Hampstead.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 You were going from one end of London to the other weren't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 To the other, yes, we used to have to - go over the bridge, see. But - I know we used to get to Hampstead, but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would your mother have the day off on a Bank Holiday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 On a Bank Holiday, yes. Yes. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you ever go away on any other holidays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh a 
fortnight's - fortnight's holiday from school, we used to have to pay in for it what they called the Bank Holiday Fund. We went away, yes, me and my sister and - 'cos then like my aunt, she was - only a few years - well she wasn't a lot older - wasn't a l
o
t older than me. My mother's youngest sister. And we all - we all went away Bank Holiday - for a fortnights holiday and that's when - my old granny, God rest her - always said, now all try and keep together, the three of you keep together, you see. 'Cours
e
 when we got there - like - we got - somebody said, I'll take her. And I'll take these two, see, 'cos - I said, we mustn't - we mustn't be parted, we've all - so - I don't know, a woman said, three of you can't go together. Oh 'course they've took me and 
m
y sister here, our May's gone somewhere else. I've cried me eyes out all night can't I, 'cos we're all - although she come round and the woman used to be very good and - but - we got used to her after but the first week we - 'cos we was - 'cos - with us i
ndoors, like we all slept together in the room, you know. Me and my - me and my sister slept in one bed and like the aunt, we never called her that, we always called her our May, always slept in like another bed in the room - but - always together.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What place did you go to that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh we went down Reading way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 It was always to the country?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh down, yes, we went down the line, yes. Went down the line, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would you go every year on these school holidays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh yes, if - like 
fortnight. Oh a - a fortnight we went, yes, we used to go - like from school, pay in like, my mother used to pay in or my aunt paid in for us to go. Fortnight's holiday, oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did your mother ever have a holiday way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No. My old mum, no. No, in the later years, me and her went away, but - no, my mother never, she worked too hard, my poor old mum. Never.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What would you do when you were on these school holidays, were you left to yourselves or did they organise you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What, when we was awa
y? Oh no, you just - well we used to go out and - and I know near where we was there was a great big field, we used to go out and - we used to - and I did because - really with me - I suppose - I was such a home bird, I remember I used to sit on this seat
 and see - I used to see the trains go by. I used to sing, take me back to London. I used to sit there crying he blo}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13847602\charrsid1983817 o}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
dy eyes out. Oh dear. Yes. No, me, I was a home bird. Although we had some - very good people you know but - especially of a night, I - when
 it was time to go to bed. Oh I used to say to my sister - my sister, she'd go to bed at five o'clock at night. It wouldn't worry her. But I wouldn't, I wouldn't go to bed, if they - I could stop up 'til twelve o'clock at night.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 You were used to having your family around you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Yes. Oh yes. Yes. No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What would you do on a Saturday when you were a girl?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh we used to go to the pictures, what they called the - we used to pay about a penny or tuppence round the pictures. Might take some
 - sweets and all that and that used to be for about - suppose - twelve o'clock 'til about - two o'clock I suppose. 'Cos in our house on Saturday we had what we called tea and dinner together so - you know, was eggs and bacon or whatever it was and someth
i
ng else and chips or something that - we had it - that - just that was on a Saturday. Then - or Friday nights we always had our baths. Every Friday night our bath, and our hair used to be done up in ringlets 'til Sunday morning you know. Yes. All day Satu
rday. When they come out they was all long curls, yes. Yes. Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you mind having them in all day Saturday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Well it was - you never really took no notice of it but - 'cos them days it was a - recognized thing, the children - you know, like th
e mother's that - like looked after - or some mothers didn't care whether their girls hair was straight, whether it was any way but - oh my mother, no. Your hair was always in ringlets. Two big bows. My hair was parted in the middle, two big bows. My sist
er's parted at the side. One big bow. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 That was for Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Sundays, yes, and your - your - you know, your pinafore all frilled up and - that was your Sunday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 You always wore different clothes on Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Sunday. Sundays and - you a
lways had new clothes for - Easter, Whitsun, you know, and Christmas, oh you had your - rig-out for Christmas. Yes. New coat, you know, whatever was going like. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What would you do on a Sunday in your family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Well used to get up and have o
ur breakfast and - 'course - as I got older - my sister one had to do the lavatory, one had to do the passage and the front, another one had to clean the knives and forks and - cut up the beetroot for the Sunday dinnertime. And then you had to - like you 
got dressed and then you - after dinner you went to - school - Sunday school. Yes. You always had to go to Sunday school after dinner.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Most children went to Sunday school those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh yes. Yes. Yes. Had to go to Sunday school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did your parents or grandmother or grandfather go to church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Oh my old granny used to go to - not my mother, she was always at work, nor my father or - not my grandfather but - my old granny used to go what they called the Mothers Meeting years ago, like - all l
ike - the women used to go like and have a cup of tea and sit like the old vicar I suppose, I don't know. It was always called a Mothers Meeting, I don't know, I never -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Your grandmother didn't go to church much?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh no, no, no. No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What sort of Sunday school did you go to, did you go to a Church of England one?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Oh yes, Church of - what was it - oh yes, yes, like - well, used to be the old chapel in the - bottom of the street, what we called the chapel. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you go on Sunday school outings, would they provide an outing for you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
I can't really - recall that, not Sunday school outing. I don't think - that was a - just like a chapel and I don't think - not that - I don't remember ever going to a; outing with them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you take part in any other activities organised by the church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh no, no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 You weren't in the choir?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Do you know if your church ran any temperance clubs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh - I don't know, I couldn't tell you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 You weren't a member of one?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 You didn't sign the pledge or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No. Oh no, I was never - I was never - well - being truthful I was never interested in that kind of thing, know what I mean, that - oh no.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you belong to any other clubs of any sort?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No. No, not as - that I could - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would your family say grace at meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Oh no, no. Oh you said, thank God for your good dinner. Oh, you know, like, thank God for a good dinner, or my old grandfather used to say a, thank God for our good dinner, like he did, oh yes, yes. No. No we never said, grace, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Were you taught to say prayers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh when we was children we used to - you know - God bless dad, God bless mum and - that was in early like but -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you have any family prayers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh no, no. No. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Do - you remember your father taking an interest in politics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh - oh no, no, not him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Grandfather?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No, no. No, no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 He never talked about voting and what party he voted for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh 
- oh he used to be a - he was a - an Labour man, my grandfather. Oh yes. Yes. The blue. When it - like, you know, voting like is blue ain't it. Is it blue now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Do you remember which colour he would have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh - red I think, red then. Oh he was a - no, he was a -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would he be a Liberal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No, no. No, he was a Labour man. No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did he used to talk about politics much?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh no. No. Oh we never - if he did he never spoke - he never said anything in front of us as children.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Do you think your grandmother was interested?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Oh no, well - no, well they used to - abide by what the men said didn't they. They never - they never like today like the girls do today or the women today, if they think they'll vote for something they'll vot
e if they - whether their husband's the other way round, you know. No, oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would your grandfather vote?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh used to go and vote. Yes. Can always remember him going voting, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Do you think your grandmother did when women got the vote, would she have gone and voted in 1919?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 1919? I can't really say that - not with that, 1919, well I was nineteen then. No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Do you think she'd have voted the same way as your grandfather?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh she'd have gone his way. Well that's - 'cos she nev
er really knew - my granny could never read or write, she learnt herself to read my granny and she learnt herself to write. Towards the end. How she used to write was - she'd say something, she'd write that, and what she said - something else was under th
a
t way, you know, she - she learnt, yes she did, she learnt. 'Cos like - when my uncle - when my uncle was in the Navy he used to - like send - send her something home you know, and she always said to me, don't let your mother know that Uncle Dan has sent 
s
omething home to me. Yes, you know. Yes. And - her - and my mother - well my mother said, well as I got older my mother said, I don't know, she said, I don't know why - Uncle Dan don't send mum any money. See. So she said, I think I'll get you to send him
 
a letter, see. 'Cos - my mother couldn't write see. Oh - so mum, I said, before I write to Uncle Dan, I said, got something to tell you. I said, granny gets a - granny gets a letter, I said, she gets - I think it was about a dollar you know, five shilling
s
 and - I said, don't say I said, she - I said, she's told me not to tell you. You know, me being near - indoors you know and it - 'cos it happened to be one day I'd got the letter and I said, there's a letter for you gran, you know. I said, all right, I'l
l
 open it for you, being nosey like. I'll read it to you. Don't have to, she said, don't have to. But - 'course I opened it didn't I. Oh, I said, there's - something from Uncle Dan, it was in - in the Navy. My - well my mother told her - she told her. So m
um you never had - 'cos my mum was a very good woman you know. My mother was, she was a good woman my mother. She used to pay for all the coal, used to pay the - rent of the house. She never used to leave the coal though 'cos we}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1967946\charrsid1983817  used to have the coal from Lebo}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
ns then days, you - you used to have a ton in at a time and you paid so much a week. 'Cos our - our coal cellar went under the stairs, it held a ton of coal. And we used to have it from Lebons, and then - Lebons used to be a - a very big coal merchants 
see. Well nearly everybody that - they'd have 'em from Lebons, pay so much for a ton. Well half a ton or what they called a quarter of a ton, five bags, ten bags, twenty bags, whatever it was. We always had a ton in, went right under the coal cellar. My m
other used to leave the money out - such as Wednesday, whenever it was - the - you know, the - insurance or rent, she left that every - my old mum, very good woman.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Was she interested in politics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Well my mother was - really - I'm sorry to say my
 mother was like - what you call ignorant, she had no - no - education or nothing. No. No. No, but - after a - like - as years went by I said, try and write your name mum, which - taught her to write at the end before she died she could write her own name
 but - she could never read. Never read. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Do you think your grandfather belonged to a political party, would he be a member of a party?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh no, no.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 And they didn't do any political activity?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh not them days. Well I don't think it w
as so much - known as what it is today is it, you know. They had to go to work and - they come home and - you know, they didn't - oh I don't know, they -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 People say that employers used to put pressure on people to vote the same way as they did?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh I don't know, I couldn't -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Do you remember your grandfather ever mentioning that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh no. No. 'Cos - well - now, well he - not with us children, well he wouldn't, no, no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 When you mother wasn't working how would she spend her time, what would she do with her free time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Well my mother always worked, I can never - I can never remember my mother - my mother never had a holiday for years 'til - 'til the - 'til the - the act come out that you - you got a weeks holiday or - my mother n
ever had no time off. It was only such as a - Good Friday when the - she worked in Covent Garden market, she - which was a Good Friday like it shut down that - that's about the only day or - holiday times - I think my mother - only had them two days, with
 - Good Friday and - Bank Holiday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 And she didn't have much time after work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No, she used to - start cleaning all the paint and - we all had to -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would your mother have had any other interests outside the home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No. She - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 You said your grandmother used to go to these Mothers meetings didn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Only the Mothers Meeting or - or go to the pictures once a week, my old granny. No, no. Well them days that - it's not like it is today is it. Women go to these meetings, no. Oh no
. Yes, well - like - when my mother had - her day off was on a Monday, she used to have to go to the - the - baths to do a days washing. She come home at - she got home at one o'clock, she'd - we used to have to carry - all put the washing on a - up the b
a
ths, and she used to do it 'til six o'clock at night. My father or grandfather used to go up and meet her and all the washing put on the pram and brought home. No, my old granny used to do the ironing until I got older, then I took it over and I used to g
o - yes. No, my mother had no time for anything of that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would your father get home from work quite late?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Don't mention him. Don't mention him. He worked in a stables, he could - finish when he liked and - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 But he didn't spend any evenings at home with the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh no. Only when he was broke. When he had no money he used to come straight home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What about your grandfather?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh he was a home}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1967946\charrsid1983817  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 bird, my old grandfather, yes. He'd come in and - you know - much about and - well
 he'd - he'd start - if there was anything like cooking or - you know - toast or - perhaps he'd come along, he'd fetch in - as he come along he'd fetch in - mussels and - night time he'd be doing the mussels for our supper you know, oh no, my old grandfat
her, no. Different kind of man to me father I must say.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would your father go to any clubs or pubs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Pubs, I don't know about clubs. Clubs wasn't so - not them days. No. There was pubs, yes, he was always - that's why I think I take after him so mu
ch really. No - he was always in a pub, 'course where he worked in the stables - there was a pub opposite, he'd come out of there, over there and that -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would your mother ever go and join him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 My mother never went in a pub 'til she was twenty-five. Never drank 'til she was twenty-five, my mother. No, I do know that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Women didn't go in pubs so much in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh - they did - only like perhaps weekends when their husbands took 'em out, you know not so much like they do now and all that, no. No.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did your father take part in any sports, would he ever go to horse racing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Well he was always in with horses. He used to work at the - the Elephant Horse Depository, he was always in - say where they used to buy and sell the horses y
ears ago at the Elephant and Castle, used to be on a Monday and Thursday was what they called the sales on. All horses. Well - if there was somebody like him and he - he - you know, he - he wasn't doing no work, he'd go in there, anybody bought like what 
they called a string of horses, there might be five, well he'd have to - they'd all be put on like at - a rope and he'd have to - take 'em from where - whoever ought 'em. He used to -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Take them to the new owner?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Where they was like, down the line you know, Kent. Yes. Walk 'em down. Walk 'em down.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 So he knew a lot about horses?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh he knew a lot about horses, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Was he very fond of them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No. It was a - he was a cruel man, my father, to horses. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 And yet he worked with them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Worked. I can remember him in a field. I can remember him in a field once with a horse. And he's - he's hit the horse, he's hit the horse and he's gone to jump on the horse, the horse has kicked out and he's - he's kicked him right here. Shoc
king leg. My father - I don't that - I don't know what there was in him but - yet us - me and my sister, we loved animals. But my - we had - well I tell you what, we had a collie dog. And - she was half collie and half chow, she was a - lovely dog, stood 
a
bout that height and my old grand father used to have to - build a - a long thing in front of our garden gate, 'cos if she used to run out she'd go right over the top like a greyhound. I don't now how high it was. And she used to hate my father. 'Cos like
 
when he used to come in some nights he'd have a few and she'd be there, get out of it, you see. And it was funny - and it's funny, we always knew - like me and my sister used to sleep upstairs, my mother slept on the first floor, we - if I was awake or th
a
t or say we was asleep, we always knew when he turned that corner of a night. That dog used to start growling and - bark, he done a - she always laid outside our bedroom door that dog. But as soon as he - he turned that corner she'd be down the stairs and
 
- and he used to have to call to my mother - to come down and let him in because that dog would never - because - I once - he'd come home boozed - with another man and - he took the man upstairs to bed and my mother - she was spotlessly clean and - they w
e
nt and laid on the bed in their boots and - from the stables, now this is - this is the God honest truth, they're laying on there because I've looked in, their asleep in all these boots. Oh, I said to my sister, my old granny and grandfather was away hopp
i
ng at the time. Oh, I said, to my sister, there'll be murders when mum comes home from work. And - all of a sudden we've seen me mother turn the corner ain't we. I said, mum, I said, dad's up on the bed, I said, his boots. I said, he's got - he's - a man'
s up there on the bed with him. She said, what? So she said - as he got his boots on? I said, yes. Well - of course she used to have all them lovely white quilts and - all her - all her - the top parts of her - her pillow}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid1967946\charrsid1983817  cas}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 es was all goffered. They was th
e top - they took all - they used to put them over but the other pillow they - under - they was all clean but - oh - said, what? So she said, is the kitchen range alight? I said, yes. 'Cos the kettle's - she's done in and of course we had - like big }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1967946\charrsid1983817 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817  what}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1967946\charrsid1983817 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1967946\charrsid1983817  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1967946\charrsid1983817 \rquote  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
name-kettles, she's got the pail from out the yard, a big pail and poured in the hot water. Put in some cold water, she's gone up the stairs, she threw the lot right over the bed. She said, what, she said, my bed. 'Course my father's gone mad ain't h
e. He got up. He's flew after her. I'll never forget it as long as I live. He flew after her, he's got hold of her, 'cos we're downstairs, me and my sister, and we had - like that's our old houses as they was built used to be - like a banister and there w
a
s all the - like long spikes, you know, they wasn't very - strong you know. I suppose - year after year my old granny used to go up the stairs and pull on them they got a bit, you know, I could see - he's got my mother, he says, I'll throw you down them s
t
airs, he said. This man's got up and gone out. I said, oh, I said, dad don't - dad, leave - you know, dad, leave off, dad, leave off. I said, oh, I said, Lil, he'll put - he'll put mum over the top. So I said, Ching - Ching, I'll never forget it, I said, 
C
hing, go on. Go on. Go on, go and get him. Go on and give it to him. Yes, the old dog, I can see him now. Crept up the stairs, my father said, you - he's gone and got hold of my father right at the back of here. 'Course he's hung onto my father, of course
 
my mum was shouting for help. My mother's come down the stairs - he said, the bastard, you know, the bastard, he said. Any old how, he had to go to Thomas' hospital. And - at Thomas' hospital said, you ought to think yourself lucky that this dog's got a w
o
nderful clean mouth. Yes, he - he could never come in that door after - after that with that dog, that dog would never let him in that front door. Yes. Well he - he - well he used to lay outside - what - we - my old granny now she used to say to us of a m
orning, here you are, that was - she used to give us fo}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1967946\charrsid1983817 u}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 r}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1967946\charrsid1983817  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 pence. Now that was for his - a pound and a half of pieces, well - that used to be - pound and a half, that was like a - a - four - oh I don't know, she used to give us four}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1967946\charrsid1983817  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 pence I know, get his pie
ces. And as we - come from school twelve o'clock we used to walk up London Road to get his pieces off the - cats meats stall you know. She used to say, now go on, go and meet the girls. He used to be - as we come out of school he'd be - coming along to me
et us from school. We used to come right up London Road - with us, the old bloke on the - on the what}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1967946\charrsid1983817 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1967946\charrsid1983817  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1967946\charrsid1983817 \rquote  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
name stall used to wrap it well up and put it in his mouth, he used to carry it home. That's it. He was - half collie and half chow. Because one of my
 aunts had a - a - like a bitch and - she - got out and she got crossed be a collie and we kept like one of 'em and - oh he was a marvellous dog. Well at the finish he had to - we had to get rid of him - and - he went on a farm, he was such a wonderful - 
h
ousedog, that he - 'course he would never let him in, we got - he got - he got that to him at the finish - well we had to get rid of him 'cos of him, he went mad every time - every time he seemed to turn the corner - he used to go mad, he'd bark, he'd go 
m
ad. Course he - really my father got frightened and that. Yes. It's funny, I said, Ching, Ching, go on go up and get him, go up and get him, go up and get him. And he's crawling up the bleeding stairs. All of a sudden - ooooow. 'Course, I said to my mothe
r - what, we used to love him, get hold of him and cuddle him and kiss him, oh dear. Poor old Ching. Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Was your father a betting man?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh I don't know, 'cos I don't know much - oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did your grandfather?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No. No no, I don't think 
so, no, not my old grandfather. He was more of a carpenter. He'd go and look in a shop if he - if he got - could get a - anybody wanted something made and he'd go and look in the - you know, the - furniture shop, and - he'd take the - how it was, he'd com
e and he'd make a - he - he could make a - a suite of furniture. Man next door }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1967946\charrsid1983817 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817  what}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid1967946\charrsid1983817 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1967946\charrsid1983817  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1967946\charrsid1983817 \rquote  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 name, he used to say 1 he wanted a - some chest of drawers or a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1967946\charrsid1983817 \endash }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817  what}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1967946\charrsid1983817 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid1967946\charrsid1983817  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1967946\charrsid1983817 \rquote  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
name. He went and got the wood, he done it all, he made a - and when we all got married he
 used to - make us a rolling pin, a - a - a dough board and a rubbing board. That was our - and they - the rubbing board used to be that thick at the top and it - they lasted donkeys years. Donkeys years. Yes. He was a wonderful carpenter. Although he was
 a blacksmith by trade, that was his - trade, but he was wonderful carpenter.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did your parents or grandparents belong to any savings clubs, you said that they save at a shop?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh, we - oh for Christmas, oh and then we - my mother put in the penny 
bank for us and of course after a time that went broke, that was at the - in the Walworth road, oh - I don't - forget, suppose I was - I suppose I must have been about twelve. I forget now. And the penny bank, it was a - a - a big place, but - it went bro
k
e so - we never got - like all - we never had a lot in it, know what I mean, my mother used to give us three - perhaps two bob, my aunt used to give us, my other aunt you know. But - there wasn't a lot, but we - we only got so much out of it, the penny ba
nk it was. In the Walworth Road. And anything - if this man, if he - tried to look back on that he'll find that's right, the penny bank, that - yes, yes. Penny bank went broke. If he looks back or if he tries to find out -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 A lot of people lost money then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Oh they did, because it - like - it was a great big bank, everybody used to go in. There used to be - two doors here and they go in there and they go in that side used to go in, yes. Penny bank, used to call the penny bank.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What about any boot clubs or sick clubs, did they belong to anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh my mother used to belong what we called was Herlocks. She'd have - it used to be a - sixpence a - a shre}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid1967946\charrsid1983817 d}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 , that was - like for all the bed}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1967946\charrsid1983817  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 linen and your underclothes and - and 'course
 like as we left school and went to work we used to have to - give up - sixpence or a shilling, that was to - for our underclothes and - all that. Oh yes. Herlocks, that was another great big - place in Walworth Road, well of course it's all altered now, 
it went - it - come from one end to the other, it run right along, it was - for - curtains, you know, underclothes, coats and - hats and - one big shop there.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you have any insurance?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh my mother - oh my mother - yes, yes, yes. She used to p
ay for my old granny and all them but I don't know - 'Cos when my father left home she - she got a - what they called - after time you can get a - I don't know what it is - a - you get so much - so much after and then you get like what they call a rebate 
when they get it - oh, can't think what it's called now. Free policy, free policy they call it. She got a free policy that -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 How did you get on with your sister, were you friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh yes, we used to have our squabbles and - and - you know, fights but - otherwise we never - we used to be all right you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you feel quite close to her do you think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Yes, but we - we - yes, we - if we had anything we shared it, such as my mother - if she had - there was apple and orange she used to say
, well 'ere you are, an apple and orange, half of orange and half - half of apple, half of - oh yes, we was always taught to - to share, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 You were treated equally?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh yes, yes. Oh yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Who would you play with when you were a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 All in the - the girls and boys in the streets, oh yes. Yes. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would you play with neighbours children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 You'd all go out together would you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh yes, we all played, yes. Next door to us was - was a dustman, he had 
nine kids and - yes. Like my granny, anything left over she says - you know, pudding or that - used to put it over to - you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would they get quite a low salary in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 They did, they was very - yes. And all our - all our bits and piec
es, you know, that was left over, she - my mum used to pass over you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 They'd be poor at that time with nine children?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh they was - Hibbards, yes, Hibbards. Mrs Hibbards, oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you have a garden or a yard you could play in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Oh we had much - we only had a little yard but we had a big front gate, like in front of our house, and then we had a garden as well, so - like, we could play in the front - 'cos I used to go and get all the kids in there and fetch out - you know, t
he stools and I used to say, gran - can we have a - can we have some tea out here? Yes. 'Cos my old granny was a good old sort. Used to have - all the kids in, a cup of tea or if we had - you know, our - teaset and all that, used to get 'em up and pour ou
t cup of tea and bit of bread and butter or bread and dripping you know. Oh yes, my old granny.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would you play in the street with other children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh yes. Oh yes, we could - oh yes, yes. Oh we was - oh yes. Yes, well -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did children ever play in each other's homes at that time, would you go into people's homes to play?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
We used to go into one or two or they come into ours. Say it was a wet night and all that we'd say, gran, can we have - Ada Reed in or can we have Betty Davis? She used to 
say, all right, fetch 'em in, you know. And if our - we had like games or whatever we had we used to sit and play or - dolls you know them days, dolls and - bit of - bit of silk and a bit of rag, 'cos them days we could go to what they called the - now wh
a
t can I say - in London Road used to be Josephs, they used to sell all different kinds of - tools and all that, well right out the back he used to have a load of girls used to - and people used to take - all old rags and all that and sell, like to be sold
,
 and he used to - weigh 'em up. Well all out the back used to have so many girls, they used to sort it over. Well with the kids we used to say, have you got a ha'porth of silk rags? We'd go and - he'd give us a bundle of silk rags, well we used to - take 
'em home and make - you know - have it - dress our dols up. Ha'porth of rags and all that, all different silks he used to - go to the rag shop, ha'porth of rags for the dolls. Yes. Oh yes, it's -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What sort of games would you play in the street, can you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Old Jimmy Hacker one, two three. Well - 'cos my mother always said I ought to have been a boy. Like - boys and that - stand against the wall and then - the other one'd - bend over see and then - there'd be so many girls and boys and - and 
say, hi Jimmy Hacker, one, two, three, ah ba bee, and you used to run and jump and - and they all used to - all used to - then you all used to - jump on all - oh dear. I know I got a - I got a spank over it, my mother's come home one night and I'm saying,
 hi Jimmy Nackers. She come and give me a hiding. Oh dear. Oh, she said, you ought to have been a boy, not a girl.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did your mother let you get dirty when you played in the street, or would you get into trouble?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh - well, like my old granny }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1967946\charrsid1983817 like you know if we was - had s}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
kates on you know, say you come home from school and put a skate on, she'd say, now - get in 'ere and put your old shoes on. Don't let your mother come along and see you skating in them shoes you've got on. You'll get into row. U
sed to say, all right gran, all right gran, we'll be in - well all of a sudden mother turn the corner don't she. Oh - in. Wallop.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Could you play with whoever you wanted to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh - now and again my mother used to say, now don't get playing with so 
and so, I don't like you playing with her, see. You say, all right, all right. 'Cos with 'em you know - like - like in our street like some of 'em was - they used to say you know - then they say - do you think you could come in and have a bit of bread and
 
dripping, you know, that - I used to say to my gran, gran, can you give me some slices of bread and dripping for - she'd say, you and your mates. She'd give a couple of slices and say - take 'em out. She'd say, all right, go and take 'em out. No, my old g
ranny. Coo she was a good old girl. She never refused you my old granny. Never.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 It's wonderful for a child to have someone like that isn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What - we loved her. We loved her.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Why do you think your mother didn't like you playing with some children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Well I don't know, some of 'em was very - you know, very rough and all that you know, well - well I suppose we was - all was at - to a certain extent but - some of 'em was little villains you know that - that - they - they'd play with you f
or a certain time and then they'd - pick a fight with you, you know what I mean, that -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you belong to any youth organisations?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No, they was - they was never known them days. Never known, no, never known. Only - the only thing I can ever reme
mber that was known was - the - Boys Brigade. That was the only thing, Sunday mornings they'd come out and everybody'd come to the door and see 'em go along you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did they have something like that for girls?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh there was no girls them days. Only boys. No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What about Scouts and Guides?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 They wasn't - there wasn't even Scouts them days. Not - not that I can remember. I couldn't say how long the Scout -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 How did you spend your free time while you were a schoolgirl, did you have any hobbies that you enjoyed doing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Now, we used to come home and play hopscotch and - what they called - alley gobs. Sit on the kerb with - four - four - and a ball - a - a marble, you know, a marble and allye gobs, we used to do that. Play hopsco
tch. And - shuttlecock. We used to have like the bat and the shuttlecock. Or yo-yo. We used to have a yo-yo. Oh yes. No, well years ago we had that yo-yo, yes, we had them, yo-yo, yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you have any other pets besides your dog?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No. Oh a 
cat. Cat, yes, had a cat. We had a cat used to let itself in. Used to jump on the - at the back yard door and we'd be sitting in the kitchen you know. All of a sudden the - door'd come open, he'd be swin}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid1967946\charrsid1983817 g}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 ing on the - he used to jump from the - 'cos we had a - table out in the yard, he used to jump from the table onto the latch, let himself in. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 You didn't have any rabbits or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No. No. Oh no, we never had no rabbits, no. Had dogs and she had pups, we'd have like the pups then
 but - no rabbits, no. We only had a guinea pig once, one of my uncle's come home from the Navy and he - he bought a guinea pig. But - we had it cut in the yard and - when we were out one morning it was missing, we never see it no more. Gawd knows where t
hat guineas pig went.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did the cat get it or something?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Gawd above knows, we never - we never - we looked - my old grandfather looked all over the place you know, never - Gawd knows what happened to that. Whether somebody got over the wall and kno
cked it off - 'cos all our houses come - you know, all our houses come - like - the - the houses - in the next street looked back on - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you collect anything, stamps or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No, no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you do any gardening or bicycling or fishing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
No, well we never - we never went away for that did we. The only thing I did I used to go swimming, I took up swimming, I done swimming. But otherwise - no other - no, we used to do skipping or - had hoops, playing hoops, you know, 
the old fashioned hoops, had them but - no, not -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would you go for walks with friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh used to go up t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1967946\charrsid1983817 he park and all that, up to Kens}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 ington park, 'cos - you know, used to be a lovely big park, you know, years ago, everybody used to be in there Sunday nights or Saturday nights and - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Who would you for walks with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Oh girl friends you know, you know. Yes. And one of my little mates, she - lived in the street. She had a - she had - she was took ill and they took her to - Westminste
r, and then they found that something was to do with the hip, 'cos they operated on her, when she come out of hospital she - had one leg shorter than the other and then she had to go on - long - laid in like a thing see, well then I used to - her old gran
dfather used to put her in the pram and I}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009338\charrsid1983817  used to take her to Kens}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 ington park with th}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid1009338\charrsid1983817 e others, we'd wheel her to Kens}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
ington park you know and - give her a day up there or - take up lemonade and sandwiches and - take her up there for the afternoon and fetch 
her back but - that was - that's all in a way like that going - as - you know, because - really - with my mother and that we - she always told us not to go - too far a field you know. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 You said you went to the cinema, did you ever go to the theatre?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Oh yes, we used to go to the - South London in London Road, and we used to go to the old - Surrey at the Elephant. The Surrey at the Obelisk, that was like the other side of the - London Road, and we used to go - to the Elephant and Castle Theatre,
 that's were they had like such as - East Lynn and Todd Slaughter - all them, yes. Yes, yes, yes. Yes. Oh yes, we used to - my mum like or - my mum used to take us up there, and - well my grandfather. But - no, we used to go more South London where all th
e different turns was on, more than the melodramas.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Sort of music hall type of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Yes. Yes. We used to go up there. When we come out there used to be - first house, used to be first house about - six o'clock 'til about nine o'clock. Come out 
there they used to - take us over - right by - right opposite used to be Palmers, used to be - pie and mash or eels you know and - take us in and give us our supper. Pie and mash or - whatever we wanted, ells you know. Take us home then. Oh yes. I can alw
ays look back on the - I have I've had a happy - happy childhood.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would you get any pocket money from your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh yes, we used to - well like - yes, not - granny so much 'cos granny didn't go to work 'cos mum used to you know - but - oh me mo
ther always give us - left our - I suppose - you know, might be three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009338\charrsid1983817  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 pence or four}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid1009338\charrsid1983817  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 pence, whatever it was then. Oh three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009338\charrsid1983817  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 pence, I don't suppose four}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009338\charrsid1983817  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 pence 'cos four}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid1009338\charrsid1983817  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 pence was a lot of money them days. And we had a - aunt before she got married lived with 
us, she was a waitress, and Tuesdays she always bought a - Tuesdays was her half a day. She used to fetch all her - what they called her perks in the old blue bag. We used to count it, take it round the - take it round the bread shop. One week my sister c
ould buy six}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009338\charrsid1983817  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 p}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009338\charrsid1983817 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 n'orth of cakes, what she wanted. Next week well I could buy six}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009338\charrsid1983817  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
pen'orth of cakes what I wanted. And ten - she used to give us - you know, I suppose about tanner I suppose.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 That was quite a lot in those days wasn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Was, it was a lot, yes. Yes. It was, sixpence, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What would you spend money on mostly?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Oh sweets and - fruit and - and I was a - rare one for raw carrots and turnip, I used to go and buy a ha'penny carrot and ha'penny turnip. I used to eat, 'em, yes. T
ake 'em to school and put 'em under the desk. And I - remember - I remember one day I'm - bending down having a gnaw at a carrot. Teacher said, what are you doing there Rose? I said, nothing. She said, what have you got under there? I said, nothing. She s
aid, well get up and show me. There's a carrot. She said, you had anything to eat? I said, yes. Whatever you eating that for? I said, well I like 'em. Yes. Funny.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 It's funny you'd spend your money or raw vegetables isn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Yes. It's funny old I
taliano Ferano. Ferano. He was - Italian, he only come over here started with a little shop but finished - time he'd finished like years after he had two big shops and a big family but - used to go buying, he used to say, here you are girl, here you are g
irl, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Were you ever given lessons by one of your parents at home or by a governess?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Well - well no, well we never - we could never afford - we had to go to school didn't we. No. And my mother couldn't read or write so - we really taught her if we had to - my granny couldn}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009338\charrsid1983817 
\rquote t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
 - couldn't read or write but to end - at the end she - really taught herself and as she - used to write and used to write - used to sit down and write and she used to - like - copy it to send to one of my uncle's in the Navy.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 How old were you when you first went to school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Well - five I suppose, that was the school age, five, them days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What time did you go in the morning?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Well nine o'clock. You was - well the old school bell went at nine and you -
 you used to have to go along and get in by nine. Well after - well, might be after nine you - you know, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What time did they finish in the afternoons?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Well come out like for dinner was twelve o'clock, went home. Go home for dinner 'til I su
ppose about half past one you went back about quarter to two, the old school bell used to go about quarter to two to go back for the afternoon.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What time would you finish then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Four o'clock. 'Course - like when you was in the infants it was four
 o'clock but - when you was in the - higher class it was half past four. Standard six - like - standard - standard six, I think - I don't know if it was seven we went - we finished up. We finished up at half past four.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What kind of school did you go to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh, St Jude}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009338\charrsid1983817 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 s school in St Georges Road, Elephant and Castle.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Was that a board school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
No, board, I mean it was - just a ordinary school, there was no boards - there was nothing like there is today because - you won - well we never - we
 used to have to sit for - you know - examinations and all that but - you never had your o levels and - whatever levels there is today do you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 It wasn't a church school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Yes, it was a church school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 It was run by the Church of England?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 I suppose so, yes, St Jude}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009338\charrsid1983817 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 s, St Jude}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009338\charrsid1983817 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 s, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Was it a mixed school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Boys and girls. But boys was upstairs, girls was down. Not like a mixed school like today. No, the boys had their class upstairs and the girls had a class downstairs. Only li
ke the infants sat - little infants, little infants, like little children about five, they sat - girl and boys together then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 How would you get to school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Well I lived near school, I only had to - cross the main road and round the corner and along the street and I was at school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would someone go with you when you first started?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Oh no, the old dog, he always come with us, across the road, oh yes. We always went to school with him but he used to go back. Yes, the old collie.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What about your midday meal, would you come home for that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Oh - what - twelve - yes. Dinner was always read, my granny, half past twelve our dinner was on the table. Oh yes. Oh no, we never went without no dinner.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What did you think of school at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
I used to like it and yet I didn't, know what I mean, but - well I - although I used to - I was never a dunce, I - cos I finished - I finished in school at - I think it was standard seven like them days. Forget now. Either six or seven, I reall
y forget now. But I finished up in the - top class when I left you know, fourteen. I left at fourteen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What were the teachers like?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh like - you know, one of 'em - I remember once - 'cos my old granny, although you always ate your breakfast she
 was an old lady that always thought you - if you get hungry, so she always give us couple of slices of bread and dripping, 'cos - them days you always had the meat with the dripping on that - we always had slices of bread and dripping, I used to take two
 
slices for me mate and then about - I don't know, it was - used to be - I don't know, about eleven o'clock was - what they called playtime, used to go down in the - in the - you know, down the playground to play, used to have a game or - skip or do that. 
A
nd you used to eat your lunch, know what I mean. Well I remember this time, Miss Shemmer, I never forget her, and - and she's - 'cos I'm - I don't know - I always used to - either buy a carrot or a turnip, I was a - a bugger for that, I used to go to the 
o
ld Italian and say, give us a turnip or a carrot, used to - he used to - he used to wash 'em for us and I used to eat it, well, I've got this carrot under this - like under me desk and of course I'm bending down having a - she said, what have you got ther
e
 Rose? I said, nothing. She said, what there? I said, it's only me lunch. Of course she's bought me lunch out. She said, fetch it here. No, she threw it in the wastepaper basket. She said, you have any breakfast? I said, I did. She said, what did you have
?
 I said, boiled egg, you know, 'cos we never come out without - never, never. So - oh, she said, well if you've had your breakfast you don't want no break. And she threw it in the wastepaper basket. Yes. Well of course I goes home don't I. I says to my ol
d
 granny like, I said, 'ere gran, know what our teacher done today? She said, no. I said, she threw my lunch in the - wastepaper basket. She said, if you've had - if you've had your - breakfast you don't want no lunch, see. So ; during the time my mother -
 
father's come in, 'cos he was - he was - he was a - like he was a - in that - like he - we never thought but I suppose he thought a lot of us in his way, so he said, what you saying of? See. And he was - he was - he was a bugger. He said, what are you say
i
ng of, what you saying of? I said, nothing dad. He said, what are you saying of? So I said, well - oh like - my granny said, well tell him. So I said, well, I said, gran's given me some bread and dripping for me lunch and the teacher's - said, well if you
'
ve had your breakfast you don't want - oh, he said, did - he said, I'll be over there. I said, oh dad don't - don't. And I used to be what they called - the monitor them days. You used to have to answer the door and wait on the headmistress, you know. 'Co
u
rse, just before twelve as we come home to go home, I used to have to put her potatoes - go out and peel 'em, put 'em on, you know, and put 'em on - put 'em on to boil, you know, 'cos she used to have her dinner in there see. And - I said, oh dad, no. He 
s
aid, I'll be over there this afternoon, 'cos my old - I - I think - you read down there you'll always find about Ada Reed, 'cos she was a real mate of mine and - 'cos she always used to say, get any bread and dripping get me some, 'cos you know, you - you
 
always - I always got her some, so - oh I said, my dad's coming up this afternoon, I said. 'Cos - and he always wore a white silk scarf you know. Oh, I said - 'course I'm sitting there you know, the bell's rung, as I looked through the glass he's there ai
n}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009338\charrsid1983817 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
t he. 'Cos old Ada Reed - oh - I've walked out - walked out, I've - gone up, oh, I said, it's all right, all right, he said. So as I went back the - the - headmistress said to me, who is it Rose? I said, it's my dad. Your dad, she said. That's right, he c
ome in. Tell him to come in, she said. So she said, what is it, what is it Mr O'Rourke. So he said, how comes, he said - the teacher in my girl's class - My Gilla's class - 'cos me always being - named Rose, Gilla, 'cos they always give me a - a nickname,
 
was Gilla, how comes 'em taking my Gilla's - break - you know, tea break, well I forget - it was lunch, lunch we used to call it lunch. So she said, what is it, what is it? So she said, well Rose, what - Gilla she said, Gilla? I said, well that's what my 
d
ad calls me, I said. So she said, well what is it Rose? I said, well - I said, I'd got me head under the desk - got me head under the desk, I said, I always buy a carrot or a turnip and, I said, I'm eating the - bit of carrot and, I said, Miss Shemald, sa
i
d, what are you doing Rose? So - she said, what have you got under there? I said, I took me lunch out. I said, she got hold of it and threw it in the wastepaper. She said, she did? She said, go in and get her. Go in and get her. Oh I was frightened, 'cos 
-
 like she's in there and 'course she could see that - like - so I said, Miss Shemald, I said - the governess wants you at the desk. 'Course she's come out ain't she. Standing the. Well the - the - the - head matron - she - head matron, I was thinking of m
a
tron, she said - did - Rose have lunch - did Rose have a packet of lunch? She said, yes. Well she's there, she said, she was eating it. I said, I wasn't eating me lunch, I was eating a carrot, see. So she said - so she said, did you throw it in the wastep
a
per basket? She said, I did, I did, I did. So she said, I asked her if she'd had breakfast, she said she did. Well, she said, if a child has breakfast - she don't want no - you know, whether it's nine o'clock, eleven o'clock like you know. So she said, ho
w
 dare you do that, how dare you do that. And my father said, don't you ever do that again to my children. He said, they're always - they have their breakfast and if they're hungry they can come any time and get - bread and butter, whatever it is on the ta
ble, they can have it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did she treat you all right after that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Oh no, she wax - well after me. Well after me after that. And I can remember when I was - the week I was fourteen I was going to leave school, I don't know what it was, and 'course l
ike you know she'd always - at the end I think I was a bit saucy I got a bit artful sometimes. Yes? If I - I used to say, gran I don't half feel - I ain't half got a pain. And if you ever said to my granny that you didn't want no-nothing to eat you must h
a
ve been ill. Yes. So she said, all right, go up and lay down. Go up and lay down. I'll give you a call. 'Cos - sometimes - oh - I used to lay there. After I lay there she used to say, coming down to have a bit of dinner. No, I don't feel very well, I don'
t
 feel - I don't feel very well. Right, all right, all right, stop there then. I laid there. I used to hear the old school bell go. Oh, I lay there a little bit more. So she'd holler down, do you feel you want a bit of dinner now? I used to say, well I thi
nk I'll try a bit. All right, come down. So she used to say, you know it's my day to the pictures, she always went about - Tuesday afternoon and Thursday afternoon. 'Cos them days when they went to the pictures they used to pay about three}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009338\charrsid1983817  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 pence or four}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009338\charrsid1983817  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
pen
ce, have a cup of tea and a cake. They all was - was put along - all along - in the pictures, a cup of tea and a cake or a biscuit and that. So - she - she said, you - you know it's my day for the pictures and that. Used to say, gran, can I come to the pi
ctures? Oh dear. Gawd, she used to say, you'll get me hung, come on, get your clothes on. Oh dear. She said, don't tell your mother. Don't tell your mother, you know.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Was your mother interested in your schoolwork, did she take an interest in what you did at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh she used to ask how we - 'cos really in a way we - me and my sister, we was - like - we learnt - we learnt and my mother was really - p
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009338\charrsid1983817 r}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 oud of us you know because we used to - write and tell her, you know, and liked to tell her thin
gs, although - like I never at the time that my mother couldn't read or write, I never knew it, but - you know, she used to say and - 'course my father used to - of a night be in the kitchen when he - felt he didn't want to go out, granny and grandfather.
 My father used to sit and read the paper to 'em you know, but - that was - that, no, I didn't know 'til like years after that my mother couldn't read or write.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did she ever have time to come up to the school to discuss something about you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Well they never did, I mean, she was always at work my mother, she - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did they have open days for parents to come up in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No. No, no, no, it's only like - such as - which you don't see it now today, used to be empire day. We all used to 
go to school with a - like - we did, my sister - we'd have a white frock and - a red white and blue bow here and a red, white and blue sash. Go to school, we had - you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 All the children would be dressed like this would they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Yes. And the bo
ys used to have a bit of - red, white - Empire Day was - was half a day for us after. Blimey, you don't see it today. Gawd, you were - you kept the tradition up, know what I mean. No. \{DOUBT\}
 to her, she said, you'll go out, she said, and have the cane. 'Cos the cane them years ago was - very bad, and I'd gone all through school 'til I was fourteen, the week I'm going to leave I've got to go and have the cane.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 How serious would things have to be for someone to get the cane?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Well you - I think I was a bit saucy to her. I think so. I think -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did this happen often with girls?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh - oh - girls and boys, yes, if they - if they were saucy or - 'cos like - well not a lot, it was only now and again you had to}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009338\charrsid1983817  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 be - you had to be - and I suppose 
I got a little bit saucy, knowing I was going to leave school at fourteen - you know, going to leave school. And having me own back on her I suppose. Well, she said, you'll go out and have the cane. 'Course I gets to the desk don't I. Oh - the head - one 
s
aid, what you - what do you want Rose? Said, I've come for the cane. 'Cos it was always the head - the head - like - mistress give us the cane. She said, what? I said, Miss Shimald sent me for the cane. She said, well what did you do? I said, I was saucy.
 
I said, I was saucy. Now, she said, you've been here all this time, now go back. And - apologise to her. 'Cos, she said, I'm not going to give you the cane. Yes. I went back. I said, I'm - she come back with me. Oh she come back. Now, she said, go on Rose
.
 I said, I'm sorry Miss Shimald. She said, all right. 'Cos it was always me - my father that was - 'cos my father said, let's hope you - like he did - you have any children of your own, if they ever - want a little bit of bread and butter always give it t
o 'em, or something like that, I don't know what - 'cos my father was - he was, he was - oh he was - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Did the teachers ever emphasise certain things as important, did they talk about manners being important and you had to be tidy and punctual?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Oh we was always - we always had to be clean because there's - there used to be a nurse come and see to our heads and then they'd pull all your clothes down to see if all your vest - yes, all your vest were clean, oh we - yes, we used to - have a nurse co
me round and - examine your heads and - pull your clothes down and - if you ever got a mark you know that it was either your vest or your - well thank Gawd I never did, and I had a good mother but - never had that, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 I suppose there were some children who did?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Lot - oh yes, yes. Oh their heads, they had to go to the - them days used to be a cleansing station they had to go. Oh yes yes. Oh yes.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What about being punctual, were you supposed to be on time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh - always went to school - on time. My old granny always see to that. Although.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did most of the other children at your school come from a similar type of home to yours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Yes, some was I you know, very poor, their mums. Yes. Yes. Well I mean, my mother wasn't rich but we wer
e a bit - we - you know, we was better - really looked after than - some of the kids - children that used to - come to school, oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Some were badly dressed were they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh yes, oh - holes and that in their stocking - socks, oh yes, no, not like - trousers, you know, oh yes. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would the teacher treat those any differently? Did they single them out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh no, no. No, we all in the class, oh no, no. Oh no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you have any gangs or groups at your school that you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No, I don't think we ever - I don't think we ever done anything like - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Were any of the children left out of things? Or do you think most of you played together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Well we all used to really - muc}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009338\charrsid1983817 k}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817  in together. Know what I mean, that - it's - it's funny, if we ever had any sweets - like we - you know, you - you know, give out. Well I suppose - I don't know, perhaps I was different dispos}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009338\charrsid1983817 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 tion to some but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 You don't think the poorer children suffered, nobody would not play with them because they were poor or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
No. No. No. No, 'cos you know if you - only had ha'penny or a penny you - not a penny, ha'penny them days or - a farthing comes to that, if you ever got like you - you always give 'em something, you know what I m
ean, you give 'em their bit of something or - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you ever go to any other school or was this the only school you went to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No, that was the only school I went to from - when I went to school 'til I left school no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 How old were you when you left?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Fourteen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would you have stayed longer if you'd had the opportunity?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No, well it wasn't them days. That was never known them days. No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you go on to any evening classes or anything after that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No. No. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 People left at fourteen and their education was finished?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Well then they went to work. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you have any regrets about your education when you look back at it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No, I don't think so. I've always gone to work and got on all right in 
all me jobs that - well I've been in the kitchen all me life that - no, I always - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 You think you benefited from attending school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Well we used to go to - we used to go to - laundry, cookery and - all that you know, but - oh no, I suppose so,
 it - I - you know, it - it taught us - well I never had to learn any ironing or washing, me mother always see that I - see to that but - no. No, I've never regretted me - never regretted - I've always told people that I had a - happy - life as a child, y
es. When I - and when I hear some of these people, you know, terrible - like - ups and downs, fights indoors with me granny and gran - mum and all that but - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you ever have a part time job or any means of making money when you were a schoolgirl?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No. Oh no. No. Oh no. No, no. Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What was your first job when you left school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Well let me - oh I went and worked for me aunt in Covent Garden. That's where I first was - I wanted to go in the printing line. But my mother said, well go and help your aunt out like, she'd opened a little caf\'e9
 and - go and help her out and - like after three week - two or three weeks when she gets settled, she said, I'll - I'll put you in the printing. But - come there - from - I never see. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What did you have to do in that first job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh I used to - help - learn - had to - helped to cook and - clean up the - caf\'e9, I used to have to scrub the caf\'e9
 out and - like, you know, of a night and - had to work in the morning, oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What hours would you do?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh well it was about - oh, I suppose eight o'clock 'til half past five. Six o'clock.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What about Saturdays and Sundays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh we worked Saturdays, 'cos market was open. Yes, Saturdays 'til about - one o'clock, two o'clock and - no.
 Oh Sundays off. Holidays, all holidays like such as the market shut down, we all used to - shut down.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Do you remember what you were paid in that first job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 About - about six bob a week. Six bob, yes, six bob. And it was a lot of money really. Yes, six bob.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you think that was a fair wage at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Well - of course - well it was six bob was a lot of money. You could go and buy a hat for about one and eleven, two and eleven and - pair of stockings for - six three. Yes. Open worked and all that, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you get any paid holidays at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Oh well being me aunt I mean - being me aunt - oh like - nothing like that dear. I used to say to her I was short she'd - she'd give me a few bob.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you give any of that money to your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
No, that was mine. That's mine. No, that was mine but - although I always said, mum, can I have a new hat? She used to say, I hadn't had no wages off of you so you ain}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009338\charrsid1983817 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 t going to get a new hat. I was always one for a - new hats and - I - although my mother - my mother kept us in clothes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Even when you started working?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Yes. Oh yes. But what - yes, we was always - me and my sister, 'cos - really there was only a - thirteen months between my sister that - really what she bought for me she bought for her that - oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 So what did you spend your six shillings on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Go to the pictures and - you know. Buy meself perhaps a - couple of pairs of stockings or a - can't say because - if ever I wanted anything - oh and my mothe
r used to say, all right - there used to be - Herlocks in Walworth Road was a great big like linen drapers, everything, give me sixpence a week, that goes for all your underclothes see. And - old Granny Jones in the street used to hold the clubs. Well you
 
- you'd go in it, my mum would and all that, about two or three shares, well, you used to have to - draw for it so whoever pulled - pulled out one, two, three - number three week, you - you got your - you got your club money and went to - went to - Herloc
ks and bought your underclothes and your shoes or - yes, oh yes, we always - yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you like this first job, did you like working with your aunt?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Not at first, but of course at the finish got used to it but - that - after that, well I went in 
- like after I - oh after I left her - well the war broke out didn't it and - I went to Sainsbury's I think. And - I worked at Sainsbury's. Then from there - where'd I go then? Coo -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 This is during the war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh yes, I worked - in a sweet}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009338\charrsid1983817  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 stuff sh
op in London Road where I lived. During the war, because when the warning went we used to shut up and I used to go towards home and - like - you know, like - I had a young aunt and all that and I said she had a young baby, I used to get hold of him and ta
ke him down the tube. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What were you paid at the sweetshop, can you remember? Were you paid more?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Oh yes, I - yes, yes. Yes, I suppose about - I suppose I was about - sixteen then. I was fifteen when the war started, sixteen I suppose. I was
 there when the - the war finished, 1918, I was still there when the war finished. Yes, I had a good job there. 'Cos like - there, our guv'mor, if you like - - 'cos the war on, the - Australian soldiers used to come in, buy boxes of chocolate he used to s
a
y, well - and chocolates like was a bit hard and - some of the women used to say, come - come in, and they used to let them have chocolate for their - kiddies and all that. Soldiers used to come in with the - Australian and all that come, used to say - ge
t
 a bit extra on the boxes of chocolates you got a bonus see. Well I did to the Australians, used to fetch their girls in to buy chocolate. That's how I got me - I used to get a bonus there. I think that used to be Segars' I think he had - he had one at th
e Elephant, one in Walworth Road, one - he had five shops that man Segars. He made his money really during - during the war.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What hours would you work, there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh used to be about - half past nine in the morning. 'Til about half past six at night.
 Well - no, half past six, seven, because - everybody used to come along then to go to the theatre and of course - like - well they all come in to get their sweets and - used to be all - all crowds in there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you work Saturdays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Yes. Yes. Yes. I had one day off a week, that, because I worked Sundays - and I worked Saturdays but I had one day off a week for that.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What did you think of your employer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh good, I - yes, I had a - I had a - missus and guv'nor had one daughter, they treated me like their - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you quite like this work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh I enjoyed it 'cos there was - all the sweets, weighing up and - it was interesting really. Yes, oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you get any holidays through that job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh yes, oh weeks holiday, a weeks holiday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 A paid holiday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh yes, had a weeks holiday, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you ever do any other jobs at all, after that, after the first world war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh yes. No, well I suppose - at eighteen I had - after eighteen I had a bad attack of - an}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid1009338\charrsid1983817 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 emia, and of course I packed up work and - well I was - ill and all that and - I was home for nearly twelve months, like my mother looked after me, but -

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you work after you were married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh I've worked - I've worked all me - life really. Oh I've worked all me life.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What sort of jobs have you done?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 I've - no, I've done cooking all me life. All me life I've done cooking. In the kitchens, oh, I've been at - worked in - Picca}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009338\charrsid1983817 d}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 illy, Glasshouse Street - the Rising Sun in Smithfield market
, early morning cooking for the porters. Yes, their early morning breakfasts', yes, oh yes. I've had a - really - good - you know, interesting life, know what I mean. Yes. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 You really enjoyed these jobs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Yes, oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would you have preferred to do any other type of job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
No, I don't think -o. No I don't think so. No. 'Course it was hard work, it was very hard work but - I suppose always being in that way inclined - perhaps I would if I'd have learnt typing or something lik
e that, them days it was - it - them days like when I was a girl like that although - if you had the money you was sent to Pitman}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009338\charrsid1983817 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 s, well that - you - well Pitman}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009338\charrsid1983817 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
s in Southampton Row, that was hardly known, only a little place, at the finish they - they f
inished up as a great big - now, perhaps I might have been - no, but when I first left school that's what I wanted to go in the printing line but perhaps - but there you are, that's just one of them things, it didn't happen.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you ever belong to any trade union?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No, well - no, no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you ever feel that there was any difference of interest among workers at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Well I don't - well I don't know, no, I think we all - all seemed to work together, I don't know. Although I'll t
ell you what, years ago - like - such as me, when I first start in the kitchen they told you that you had to go and do something, you went and done it, don't matter what you went there as you done it because - they might say, you - will you go over there 
and scrub that up or that. But as the time went and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009338\charrsid1983817 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817  what}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009338\charrsid1983817 
\rquote  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1009338\charrsid1983817 \rquote  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
name was altered, such as I did, well I - I never had to pick up that, I'd say, I - oh well, you know, Beattie, go and fetch that over and - you know. That's - as the years went by. But - not like - years ago. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Do you feel there was any division between trained craftsmen and other workers at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 He wasn't much trained was we.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 If you knew a family whose father was a carpenter or something would he be regarded differently than an ordinary unsilled worker?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Well I suppose he would, a carpenter. I suppose he would, I don't know that - I mean, I couldn't tell you that way but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did people want their children to be trained as craftsmen at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No, well
 it never did they. I don't think that - them times - as the children comes fourteen they were sent to work but - once they were sent out and got a job - it didn't - matter what job they got as long as they got a job. Yes. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would you say that full time work changed your attitude to life at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh I don't know, you - couldn't say about that really that - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you go on living at home once you'd started work?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Yes. Yes, I never left home in me life. I had too good a home, I 
didn't want to leave it, not 'til I - - then when I got married I didn't leave home, I still lived with me mother, 'cos me husband went in the Navy, he was in the Navy then. Wasn't 'til he come out of it that - like we got our own place.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did starting full time work change your relationship with your grandparents or with your mother at all, did they treat you any differently?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 How about your sister, what did she think of you once you'd started work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Well she - she wasn't far behi
nd me was she. Yes, she started work when she was fourteen at - Sainsbury's. And she worked there 'til she - got married, she worked there, she got married when she was - twenty-one. And of course at Sainsbury's years ago, once you got married you couldn'
t
 be - you couldn't go to work, never - they never employed married women. Yes, Sainsbury's in - in Stamford Street. Yes. Yes. No, no. No, didn't - well you know it now. No. Yes, that' was Sainsburys. My sister packed up work when she got married, I think 
s
he was twenty-one, she got married in the Christmas. Now let me see, no, she was a bit older than twenty-one I think. Any old how, that day - that week when she was getting married she got her cards. Yes, that's Sainsbury's. And when we used to work there
 
me and her - there was a little room we used to go up for our tea and we used to have a cup - right up in a little square like that. And all the girls in - we all used to traipse up the stairs, I suppose we paid ha'penny a - ha'penny a day for our cup of 
tea. That was paid at the end of the week.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would you spend Sundays any differently once you started work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you stop Sunday school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh yes, I didn't go to Sunday school no more.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you go to church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh no, no, no, no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Were you interested in politics yourself once you started work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh no. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What would you do with your spare time once you were working?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Well used to - used to go up the pictures, go to the old Empire or - no, I - I see life 
that - you know, used to go out, used to go all over the place you know.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would you go out in the evenings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh yes. But we always had to be home a certain time, know what I mean.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Even when you were older?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Well, oh yes, had to be home at a certain time, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Where would you go in the evenings, would you go to music halls and cinemas and things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Yes. Holborn, Winter}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1377173\charrsid1983817  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 gardens, Drury Lane, all over there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you make any new friends at this time? Girl friends or boyfriends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No, I can't say that I did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 You were still friendly with the friends you had at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
No, no, oh well I missed - I lost sight of Ada Reed, like me old mate. But I met her years after. Funny. Yes, I met that woman - years after. Years after.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 You recognised her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Well she recognised - - 'cos as I - as I'm going along I forget where I was, I was in at Peckham, and as I was - she hollered out, Gilla - 'cos she always called me Gilla not Rose, Gilla. Oh, I said, hello Ada. Funny. Ye
s. So, I said, how are you getting on? She said, oh all right. Now she's - when - like after - like as she - as she left school and all that she married a fellow out of - out of Covent Garden, 'cos she hadn't been married - like very - well she got marrie
d
 and that and she like fell for a baby, well now - when I see her - next time I see her he'd died, well like and she was left with this little baby. And then - it was the next time, I'm waiting for a bus in - Pall Mall, by old Hamptons that got all bombed
 
down by - Rickham Street. As I'm standing there I looked up, she said, hello. I said, hello. Cor, Gawd, I said, so I said, how are you - how are you getting on? All right. So - I said - she said, how are you getting on Rose? I said, all right. Gilla, not 
R
ose. All right. So she said, I got married again, she said. I said, go on, did you? I said, good luck to you. Yes, she said, I've got two babies. Like two children you know, not babies 'cos it was years. Go on. Yes, she said, I married a bookie, ain't it 
funny. And then - oh Gawd, years went by again, I tell you I see her in - Peckham. Well oh blimey she's as old as me. And - I - she said, hello, I said, hello.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 You recognised each other?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Yes, we always did. 'Cos she said - she said, Rose, she sa
id - not Rose, Gill, she said, we'll never - we'll never forget one another will we. Funny. So she said, I've lost me husband but, she said - and then - I don't know, one Sunday I'm waiting to go to work after I lost my husband - and - she's waiting at th
e
 bus stop. I said, hello. She said hello. Said, I'm just going to me son's, she said. I go weekends she said, like - and have a - she said, I spend one weekend with me son and one weekend with me daughter, see. Oh, I said, that's very nice. Well of course
 you know - well she - I suppose - she's as old as me now but - it's funny. I'm often - I've met that woman - on and - well that girl on and off all them years. Old Ada Reed, funny.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Could you take friends home to your grandparents house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would they welcome them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Oh yes, we used - I - like the children - well in our - well I think I've told you if you looked down in our front garden I'd walk in, I'd say, gran, can I fetch some children in, have a cup of tea? All right. She used t
o fetch the tea out and in the front gateway and we used to have it on a big stool and - my old granny was good old girl.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 When you were working were you still allowed to bring friends home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh yes, I used to say, gran - be all right to fetch - I
've got a girlfriend or a boy - she used to say, well, fetch him in, if I like him I'll - funny I never - I never had - I never had many - really boyfriends you know what - it's only one and - I - it's funny though, if I'd have - if I'd have - if I'd have
 stuck to him - I - I'd have been in the money but - he stuttered and oh - and a nice looking fellow, he stuttered. Ooh couldn't - my mother said he's a - oh I said, I can't - oh I can't have him, I said, he stutters.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 If you went out would your mother want to know where you'd gone?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Oh where you're going, yes, she - I used to say well, I'm going up the Oval and - won't be back 'til - won't be home 'til about twelve o'clock. All right. Well my old granny like she'd be on the alert as you went in, sh
e used to say, all right, bolt the door. 'Cos she always heard your - key, she was always - up on the top l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1377173\charrsid1983817 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
nding listening. Yes. No. Oh dear.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did anyone outside your house ever help your mother look after the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No. No. No, gran - well my -
 like my granny and - like I had a - a young aunt, now there wasn't a lot of difference, well - she used to do the - she used to - like do the work and all that and - no, that -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 If your grandmother or your mother was ill what would happen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 My mother was never ill. No. No. She might have gone to work ill but nobody ever knew nothing about it. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you have any relations living near you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh they - like lived at Camberwell Green like and - you know - oh they lived - all like - you know, like about three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1377173\charrsid1983817  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 penny ride them days, wasn't far, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you see much of them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Oh they used to come up weekends, yes, we used to have parties and - holiday times, parties, my mother, yes. Christmas time they all met together all the whole - all the whole family met Christmas.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 You were a close family really?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh yes. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did your mother and father have friends who'd come into the house at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Well no, my mother went - no, my father was a - very kind of jealous man,
 he - my mother could never have no friends that - oh, cor, no, she - oh, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would he ever bring his own friends home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would people come into your house without an invitation?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh well like - well like next door might - old
 - Mrs Hibbard next door might say, gran, can I come in? Like to my gran, and my gran'd say, yes, well - whatever they're talking about I don't know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would your parents go out with friends, would your mother ever go out with any friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No. No. My mother never went out. Not when - once she come home she never went out my mother. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
People often say that in those days people made their own amusements, would you remember that as true in people's houses you went to or when people came to see you?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Well I don't know, no, well - like - during the week we never had nobody come, know what I mean. It was only weekends that - like - you know - we - I had uncles in the navy. They - they'd write home to gran and say - we're coming home and - get
 a steak and kidney and mushroom pudd}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1377173\charrsid1983817 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 n}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1377173\charrsid1983817 g}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
. Well I can remember my granny, we had a great big a great big basin - and - I used to have to go and get the mushrooms and she used to make the - and she used to have a big steamer and put it on and - he used to fe
tch his - sailor mates in and - all the whole table used to be - put - open right up and we'd all sit down and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 It must have been great fun?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 It was, it was really, it was really. Was really, but I was only a kid but I used to enjoy it, cor. Enjoyed it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Many people divide society into different social classes or groups, before 1918 were you aware of there being different groups or classes at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Not as I know of, I don't know. No, well I never - I never met - I used never to mix kind 
of like that, know what I mean, that - might have been such as - all round the Elephant like what they called gangs and all that, some gangs used to be - the racing gang or that that - like - well, I never used to - was never }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1377173\charrsid1983817 intermixed}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817  with - anything li}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1377173\charrsid1983817 k}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 e that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would you say your family belonged to any certain group at this time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No. No, they - they never mixed like with nobody like that. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you ever have to treat people of one sort differently from another, did you ever have to curtsey to people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Oh - no, no, Well years ago like, all the men - years ago on a Sunday they used to go out they'd have a - a - a flower in their - in their button - had what they called a buttonhole, 'cos you used to see - flower sellers with a big - li
ke a big - placard and ther'd be - be a - a rose, there'd be something else, buttonholes. Fellows'd go out Sundays, they'd - but theirself a buttonhole and stick it in. They'd have their - their - straw hat on, Sundays. That - no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What sort of people would do this, it wouldn't be the very poor people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No, well - well - I don't, well no, I don't suppose - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Working people used to do this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Well they did, yes, they used to - they had their Sunday clothes them days and their workday 
clothes you know. Not like today, you - you've got all your clothes you can put on what you want, know what I mean, that - no, oh no.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you ever have to call anyone sir or madam?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Only when you went to work, was - always sir or madam, well - u
p today - well, I don't know, but - I always did, like when I - used to say - madam or - sir, you know. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would anyone call your grandmother or grandfather sir or madam?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh no, no. Gran or Mrs Shergold or Mr Shergold, oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 How would shopkeepers address people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Oh - they'd say, hello Rose or - you know, like that. 'Cos they knew us. They knew us. Or they might say to me, hello tomboy or something like that that - they knew you know, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 In your part of London who were considered the most important people would you say?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh I don't know. Couldn't say that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What about people like the clergymen or the vicar or the doctor, people like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Might be the doctor. Don't know about the clergy.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 He'd be respected would he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Oh yes. Yes, 'cos if you see old Doctor Matcher come down the street with his bag - we always said he'd got a baby in the bag. You know, you know, you used to say, Doctor Matchers come down, got his bag, you know, if he went - Mrs What}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1377173\charrsid1983817 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1377173\charrsid1983817  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 a}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1377173\charrsid1983817 \rquote  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 name you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would clergymen come and call on you at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No. Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What about shopkeepers, who would they associate with, who did they mix with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 I don't know - well I couldn't tell you, 'cos like - like where we lived in London Road 
you know you went in the bakers, you went in the oil shop, you went in the - next to the oil shop was where you got your tea and sugar. You'd walk in there, hello, good morning, and - you know, you say, gran wants this. You take your - list in, you know. 
And - no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would the doctor and the clergymen mix with the working people do you think or did they have their own friends?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh I suppose - oh I - oh I don't know, I suppose so but - you know, 'cos them days doctors, if you wanted a doctor you 
had to pay for it. See? Like - my mother used to take us if we was chesty to the doctors, well we - she always had to pay for us. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What sort of people would you say went to church in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Well I don't know do I, don't know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Do you know if different people went to chapel?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh there was chapel people. Church people.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Were they different from the church people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 I don't know. Well I don't know really much about that dear.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 You didn't go to chapel or church yourself did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh I had to go to Sunday school. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 When you were older it didn't interest you very much?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No, no, well - no, we was always taught - well my - always taught if you didn't do no wrong you never had nothing - know what I mean
, that - the only time I used to go - I used to go to - midnight mass, I did do that. I used to go that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 At Christmas?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Yes. Like my - you know, my father being - I used to go that but - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Would you say that all the people who lived around you had the same standard of living?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Oh some did and some didn't I suppose you know, that - we all - you know, anybody wanted any help we always - you know, always - seemed to kind of - help, know what I mean.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Do you think that people were more neighbourly in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Oh - than today, yes. Say any - any - any woman was going to have a baby or that you know, well we never knew it but - come up and perhaps borrow your sheet and that you know. See my old granny take a bundle out, well I ne
ver knew what it was but - but it was - the same as - it was same like really - as I grew older and that but today, no. Really - really today I wouldn't give you tuppence for the young 'uns today. I'll tell you that dear. No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 People really did used to help each other a lot?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What - nobody would know anything about it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you ever know any very poor families?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh yes, the old dustman next door to us, he had ten kids. And whatever like what was left over from a - our dinners or that we -
 my granny used to put over to 'em. Oh yes, anything like - she says - you know, any clothes me and my sister left off my mother always - put 'em over for them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What did people think of a man being a dustman?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh it was - ooh, it was terrible. Ooh terrible. Yes, terrible. And very poor pay let me tell you. Terrible. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Were some families thought of as rough families and some as respectable?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Well 'cos some was, some kids - ooh, some kids was terrible you know, yes. Some was like - you 
know - oh I suppose - 'course - years ago used to be called what they called the - the Friday nights - suppers where they used to go round and see a magic lantern, the poor children, in the mission, yes. And when they come out they - before they come out 
t
hey had a cup of cocoa and as they come out they had two thick slices of bread and raspberry jam. And - that's what those give to the - that was called the poor children's suppers, on a Friday night. And I can tell you I went with one of 'em, and as I com
e along I meet the raspberry - slice and my mother's come along, she's given me a good hiding, give me a good hiding. Got hold of me, she pulled me in. She said, you - granny said, what - whatever's the matter now? 'Cos I'm crying ain}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1377173\charrsid1983817 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 t I. - She said, she's
 come along - look at the slice of bread she's got. She said. She said, I'll kill you. Never forget that. Ooh - I think I went with - one of the - dust - dust children next - in next door, they said, come on, come round these suppers. Come round and see i
t. Cor}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1377173\charrsid1983817 ner}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817  dear, my mother said, you ever do that again. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Do you think your mother treated people from all the social groups all the same?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Yes, my mother - yes. Yes, no, yes, we never -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Do you ever remember anyone being called a real lady or a real gentleman, did people ever make remarks like this that you ever heard?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 I can't say that. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Do you ever remember seeing a policeman about?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What - they used to come along two at a time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Do you ever remember seeing a policeman?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Yes, they used to -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Policemen used to come in twos? What did you think of the police when you were young?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh lovely - lovely. And if they - if there was a party on in our house they - door was - used to come and knock on the door, they
'd sit on the stairs with beer. Oh dear. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 You say the police used to walk in twos?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Police, oh yes, twos.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Was that because it was dangerous?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Well don't know, well that was - that was - that was that - that was that kind of law, the
m days, you know, and they used to - change over different - twelve o'clock at night, you'd all - don't matter if you was out at twelve o'clock at night you'd always see a policeman walking along. Not like today, you never see a policeman do you. Yes.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did your mother ever threaten you with a policeman?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No. No. No. Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 How do you think the police treated people in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 They didn't - like children, if they}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1377173\charrsid1983817  was a bit - they used to slap th}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 em with their - their gloves. Oh yes. And I mean I'll tell you what - a child years ago was more fright}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1377173\charrsid1983817 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 ned of a policeman that - you know, they'd run miles but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 They respected them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Yes, they were - they was, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you rent your home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh yes, my granny like, she had the - she had the house and, you know, yes, rent.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you ever see the landlord?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh yes, he lived round the next street.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 What was he like as a landlord?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh he was all right, he was a - a - a good man.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Do you ever remember feeling your parents had to struggle to make ends meet?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
Well I don't know, I don't think so because - I don't think so. No, and then my Aunt Rose, 'cos I - I told you that, about me aunt Rose, she was a - like she had money - I don't think but, no, but my Au
nt Rose helped to - helped my - helped to keep my granny and that always - see that my granny - and - was provided for.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Even when your father went you didn't have a difficult time then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 At first like - no, but my aunt see, no. The only thing tha
t my mother used to have our boots and all that made but - when he went like - we wanted a new pair of shoes she went and brought a pair off the - what they called off the hook and I had bad heels over it because they were so - hard you know. No. 'Cos I g
oes mad don't I, but - any old how, that passed off. My mother says, you know -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 You never had to get any help from the Guardians or the Parish or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Did you ever know anybody who did?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh it was always everybody
 - like, lot of people yes. Oh yes, lot of people. What they called the bun house them years, bun house it was called years ago. And they got - never got really money, they got tickets for - bread, it used to be nearly - kind of a black bread, what I've h
eard, I don't know, you know, it used to be terrible bread, sugar and - I think it was very very hard.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 And the Guardians didn't treat people very well when they went did they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No. No. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Have you ever heard of the expression rough music, if people disapproved of people they'd make rough music outside their door or something?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 
No, I don't - no. No, it always seemed if there was a party they - used to - they say they'd lay and listen because, you know - like we had a piano and all that but - like perhaps in the street never but they used to like to hear the music and - no, no.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 People wouldn't bang dustbins outside people's doors?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh no. No. No. No. I don't know if they do it now I don't know but we never had it. I mean we re
ally we lived down - my old granny - like to the day she died, she - she'd lived in her house fifty odd years and - but - no, I don't think that - we never did. Al down our street we all seemed to get on - very well, know what I mean. Like there was alway
s a collection got up, or in the pubs at - a collection got up to help 'em out. Oh yes, yes, yes. That - yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 People had a totally different attitude towards other people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 Oh to - today, well - well I say - I mean, I'm older now but - although -
 I can only say I've got met some wonderful people this way. Wonderful people. But - like you can - like - when I - when I moved from where I lived, me little house, and went to a - do you know, the people was terrible, you - you felt like - as if you was
 
- they - world of your own you know, it was terrible. Like the kids - no, the kids used to - put rolls of cotton on me - on me door, as I opened the door you know, they'd be all up the stairs. I went mad I did, I went and banged on a woman's door, I said,
 your boy does that again, I said, I'll throw him over the balcony. She said, how do you - oh I went mad.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid752558 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 You weren't used to this where you'd lived?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8213171 FJ  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10178391\charrsid1983817 No. I said, kids, kids. I said, they're heathens. It's funny after, I said, you, I said, don't y
ou ever come near me, to him. But after - I don't know, one day something, I don't know what occurred, he's - crying and all that when I come through the - he looked at me and that I've gone by, and - I said, well what's up with you? Oh, he said, oh - you
 know. I said, all right, come indoors, give him a cup of tea. I said, what's the matter with you? He said, that boy upstairs. I said, don't matter about the boy upstairs, you remember that knocker, to him. He said, I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I'm sorry.
\par }}