{\rtf1\adeflang1025\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\adeff0\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang2057\deflangfe2057{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}{\f38\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f39\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f41\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f42\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f43\fbidi \froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}
{\f44\fbidi \froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f45\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f46\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f48\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}
{\f49\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f51\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f52\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f53\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f54\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}
{\f55\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f56\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden 
Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs20 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}}
{\*\latentstyles\lsdstimax156\lsdlockeddef0}{\*\revtbl {Unknown;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid1651909\rsid2506258\rsid3212931\rsid4405242\rsid5265435\rsid6365406\rsid6429687\rsid7079132\rsid8086646\rsid11344320\rsid11608922\rsid14231562\rsid14897221\rsid15207351}{\*\generator Microsof
t Word 11.0.0000;}{\info{\title Information about interviewee}{\author SEENU}{\operator lhorto}{\creatim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min9}{\revtim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min9}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords43567}{\nofchars248338}{\nofcharsws291323}
{\vern24613}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 http://schemas.microsoft.com/office/word/2003/wordml}{\xmlns2 urn:schemas-microsoft-com:office:smarttags}}\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1800\margr1800\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0\ltrsect 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\donotembedsysfont0\donotembedlingdata0\grfdocevents0\validatexml1\showplaceholdtext0\ignoremixedcontent0\saveinvalidxml0\showxmlerrors1\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace180
\dgvspace180\dghorigin1800\dgvorigin1440\dghshow1\dgvshow1\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\splytwnine\ftnlytwnine\htmautsp\nolnhtadjtbl\useltbaln\alntblind\lytcalctblwd\lyttblrtgr\lnbrkrule\nojkernpunct\rsidroot7079132 \fet0
{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}\ilfomacatclnup0\ltrpar \sectd \ltrsect\linex0\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ltrpar
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid6429687 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\ul\insrsid6429687\charrsid16072257 Information about interviewee}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid6429687 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid6429687\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tx2057\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid6429687 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6429687\charrsid16072257 Date of birth}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6429687    
\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6429687\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6429687  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid2506258 1894}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6429687\charrsid16072257 
\par Gender}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6429687           \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6429687\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6429687  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid2506258 F}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6429687 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6429687\charrsid16072257 Marital status}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6429687 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6429687\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6429687  
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid2506258 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6429687\charrsid16544153 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6429687\charrsid16072257 Occupation}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6429687 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6429687\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6429687  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid2506258 Housework}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6429687\charrsid16072257 
\par Geographic region}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6429687 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6429687\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6429687  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid2506258 Mousehole, 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Cornwall}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6429687\charrsid16072257 {\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
\par }\pard \ltrpar\qj \fi-490\li518\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin518\itap0\pararsid6429687 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 I feel very proud though - though, because I only went to a Cornish school here in Mo
usehole, I have a grandson who had the chance of getting into {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Oxford{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}, St Catherine's College, John Pender.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How many years did you live in the house where you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well I was born in this house and I was seventy-eight last - last Tuesday, the eleventh of January, so I've lived here - all my life.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 You've never moved away from here at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. I wouldn't know the first thing about moving.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How many brothers and sisters did you have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh, I had - my brother was the eldest, and he died - Christmas week, he was ninety-one.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What was his name?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 William James George. And my - and I had two sisters.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Younger?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No - older than I, and - my second sister was ten years and a half older than I, and the - and no childr
en between. So there was the four of us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 So how old was the oldest of the two sisters?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 My - eldest sister was - seventy-eight when she died.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Which was when?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 About eleven years ago.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How old was your father when you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh goodness I can't tell you that, I can't - I should think he was about forty-six.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Can you work it out from when he died?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 My - my father died when he was ninety-four. And he died the - the month the - year the war ended. The two boys came hom
e on leave - from the Army, and - he died while they were home, they - they were - I think all the men had the - had a months holiday I believe after the war ended, so they had to go back, and - they - and wait for demob, you see. And - he died - while th
ey were home, so that would be - the year the war ended.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did he come from Mousehole, was he a Mousehole man?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh yes. Yes. Yes, he came with his family - there'}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7079132\charrsid3212931 
s - five generations in Mouseho}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 le.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What was his job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Fisherman. Fishing all
 his life. But it - but he was a great scholar, he should have been born - in later years he had - wonderful - brain, and a great reader, and then when he was seventy-five and he finished on the sea, he commenced to paint. And - he had - painted hundreds 
of pictures and - well gave them away to young people who were getting married, they'd all come and ask for a picture, and - they're all over the world, his pictures. An Austr}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7079132\charrsid3212931 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 an couple that - came here to live, they put on - on - they had a gallery of pictures called t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7079132\charrsid3212931 he Art Gallery here in Mousehole}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931  and they invited - me to bring his pictures down and have a - exhibition, and we could have sold them all. We collected forty-five then, here in the village. And what we had ourselves you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did your father have any part time jobs or casual work or was he purely a fisherman?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Oh no, that was a full time job in those days. Because - was only the latter years of the sea going that they had engines on the boat. It was all done by sail and - rowing, and 
- the - the fishermen mostly here, they - they didn't own the boats, they - they had the - so many nets each - on the boat you see and the - and the gear and - so - they had to - to look after their gear in the spare time and - they was kept busy mending 
t
he nets and getting others ready - to go on the next season, and in this day of fishing they were - going from one port to another - from Scarborough to - to - Scotland, and from Scotland to Ireland, and - from Ireland to the Isle of Man, but practically 
a
ll - most of their time was - was spent on different course fishing, different - fish, mackerel or herring as the case may be, and - so by the time they came home, in each season they - they perhaps were home for a few weeks, that'd take them all their ti
me then getting the other - gear ready. And I've heard 'em say so often, he - he was - cook - for - for seven men on a boat when he was only ten. And he - yes, he must have been more aggravation he said.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How old was he when he went on the boats?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Ten years old. Well I - he was younger than that when they went fishing, well then all the boys here in the village he said would go when they were seven or eight. You can hardly credit it now can you? Just like boys going on the mine, going down the mine
 and that. Sent at a very early age.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 So I don't suppose he'd ever have been out of work at all then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
No, no, no, the - and - the - the worst time of the year was this - was the winter when they came home from Plymouth, and they would go up to Pl
ymouth and be there perhaps about sixteen weeks. Go up - in the - the latter part of November sometime and they wouldn't be able to afford to come home, not very often. Sometimes if they struck luck they may come home for Christmas and - I rem - I - I've 
k
nown my father to sell a net - to come home and spend Christmas home with the family. And then - the - the - the worst time of the year really was after Christmas when they came home, between the - winter season and the spring season. And it seems to me -
 
by what - what weather we have lately that - we had harder winters then than what they are now. Colder and - seemed to be more wind, they couldn't go to sea, but whether it was because, they had sailing boats - and they didn't have the help that they have
 now. But there was a long lapse between the - winter season and the spring season - which would perhaps be nearly April, before, and the fi}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7079132\charrsid3212931 sher wives and the families dre}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 aded that part of the year, more than anything else. And the - the wives had to be ver
y careful - on their money, if they - if they got - a few pounds, and - lots of times I've asked my mother for a new coat or dress or something I thought I would want, and - she would say, well, I can't afford it now. And - I would say instantly, well fat
h
er got some so - a few weeks ago you see. And - the reply would be, yes, and it may be months before they get anything more. And of course there was no unemployment. And they had to depend on the shops - to help them, and - they - they were very good, the
 
- the shops then was always kept by - by village people, who understood the fishing, and they knew the people that they were dealing with, see, and if the - if they allowed - families - weeks or - or to three months of the year to have credit, they knew t
hat as soon as the money was - was got they would have it back. And that's how - people lived in the days that - are passed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you know how old your mother was when you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No, I'm sorry about that, I should have I suppose, I think she wa
s about - I should reckon she was about thirty - five or six. Because there was ten years now difference in my - second sister and I you see. And my father was eight years older than mother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7079132\charrsid3212931 Was she a Mousehole}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931  girl?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Oh yes, our families ar
e - one of the earliest families in the - in the register in church, Poole church. Her name was Mann. Yes. Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did she ever work before she was married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No, only helping her father who had a - they had - her father had - two or three brothers,
 and they had three boats, and - she helped with the - all the nets, making - they used to make their own nets then, and - and what I've heard her - say she was kept busy - helping with the nets and - breed them, they used to breed the nets and do everyth
ing by them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What do you mean breed the nets?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Make - make them and - put on the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7079132\charrsid3212931 losels}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931  and the - put line and fix them all up for them, and - then they would have the job of - of knitting - the men's - sweaters, which was done then on eight steel
 needles, fairly fine needles, and fine navy worsted, so - that would take quite a while to knit. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did she work after she was married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh - her never stopped working until she was taken very ill.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did she have any jobs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No, only her fami}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7079132\charrsid3212931 ly. I don't think anybody - in M}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
ousehole at that time, it's only within this last - ten years, that - yet - that married women have - have done any work. They - they - when they got married they was considered to have a full time job - looking after 
their husbands and the - nets and the work that attached to it, and the children. Different day now, we've gone like the Americans.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How many rooms were there in the house that you lived in, how many rooms are there in this house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Six.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How many bedrooms have you got?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Three, and a bathroom. And toilet upstairs. A living room, yes. And kitchen and - sitting room.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did anyone else besides your parents and brothers and sisters live here?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 My grandparents, until they died. My mother
 gave up her house. After the - three children were born and had got up in their teens, well my - my second sister's ten years and a half older you see so when - so I was born here - the - her parents got - old and wanted her to come and - live with them,
 so - they came here, mother and father and the children came here then you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Presumably your mother didn't have any help in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No, no, no help what - no help whatever and up to the time that - my mother was an invalid and the time I 
was thirteen I left school - to look after her. She had a big ill - big sickn}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7079132\charrsid3212931 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
ss and she was in bed eighteen months and - father was fishing, and - I was here looking after her until - I was married, at twenty-three. In the - first world war. And I never had any help, I looked after her.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 So presumably she did everything like the washing as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Yes. When she got very ill there was a - a person to come in and help with the washing - you see, on Fridays perhaps and that but - that was all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Where was the washing done?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 In the basement. We had a copper down in there. The worst job in the washing was the two storeys to go up and down, looking after her.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What about clothes, did your mother make your clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Some of them made - mother made some of the things - underclothes and - but - her cousin - her n}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7079132\charrsid3212931 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
ece was a dressmaker, and - so we had - we never had any worry to do the - but - there was nothing bought in those days, not - not - in the way of - of dresses or blouses, everything was - you'd have a dressmaker came in a shilling a day. See?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you have hand me downs, did you get your sister's clothes, were they remade for you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh yes, pass down when they firsts - my sister being all that older, you know, I could have - 
skirts cut down and - 'cos they wore them very long in those days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What about shoes? Presumably you had to buy shoes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh yes, yes. But you know I can remember my cousin saying to me one day - well there - it was in the summertime, there were lov
ely shoes - being sold in - a shoemaker's - in Penzance, a - a shoe shop for one and eleven}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7079132\charrsid3212931  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
pence ha'penny a pair. And - would you like to go in and have a pair? And I said, oh my goodness, yes. And - we went in, we walked in, we'll say the three mile and walked back, and - I had these - picked these shoes for one and eleven}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7079132\charrsid3212931  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
pence ha'penny a pair, and they were a lovely little shoe, I can see them now, they were little fancy - like a little fancy button on the top you see in the front and a strap with a but
ton - strap. And they lasted us all the summer. Oh they were proper little summer shoe, one and eleven}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7079132\charrsid3212931  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
pence ha'penny, you could hardly credit it now could you. No
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What sort of shoes did you wear for doing housework and this sort of thing?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh w
e wore - the - most people wore - what we'd worn all the year and then had come down for every days, you see - wintertime we had boots, because we had so much mud - so much mud on the roads, that - they weren't made roads then as they are now so - we - ha
d to have boots, and protectors and coos on them to - trample down the stones from the quarry.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did your father ever help your mother with jobs in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you remember him perhaps cleaning or making fires?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, I can - I can 
remember coming home from school and finding tea not ready and I was very indignant about that. And - I'd - perhaps I was about ten or eleven then you see, and mother would be here - with a net stitched up to the window mending the net. And - I would - sa
y
, oh - isn't tea ready yet? Mother would say, no, and then when I've finished this net before I get it, I've nearly come to the end and I must finish this net, your father wants to put it aboard tomorrow. See, and that was the life of the - the life that 
was around the - boats and - and the gear. And - a good wife would be always looking after the gear and helping her husband.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What about a good husband, did he ever help his wife in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What sort of things did he do,
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 My f
ather, he would - well if - my mother was - if she was very ill, she was an invalid for practically - thirty years, well forty years of her life, and - I was sick at the time, colds or wasn't very well father would - wash out the kitchen and - clean the s
tove, black}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7079132\charrsid3212931 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 leaded stoves in those days, and he could turn his hand to anything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did he do any decorating or repair jobs round the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well, no, I don't think he decorated because in those days every room was papered or lined. We - the - the v
illage people - put a lot of lime on the houses. And I heard an old lady say once - the village people keep the plague away, because - they had no sanitation you see - here, and - there was little rivers - running down each little street was a little rive
r, and everybody emptied all their ashes and all their slops}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7079132\charrsid3212931  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
in the rivers. And this old lady said to me one day, the people of vill - the - the - the women of the village have kept the plague away, because lime she said was the - a wonderful - thing for ki
lling germs. So - I think that we all done share in keeping the place tidy you see. And most of the rooms were limed, and the cupboards were limed out and I used to get sick and tired liming out cupboards. And - mother wasn't able to do much herself, she 
would always give orders - of what had to be done you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 When you were little did your father ever dress you or undress you or bath you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 I - I can't remember that happening very often because - my father wasn't like anybody - the fishermen wer
en't like anybody else unless - you know, because they were out most of the time all the week, all evenings. Their work was in the nights. And - if father wasn't fishing here - in the night, they were away, as I said just now, different places. You see. S
o they weren't home that often. But - oh they put - he'd put - put us to bed, put me to bed and - and told me stories by the hour, he was a good story teller and could - always - make up a - a good - story, to keep me interested.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did he ever read to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Yes, he'd read a - I think that - the people - the parents had more time - for their children in those days than what they have now, I think that's what the children miss - really, is the contact with the parents. Father -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did your father take you out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Yes. Walked with me - after - I was thirteen when mother was taken ill, and - father'd walk with me and went with me all around the country - Sundays, Sunday afternoons or evenings. He was my main company then. And long walks and - tell me
 all about different - things, the flowers and birds and where the nest - where the nests were in the hedges and - very interesting father was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you remember him ever looking after you perhaps when your mother was out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Yes. I wouldn't min
d - and you know I was never afraid of father, mother was very strict. I suppose she had to be but - with the children, she was left alone most of the year with them, and if I'd been naughty - she would say, I'll tell your father when he comes home from f
ishing, and I would say, I don't care what you tell father, I'm not afraid of father. Which used to annoy her very much.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you remember having to do anything special, a particular job that you had to do in the family, like cleaning or something? Do yo
u remember doing anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well I had to help the - Friday afternoons when we came home from school, it was brickwork to clean. And - I don't know if you know anything about the brickboard, where we had all steel knives to - all steel knive
s to clean, and the board was about so long, with like a - a - a rough - towel or something on it you see specially for cleaning the knives, then we used to have brick - a block of brick - and I would sit in our back stairs, Friday afternoon after school 
t
hat was always my job, with all the knives mother could - scrape up, and - I had to clean them you see with this brick board, it would put your teeth on edge - when you heard the scrape, scrape, scrape. No stainless steel in those days, everything was the
 
hard way in work. And then there was a paste - called Usabit which we had to clean the - spoons and forks with, also the brass rods of the stairs, and - they were all cleaned of course Friday afternoon, and that was our job, my job always Friday afternoon
.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Right up until you left school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Yes, to clean all these fiddling things.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did your sisters have special jobs to do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well they had them in their time, you see. And - the only jobs that - the only jobs that was here to do in the v
illage for my sisters - my - my second sister went in the Post Office. She was hoping to be a pupil teacher but - to go on teaching, but there was no vacancies at that time, and - so she got tired of waiting an}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7079132\charrsid3212931 d she got a job in the Mousehole}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931  - in the Post
 Office here. The young woman was getting married and she had her job. And then there was nothing else to do, you see, and - only - if anyone - those who had money - which wasn't very many people here in the village - that - could afford to hire to have t
heir work done, and - my - my elder sister, that's what she - she done, she went out by the day to - a shilling a day, from morning 'til night.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you remember your sister ever helping you when you were little? There was quite a big difference in your ages?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did they ever help you to dress perhaps or to eat your food when you were small?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
No, my - my - second sister was at the Post Office as I said, and she had her food there. And she would be - wouldn't only be home in the evenings 
see, and - then she had to do - because all that - at that time everything was done by - by - morse, there was no - no phone, she had to learn - the different things pertaining to her work you see. Which kept her employed for a while in the evening, then 
of course she'd go out with her - friends and - and - my elder sister, she used to - do more for me than my second sister - help - put me to bed or wash me. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you remember ever helping them}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7079132\charrsid3212931  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 with anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Me? Oh I always wanted to help and do things.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Were you allowed to?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Yes. I - loved singing, and reading, and I - I used to have lots of rows with my sister, she used to give me lots of - talking to because I read so much, and she would - she'd want me to go and do things you see 
and - go on errands and - she - loath to leave the book then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you have to go to bed at a special time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh yes. Had to go a lot earlier than what they go now. mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What time did you have to be in bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Had to be in bed about - seven o'clock. And - I would beg to stay up a bit }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7079132\charrsid3212931 
l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 onger but - off I had to go.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you remember being put to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. And I would - and my sister would - my sisters - my sister Ada, she - she's she told me in her latter days that - she read to me mor
e than - she told me more stories than my other sister, I always thought me elder sister did but she didn't know, I was the one that told you the lovely stories, and - she would lay - lay down beside me, I was - always the thirst for stories and reading a
nd that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you remember how old you were when you first put yourself to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well I think I was about - five. And - do you know, I - I must tell you this, that my sister - my eldest sister was very reserved, and - 'course she - when she had a bo
yfriend - when she brought her boyfriend in first - and my mother had gone out visiting - her sister, and - I was put to bed see, and - Mary was there with her boyfriend. He came from Newland. And of course I was curious, I hadn't seen him. So - I came do
w
n out of the bed and peeped through the - this staircase you see. And of course I was in my nightdress. And that shouldn't have been, I shouldn't have come out of bed and come down with her boyfriend there. Anyway, I looked through the bars and - and I ca
m
e down you see, and Mary was insistent that I got up - in such a stern voice. And I - I just - stayed there, a bit - I suppose brazen or something you know me came over me very - very naughty, and - she said, you've got your nightdress on, go on up at onc
e
. And I said, well what's wrong with my nightdress? Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed in one of these. And I think that tickled her, broke down all her defences. And she - she had a good laugh and of course the boyfriend had a laugh and that was al
ways kept up against me, Solomon in all his glory. Oh dear dear.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you share a bedroom with your sisters?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Yes. After the time my grandmother died, and - and grandfather died. My grandmother died - when she was eighty-two and - and my grand
father - twelve months after. And up 'til that time we had two beds - in the one room, in the room - over this, and - a double and a single bed, and -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 So you've got three bedrooms and you had six people living here?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How did it work out then? You had your mother and father in one room?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Mother and father had - I'm sorry, not there, mother and father had one bedroom. And grandmother and grandfather had a bedroom. There was - a big fourposter in the room over the living roo
m, which is a bigger you see. And - that was - four poster in that and a single bed. And my brother slept in the single bed. And - my two - two sisters and I had the - they slept - there was only thirteen months difference in those two - girls, and they s
lept in the double bed and I in the single, you see. And mother and father in the other room.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 It must have been quite squashed upstairs really?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Which room did you bath in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 We had a bath and - the - the bath that we used to keep - 
it was one of the tin ones and we used to have that in the basement. We had - a - a - our bathroom and toilet now is taken out of the room over the - living room. About - fourteen years ago since we had that done. But up to then we had a toilet - in the b
asement. And - I think we were one of the first to have that done. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How often did you bath in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Every week. And of course you had to wash your neck and face and - and - your - legs if they were dirty summertime, children, you know t
hey're out every - and no stockings on in the summertime.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you have a special bath night for the whole family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Friday night. Yes. Yes. And there were clean clothes was always - took out and warmed and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 You just had clean clothes after bath night?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Always had your clean clothes put on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 You had a bath once a week?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, Fridays. Friday night.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Was your mother strict about it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, she was very strict on that matter. And - always brought up to have a good old 
wash, you see, every day. And - I'll tell you what because our work was so dirty here even when we were young people - the black}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7079132\charrsid3212931 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 leading the stove two or three times a week and that, we - we - we just had to strip off and have a good old wash or else you'd
 have an high water mark around your neck which everyone could see, so - we always had to have a good old wash.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you ever have clean clothes on a Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 On a Sunday? Well everything clean was put on, either the Friday night or Saturday morni
ngs. And - Sundays we had our - our best clothes which were kept for best, you see. And - I remember asking mother one - one day in the summertime - it was a lovely - lovely summer and this was a very fine day and I was going Penzance, I was perhaps - sev
enteen or eighteen then, and - I said, mother, shall I put my - my best dress on to go Penzance today? And my mother - looked - very indignant and said in a very stern voice, best? Will never be best any more.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Where did your family eat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What did we eat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Where did you eat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh we - we ate in our living room.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Every day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 You never ate in any other room at any time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Only here, perhaps wintertime we'd have our - our tea down here you see. But for our meals beca
use the cooker - cooking stove then - was in the living room and - it'd be handier to have it there you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you sit round the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Or round the fire perhaps?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh - always round the table. Never had any - any meals like they
 do now, haphazard, it was always set properly on the table. And - for dinner or tea or supper, that was the - way we lived then.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 And your mother had a range out in that sitting room?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 She had a - a grate, an old fashioned Cornish grate, everybo
dy - all the houses here - had these Cornish grates until the - the Cornish slabs came in vogue and - and - then - if anybody could afford a Cornish slab they had it. But - this - our living room, the - our grate came at the back of the next door neighbou
r
's fire - place, and we had to have it built out. It's an awkward shaped room you see and it would come right out and the other was part of the room. So we - we couldn't very well have a Cornish Slab. And - I suppose it was just half a dozen houses in the
 village who had a - Cornish Slab. Everyone baked everything. In the - in the big bake}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7079132\charrsid3212931 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 houses. There was about eight }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7079132\charrsid3212931 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931  bake}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7079132\charrsid3212931 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 houses here in the village. And we baked our dinners and our - tarts, fruit tarts and our pies, and our Christmas cakes and fruit cakes, all - everything was baked all the year round in the public oven.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Where was the bake}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7079132\charrsid3212931 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 house that you used?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Near the Keigwen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 That's just round the corner?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Here in the road and Saturday mornings you would have a lovely smell in
 this road of saffron cake being baked. They used to - used to have the - gentleman who kept it, Mr Humphries, he would have - two ovens, eight o'clock in the morning would be the first for cakes and bread, and then again at ten for cakes and bread, and i
t would be twelve o'clock dinners or half past - half past ten - somewhere around that time and the dinners and cakes put in.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What time did you eat breakfast?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What time did we have breakfast? Oh well if we had to go - we had to be at school by ni
ne, the bell, we'd hear the school bell ring about quarter to nine.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you have breakfast with your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well - if he was home and my mother when - before she was taken ill, when I was thirteen - but if father hadn't gone to sea he'd be here.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 So it would just be your sisters and your brother and you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Mm. My brother was fishing as well you see. And - he - he would be away just as often as - as - as my father was.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you take your mother her breakfast upstairs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh - not until she got sick, when she was sick I took it up for years and years. Up to bed for her.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What did you have for breakfast, what sort of food?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well - our breakfast was - wintertime we would have porridge, and - bread and butter and - and te
a, if we could stay to have it to go to school. And - in summertime we wasn't so fussy over porridge, we'd have - bread and butter and toast and - marmalade or jam, what was going. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you have a different meal on a Sunday? Different sort of breakfast, different food?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
No, well - the only difference we had in - on Sunday was saffron cake. Mother would always make saffron cake Saturday. Bake it Saturdays. Put it to rise Friday nights, and that was a custom of the Cornish folk - they always ma
de up their saffron cake, and - that would be cut up on the plate for - for breakfast, and - we'd have cheese if you - we were always very fond of cheese, my father - and mother and the family, and - suppers and breakfast most often we'd have a - cheese.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What about lunch, did you have lunch as a meal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
We had our - our lunch - there would be always - dinnertime, we never had it in the evening. Because - on - on the - on the work of the fishermen, they'd be - they would have their dinner and then g
o to sea in the afternoon, they were all night work you see. So they would be out on the fishing ground at - by - three or four o'clock. And - well we'd have something different every day, I can't - if we had - say - the - the - women would - would - pick
l
e the - the fish as the men brought up - perhaps a handful of - mackerel one day or - herring. They would be put into - busses. A busser would be a - a big earthenware pot, that's a Cornish word, and put in coarse salt, made of - a brine all you see and i
t
 would stand for twelve months in that, and - salt pilchards and herring and mackerel would be put - salted down in busses, and we always - the fisher people always had something in their cellars - that they could have for a meal. And - once a week - or m
a
ybe twice we would have perhaps salt mackerel or salt herring, and potatoes boiled in their jackets. They didn't believe in peeling the potatoes then so much then as they do now, they - they always said that the - more nutriment in the skin - under the sk
i
n than anywhere else in the potatoes, so they - if they had fish and potatoes that would be - they would be boiled in their jackets. And - at our little local shop where the Lobster Pot is now we could always have dutch butter. Which was delicious, it was
 a salt}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7079132\charrsid3212931 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
er butter that our own Cornish butter, and cheaper, a lot cheaper, and for our fish and potato dinner we always had Dutch butter to put - you could use then - this butter.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you ever remember having meat? Do you remember eating meat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you have a lot of meat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Oh, and meat was very cheap. We had - more meat then than what we can have now. We got for - with about - with half a crown we'd have a plateful of meat for half a crown, we'd get more that - for half a crown then than what you get now for a pound. Four}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7079132\charrsid3212931  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 pence - and three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7079132\charrsid3212931  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 pence a pound. Stewing meat and boiling meat at the butchers. And - it was nothing new to hear anyone ask for three or four pennorth of meat.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What sort of meat dishes did you have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh we 
- mother varied our - our food you see and - meat was very cheap in those days, so - one day perhaps we would have - well Mondays would be - what was left from Sunday, the meat and - perhaps fresh vegetables or what was left, and - Tuesday we would - mayb
e
 have a - a roast - the potatoes round the - the meat and that. A very nice Cornish dish is - onion and turnip cut up small in the bottom of the tin and potato cut up small and then the potatoes put around, and the meat in the middle, and - a little drop 
o
f water of course, and that'd make a very nice tasty dinner. And there was generally a - tart of some sort and - or a pudding after. Always a pudding, a milk pudding was always made if we had fish of any sort and potatoes. And - then there'd be a - pie, w
i
th meat in it, see, meat pie. And a nice crust on top, and another day would be - soup. And - have the bone, ox bone or something you know and make a nice soup with it. All different sorts of vegetables. And - then there'd be a pasty, and I will say that 
for our fisher}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7079132\charrsid3212931  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
wives here they did look after their children and their men and they always contrived to get - a good dinner meal for them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What about teatime, what did you eat at teatimes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well teatime would be perhaps - a little bit of fish if i
t was going, sometimes see having mackerel see you can - if you went through the village you could smell mackerel roasting in the grid iron. I wish we had a grid ion now, I never see a grid iron, I don't suppose you could buy one anywhere. You could have 
a single grid iron or a double one, you know, where you could put the mackerel in or the herring and - or the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7079132\charrsid3212931 pilchard}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
 and - turn the - grid iron over the other side and - roast it on a clear fire and you never had anything so rich, as a mackerel on a grid 
iron, or a herring or a pilchard. Pilchards especially. There's no richer food than those, and - I don't know why - a grid iron now is never made, because we have lovely clear fires here now. And you can never have a - that - fish done that way. I - I sai
d
 yesterday we had - we had mackerel given us, I said oh a - lovely clear fire and - can't we borrow a grid iron from someone. Put it under the grill then of the electric. But it scent the house out, that is - the trouble then and - never done as nice as i
t were put on a fire, a clear fire.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you ever have cakes for tea?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Yes, well - another Cornish recipe is holteddy cake, which is delicious, it was - very nice, yes and that was always - about two or three times a week we have - and especially 
made for the men to take to sea with them. Always heavy cake or scones, mother was a dab hand for making scones. And you put jam or butter on that and sometimes cream, if there was plenty of money going around you'd have it, always - always - Sundays - yo
u
 had cream in the house and scones. That was a special treat for Sundays. And - there was no fancy living then as it is now, there was no - tins of fruit and Lyons rolls and all that sort of bought stuff that you can get - you know, I - people never had i
t, never - never - wasn't - we had no shops here to sell it, anything like that. No restaurants or no cafes here then and - shops never - never went in for them and - biscuits and fairy cakes, but - never anything - like that to sell.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 You said earlier that your mother made her own bread, did she make things like jam, or did she bottle fruit or vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh yes, made jam, I don't know that - bottling wasn't done in her day, not like it was when I got - married woman.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What sort of jams did she make?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Strawberry and blackberry - apple jam, apple jelly. Always made our own jams, mother did, and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What about things like pickles?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Pickled pears was a very - well rare, and we always loved to have pickled pears, there - there's a hous
e here in the vill - in the village, Brook Villa that they had a - a nice orchard and - proper pickling pears. And I've got my big gallon - and - put cloves in them and the vinegar you see, and had them on for so long. They were delicious in the wintertim
e, put in a busser a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7079132\charrsid3212931  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 vain, and to take out you know for tea, very nice.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did she ever pickle vegetables like tomatoes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. No, tomatoes - I only remembered - seeing tomatoes when I was a - a girl about - ten or twelve. First tomatoes we ever saw c
ame from Sully, and my - my neighbours daughter lived in Sully in service and - she sent home a box to her mother and - we didn't know what they were. They were a - very large one, I can see them now, cracked you know. And - oh - my mother never tasted th
em anymore, she hated it. It looked so rich and she was so disappointed I think at the taste, and she never acquired the taste, father did but not mother and - but we never done tomatoe}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7079132\charrsid3212931 s}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931  or - and pickled onion, the picklers, they always done them. But never no fancy chutneys or anything like that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did she ever make wine?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Elderberry wine. Yes. Not elderberry wine, I'm sorry, sloe wine. And I made some this year. Last year I made them, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What about medicines, did she make medicines for the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well that - that's medicine, that - the sloe wine is a medicine. And - the - all the people, the old people had their different - cala - calamile was for - soar throats. People be going away picking that - certain time of the year and - up ar
ound Castaleck you could find that, little yellow - small yellow flower. They would boil them down and - put on a poultice if you had a - had quinsey or tonsillitis, and they had cures for everything in the hedges then. And - there was a woman here in the
 village who used to make up ointments and all that sort of thing}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5265435\charrsid3212931  for - from the herbs that grew }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
in the - hedges, but I don't think you can get it now, not - not locally. Herbalists of course. El - Elderberry - elderberries - the elder - the flower was alwa
ys picked and dried. If you had a fever - it was - you - you would see a bunch of elders - elderflowers hanging around the houses - in the summertime drying you see. And - the elderberries made the - the wine too.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did your mother make wine?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No, only the - only the sloe wine.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 She never made beer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. Oh no, we never had that brought in the house, nothing intoxicating. No, everything the - in - in that way was taboo, nothing brough}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5265435\charrsid3212931 t in intoxicating. Very rigid }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 was. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did your mother and father grow vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No, never had any ground for that, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 And no fruit either?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. Never had any - place to grow anything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 They bought the vegetables they wanted?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, but I can - I could have a - a big bucket
 and go down to the - to the - fruiterers or an old man that sold vegetables when I was young and - Saturdays I was sent down with a bucket for three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5265435\charrsid3212931  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 pennyworth of potatoes, and a ha'penny cabbage and a ha'penny turnip and sixpence would buy the lot. You'd have a potato - a a pail full of potatoes for three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5265435\charrsid3212931  
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 pence. And lovely cabbage for a ha'penny and - a great big turnip. And now you can't buy potatoes hardly for sixpence.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Were there tinned vegetables around at that time, or tinned fruit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. Well I think tinned fruit then came - oh with the shops when I was perhaps about twelve, eleven or twelve you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did your mother buy any?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Only special occasions. Wouldn't be able to afford to by - tinned fruit very often.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What sort would she buy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well tin of pears or peaches, something in that way. But - a tin of salmon on - on rare occasions, special occasion that. No, they didn't - they didn't eat out of tins in those days. That was - all - clean wholesome food. Bake their own bread
 and - two or three times a week, the gallon loaf would be a five pounder, and the two pound and a half would be of course smaller and - and that was a big job twice - two or three times a week and your saffron cake then the end of the week.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did your family keep any chickens?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
No. I've heard my mother say they did when she was - married first here, had chickens but not in my day. There was - mother said everybody nearly had a couple of - chicken here in the village, you know, the - in their houses. But - not in my remembrance.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you remember anybody poaching?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Poaching? No, I don't think our fishermen had any time for that. They had to poach on the sea, they - they - they never had time to - do anything - there - there were - several - l
and men in the village who worked in - on the fields, in the fields, farm labourers and different friends of theirs who would go away - with a ferret. They kept a ferret you know, they'd go away and - in the evenings for rabbits and - that, but - but my f
ather never had - I - I - I never remember him, he never had a gun, he never had a rabbit, he never had a dog, and - he didn't have any time for that kind of thing, perhaps he would be too busy reading in his spare time. That was his hobby.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you ever remember your mother perhaps having less food to eat at a mealtime than the rest of the family did?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Or father}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5265435\charrsid3212931  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
having more than everybody else?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 If she did we didn't notice it. We never - never knew it. I don't think we would have ate 
what we had ourselves if we thought she was going short. No, I can never remember mother - having anything short, I mean, you know, she'd always sat down and ate with us, and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What about your father, did he ever have more?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No, well he - no, I d
on't think so. He had - he had a good appetite and you know - he was very rarely sick, he was a very hard working man, he lived to be ninety-four, and - he used to say to me - up to the time before he died, he didn't know where his stomach was, he never -
 
he never - he never had a pain in his tummy in his life, and - he never smoked cigarettes, but a pipe, and he'd chew - raw - the - the raw tobacco. And he never - he never had pains in his stomach. HE NEVER drank anything but - strong tea. And - up to the
 time he died he was having - bread and butter for supper and cheese and his cheese for breakfast, he didn't want anything but cheese for supper - and cheese for breakfast
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you remember mealtimes when you were a child, were you allowed to talk?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Oh no. No. They was always very strict on - on having your food and you - supposed to - eat what was put before you. And I remember my sister that - the - the middle one, ten years and a half older than I, she - has told me lots of times since and - I've 
heard my mother say - she wouldn't eat fish. And if she came home from school and there was a fish dinner she would always want something else, she would - she'd rather have cheese - than - have fish, and she - she would - insist that she wouldn't eat it 
y
ou see, and - this day particular my father was in from sea and he said, no, you'll have to eat it. You'll have to eat fish. And that's your dinner today and you must eat it. It'll do you good. And - out of desperation you know she - she stuck out and - a
nd then - in the end she - looked at father and she said, I was never born to eat fish. And I'm never going to eat it. And that finished it. That was that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What did your parents say if you didn't want to eat something else, supposing you didn't like a vegetable?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well - they didn't like it very much, no, but - but I had our children here, you see that - they were born here with my parents, when mother was this - she was such a invalid I couldn't leave her, and so - the children were born here and a
s they grew older they had their likes and dislikes, and there was only eighteen months difference in the two boys, Jack and Bill - Jack perhaps would like - rice pudding and Bill would like tapioca and I would make a bit of each for them in a small dish 
y
ou see, and - or if they - it was dinner and one liked beans and one liked peas and I would try and please each one, which was silly of me I know, and - my mother would say that I was - mad, she'd say, you're spoiling them. If they didn't eat - if they di
dn't eat what was there they'd have to do without. And well I thought lots of times when she was - say these things, well, you've got cheese for me sometimes if I haven't liked the - dinner. But -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 When you were sitting at table did you have to wait if
 you wanted something like the salt, did you ask for it or did you have to wait until, it was passed to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
You had to be - you - you was - they had more discipline with the children I'm sure of that in the old days than what they have now. And - li
ttle children afe - are seen and not heard. That was the - the rule that we were brought up on. You were never allowed to - forthright speaking in the midst of - the parents talking to somebody would be told - to wait when they were speaking you see, and 
-
 That was - we knew that we couldn't do these things, and so we didn't - after the first try you know, we just stopped you see, but - when I was a young mother and - and - and my mother and father always said - that they were brought up - they had - they 
h
ad grace be - before every meal, see. And - they were so religious - that my grandmother never washed a dish up of a Sunday. The knives and the forks would be - put in the jug - a big jug of hot water and washed, but the plates - was never - never nothing
 washed until Monday. But I think as each generation have come along - things have changed, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Were you allowed to ask for a second helping?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh yes, if you wanted it. We could always ask for some more.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What about holding things like knives and forks, did you have to hold them in a special way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Yes, we were told which way to handle our forks when we were young. And - mother and father - well, mother especially had relatives who came - from London and different places and of course they
 would come summertime - visiting and that so we always had to be on our - best behaviour when our - our relatives came on the scene.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Were you allowed to bring books to the table, or toys?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Not having food. No, never - allowed a book having food,
 and of course - when mother was in the bed father and I would - break out in song then, and - father would have his book propped up by the teapot and I - on the jug, and we were - we were both of the one sort of reading you see and although mother was a 
- a great reader but - we were never allowed to bring a book to the table.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 When were you allowed to leave the table, did you have a special time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No, well we had to wait you know for each other or ask. But - I'm afraid that we've all got lax in 
those kind of - thing - of things. Although our grand-children, I will say that for our grandchildren, they always ask. They - they take their turn in coming here on Sundays for dinner, and generally we are - five or six of us. And - they - they always sa
y can we leave the table grandma, and thank you for - thank you for having us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 You said earlier that the family always sat at the table for your meals, did you always have the same places at the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Yes, we always sat where we were accustomed to sit. And - I think that happens now with the children.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did your mother serve the meal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Until - until she got - sick and she couldn't do it you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did she serve the food out in any particular order?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Father always cut the
 meat up if he was home see, and if he was away - well then she would do it, but, no I just - can't remember - 'cos I was only thirteen when she - was taken ill and I - but I think that before she just - took out the dinners and - father cut out the meat.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Was your father the first person to have his food in front of him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Yes, it was all - I can always remember and I've done the same, my grandfather and grandmother would have theirs taken in first. Although I was just three when grandma died and f
our when grandfather died but - they were always taken out and - and when my mother and - father - well I took on you see at fourteen - or thirteen and a half and - from that time on my mother's were taken out and took upstairs and - father's, and - accor
dingly. And after mother had died - father lived - fourteen years after her, ninety-four, his was always taken out first.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you remember your mother being an easy person to talk to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Very easy on everything - except - the things you wanted to tel
l her about yourself and that and - on that subject - shall I say sex was very reserved. Never - never informed - I don't think any - either of us girls in anything.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Was she the sort of person you could take your troubles to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh yes, I could ta
ke my troubles. But - in case - I mean, and having the children you know I could never tell her - the pains or anything that I had or what was happening because - she was very reserved and if she wanted to speak on - on that, if her sister came in and any
t
hing was being - spoken of - about anything in that way, I was always sent out - out of the room. Never anything talked about in this day there is too much talking - spoken of and - I - I know perhaps in those days not enough. But the pendulum have - swun
g - too far the other way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How did you get on with your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
My father? Oh wonderful. We were good friends. And with my mother, and she was very kind but - on that subject everything was taboo, nothing was spoken about I - I don't know what th
ey they would say if they were alive now and - know so much was - which I don't think really is - good.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How did your parents expect you to behave towards them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 We had to - behave ourselves and never answer back. And I don't know what my mother w
ould say or father if they - if the young children - some children - that I've seen and - and heard. But - no, we just had to - do what we were told and there's no question about it. You couldn't argue at all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you have to behave towards your sisters and your brother in certain ways?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Yes. Yes. Although - you know - I was - different - everybody got different disposition, even in the family if you were ten children and - wouldn't be ten alike. And - my two sisters were entirely different, one t
o the other. My elder sister was - very strict, and - brought me up very - you know, firm and that. And - but - I wouldn't answer her for the world.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What happened if say one of them hit you, would, you hit back? Or perhaps if another child hit you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well I don't know - I think if - if any other children did, but - I don't think that - I would have the courage to do it to my sister.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What would your parents say about it if you hit back?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well they wouldn't allow it. They wouldn't like it. 
But - I suppose all children - every generation - do defend themselves if the time come you know. I suppose if any of my friends - had a - bit of argument or fight and that I should be just as good as them at that time.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What sort of people did you think your parents wanted you to be when you got older?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What - what children that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What sort of people do you think your parents wanted you to be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well they always wanted - for me to - move in - in good - with good companions, and I can reme
mber our schoolmistress at school when we were quite young, Miss Hooper, always saying to us, birds of a feather flock together, now never forget that children. Birds of a feather, and we didn't know what she meant. Until after years we - we tumbled to wh
a
t she meant, you see, I told her one day in the bus, I met her, and I said, I've puzzled your words so often, and she said, oh Nettie my dear, tell me. And - in which - in what way, and I told her - about when we were young - she spoke to us so seriously 
- about - birds of a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4405242\charrsid3212931  theatr}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 e flock together, and I said I found out in the - in latter years what you were - what you meant.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What sort of things did your parents think were important in life?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Religion. Reading, knowledge. And religion, and that w
as the - I think the - main thing in life, if you're brought up on that you - won't go far wrong.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What did they think of swearing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Never had any, we never - had it in the family you know, we never - never heard it then in the family. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What happened if perhaps the grown ups were talking were you allowed to join in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Not in - not interrupt. We had to wait until they - they finished speaking. But - we were allowed to - to have our - opinion and all that, you know, they would listen to us, but we always had to listen first, and always told we must never interrupt.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 If you did something that your parents thought was wrong were you punished?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, mother would punish me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Always your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Mother would - chas - chasti
se me, I'd have a slap on the leg or slap on me hand, never had a stick in the house. Can never remember her having - me mother using a stick, she had a very heavy hand.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Would she use it often?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Which - which I've had pretty often, if I didn't come exactly when she called me or - you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Your father never hit you at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, once.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Why was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well I was very naughty girl. I - I'm sure I must have been, and he was very annoyed to think that - I had done what I'd done and
 - although at the time I didn't think I was doing any wrong because - we were playing down in the - in Wesley Square - three or four little girls about six or seven years old, and - there was an old man coming by, with a stick you see, and he had a long 
b
eard, and I had always heard him called Jim the Dunkey, that was his nickname I suppose, but I didn't know but what it was his real name. And - of course as he passed he flicked his stick at us in passing you know for us to move out the way, which we didn
'
t like I suppose, and of course we began - well - we little girls - started to calling him Jim the Dunkey, and my dear child, he got so mad - that he chased us. And - we ran in this lady's house and up over the stairs and under the bed. One of the little 
g
irls that lived in the house was playing with us you see. And - eventually the - the lady of the house came - along and - spoke to the old man, kind of consoled him - well my sister was - was mending our - our cousin's nets in the house opposite, and I di
d
n't - I didn't know this. So when eventually I came home up over the - back stairs, my mother and father were in the kitchen, mending nets also, and as soon as I got into the room I had the honniest - smack with my father - across my face which I didn't -
 
I didn't know what it was for you see, I think the shock - of the - slap - was as much as the blow, and to think that he had slapped me, well - eventually I was told - if I ever spoke to anyone or called them by their nicknames which I at the time I didn'
t know was his nickname I was always very careful after that I - but that was the only once that I can remember father - putting his hand to me, I didn't want it anymore either. I always made clear of Jim the Dunkey after that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you remember your mother hitting you on any special occasion?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
No. No, but - no, but - very - hard of course, she would - we were always - a bit afraid of her because - we knew we had to obey her and - but - I never remember having any - any - any - canes with her there, stick or anything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you think that your mother or your father played the most important part in how you behaved?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well mother I think because we had more time with her, in our young life, she was with us more than my father you see. And - that 
was the case in all fisher people here, their - mother had more control - she's with them oftener and more than father.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Were you ever taken out to visit the neighbours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh yes, I loved in the evenings, winter evenings, to go out with mother to 
her - cousin's or her sisters houses or friends houses. She'd a special friend in the village - whose husband was also fishing, and - she would have some lovely Quiver magazines - a - monthly magazines called the Quiver you see. And - I knew if mother and
 
her had a chinwag, if they were busy talking that I could have the books to look at the pictures in them. And - read a short article, don't matter it was as long as it's a book you know when I was young. And - so winter evening I used to - I would say to 
m
other sometimes, oh come on mum, let's go out and visit so and so and so and so, it'd either be aunt this or aunt that, or aunt Bella, her friend, and - very important in the wintertime. Not so much in the summer because they were busier - doing the nets 
and different kind of - housework cleaning and etcetera.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did your father ever take you out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Father? YES? OH my father would take me for -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did he take you out visiting?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh no, not very often did I go visiting with father, because - they
 were - if it was fine weather and they were home here fishing it would be - it would be the same mostly until Saturday nights and Sundays nights, and that'd be spent home then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Were you ever taken out shopping?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well Pen}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4405242\charrsid3212931 z}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
ance you mean? Yes. Oh y
es, I have a - turn at Penzance sometimes and - in the summertime if father was in - well - two or three Saturday nights there was a - a party in there on the prom where the - pavilion is now and a big marquee. Kind of variety show and all that you know, 
oh it was wonderful to walk in - of course we had to walk then to Penzance and walk back, and - I thought it was wonderful to - to - go in there, listen to these - variety - show.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 This was just with your father was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh parents, my parents.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 They both took you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. YES.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you remember going out anywhere else with them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Yes. We'd generally go and - we'd go to - Good Friday sometimes if they were - they both wanted to see, and - oh yes, we'd generally go and - we went up - 
we had a cousin living in Tringoltho then, St Lytham then, St Lytham Parish, they were farmers on Tregoltho Farm and - would be - perhaps the summertime we'd - we'd go up to St Lytham which is eight miles - there and it was Saturday afternoon we went walk
 away in there and - stay for the weekend you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you ever have holidays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Not very often. Never had a half holiday, we didn't have much holidays in those days, we'd have - two weeks in the summer, two or three weeks in the summer.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 You went away then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
No. No, spend it here. Well - I - I say - spend it here. I meant go up to this to the farm. Come down the - they would supply the chops with butter here and eggs and - and - if Mr Austin came in and I was here you know and - not very 
well he would say, throw her up in the cart Lizzie and - a few days in St Leonard will do me all the world of good and that was - a lovely little bit of a holiday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What sort of things would you do when you were up there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh play with the childre
n in the moor - in the - the movie and the hayricks and - that were and - collect the eggs and bring them in and - oh - and pick black-berries or primroses, around the edges. Marvellous. Lovely holidays then up there. Sometimes mother would go with me and
 -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How did you spend Saturdays in those days when you were young?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well Saturdays - when we were young in the summertime - we would be - mother would say go down Pawr and play. Well we never questioned - where Pawr - we - we knew where the Pawr wa
s but we didn't question the funny name - of being called the Pawr. But the pawr apparently is an old Cornish word for harbour, and - the - old name of Mousehole was Pawrennis. Porthenys, and Port was the harbour and Enys was the island. And - so we would
 spend our Saturday mornings in the harbour, playing, making the - having shops on one of the big flat rocks down there. Picking up the sea}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4405242\charrsid3212931 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 wood for butter and - and big - big round stones for bread and you see we used - we passed away and washing our feet 
- lagging as we used to call it. And that was Saturday mornings, well then we would be called up for dinner and - always washed a good old wash after - after playing down the harbour we'd have a good wash after dinner and have our clothes changed. All the
 
- clothes changed Saturday afternoons and if we had any pocket money at all it was given to us then. Sometimes we had much, sometimes we had little, sometimes nothing at all, but - we had the grace and the knowledge not to make a fuss even if we didn't ha
ve anything. And - that was - the Saturday.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What about Sundays, were you allowed to play on Sundays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
No. No. We always knew from time - we started life we never played Sundays. I had a doll, a wood doll - when I was young and - I was never allow
ed to play with my doll on Sundays, on Sunday mornings. But I could have a book to read, you see, that was not - never barred from me. And - of that I'm very glad but - from earliest remembrances - after breakfast and that we went to chapel, and my father
 - he always went Sunday mornings and mother stayed here of course to cook the dinner and - and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What did they feel about work on Sundays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh, terrible. Nothing was allowed to be done, but my mother wasn't like her mother. Her mother - mother wo
uld always have the things washed up, the - the - plates and saucers, cups and saucers were always washed on a Sunday, but that was all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did your mother go to chapel on Sundays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Your father went in the morning?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 He always went in 
the morning with me and - mother and father in the evening. Always went in the evening. And my - two sisters they were - but my - eldest sister and brother was always in the choir in my remembrances and - I went - after - when I was eleven I went in the c
hoir.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did your sisters go? Did your sisters and brothers go to chapel?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Oh always, yes. My brother was in the choir, my eldest sister until she was married and - he went, he was after until he went to America. And - he was over thirty when he went to America, and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you go to Sunday school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Yes. We went at - we went to class Sunday mornings, there was a - a lady who had a - young woman's class, a girls class for small and young woman and we went to that ten o'clock, had our breakfast 
and go out to the class, and after the class I go - I go into chapel - which commenced eleven. And of course - that ended about quarter past, half past twelve then, and they'd come in and have dinner, and had a wash - of course we changed to have your din
n
er, you would never sit down and have your dinner with your - best clothes on, that was customary to take off your things as soon as you came in from chapel. And that was done and then of course after we had our dinner we changed and put on our best cloth
es again and we went to Sunday school. And - came in half past three and - had a read of the book and then - tea, and - changed again for chapel in the evening, six o'clock service.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 You went in the evening as well did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, six o'clock servi
ce. More often than not there was a prayer meeting after. And so we always had a full day and of course we took it all for granted. And - we never thought it was too much, we never complained, we were happy.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you ever have Sunday school outings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well - I couldn't say that they were a outing, or we shouldn't - we - we didn't call them outings, we'd call them galas. And - that was - we had two red letter days in the year which we looked forward to very much as children, and one was the gala - wh
at the cornish people here say Park, and Park in Cornish means a field. And - the Sunday school Anniversary. And them were the two outstanding days. And - the - the park - would be - when I was very young on the Monday. Strangely enough, and - the Sunday 
n
ight I think that - all we little children that - attended the Methodist church draw our - father's crazy bay asking him - hundreds of times - is it going to be fine weather tomorrow. The fathers would say it's going to be fine tomorrow, can I see and loo
k
 at the sky and see if it's going to be fine. And father would come out and look at the sky and say, oh yes, it's going to be a lovely today tomorrow, and that would be - it, and - I don't believe - I - I can't remember only - once or twice that we had ra
i
n, and poor weather. We were very fortunate, and a good job that we had fine because - although we looked forward to it so much it was a very hard day. The teachers would be - would be busy all the morning getting the - the - the crockery together and - a
nd the - and the stuff all being taken up to the field, a - a large gentleman}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4405242\charrsid3212931 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
s - house - on top of Newlyn Hill called Shoon, and - they always loaned us a - a - a field, a - a lovely field in front of their - house. And - so we would - gather at hour - at 
St Clements schoolroom about - half past one or quarter to two, and - a band would come down from St Just and a band from St Ives, headed by - the superintend}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4405242\charrsid3212931 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 nts and the minister and the banner was - two lovely - large banners which were carried by - youn
g men, and - we would parade the streets of Mousehole, and all around and up on the front, up on the cliff, and - finish up then on the new pier, with God Save the King or Queen, whatever it would be would be played, and - then - we would - parade then - 
t
hrough - the Clip, on Newlyn Clip and - to Newlyn, two and a half mile, out as far as the art gallery. Then turn and walk up over Newlyn Hill to Choon, which was another, I suppose-mile. So - it'd be three and a half mile that we would - traverse, and - w
e
 would get into the field then hot and dusty and tired but happy, and - the - the boys would carry - stacks, red white and blue streamers and in my young days the young girls would carry flowers, and - the banners would be rolled up and - collected and - 
t
hen there would be the - a big marquee with tea provided and - as soon as we got into the field the Sunday school teachers would be there, with the hampers full of - saffron buns. A saffron bun each given to each - scholar, and a bottle of pop. And of cou
r
se then we would sit on the grass and drink our pop and our - saffron bun, which was really lovely, we enjoyed that, we didn't look for very much in those days, but we were very very happy, I'm sure we were happier then than they are now with all they hav
e
. And it was a bit - outstanding day, and of course the schoolteachers would be busy in the tea tent serving teas then, to the people, there used to be crowds of people there, all the parents of the children you see, and the band would be playing - and th
e
 - young people, dancing, in the field, and then there would be games, started off, teaser, and the kissing ring and the - the young children would follow suit, they would have their - own little kissing ring and - all the rest of it and - then after the 
t
ea it would be the games for the children, the sports you know, they would be - running and - doing all sorts and kinds of sports, and - after the - when the evening got, you know, about six or - six or seven o'clock, six o'clock - the sun was gone and ge
t
ting - a little bit on the chilly side the young courting couples - youngsters and girls would have a - hire wagonettes and go for a little ride round the country, and that would finish up a lovely day. Well that was one of the outstanding days. And I thi
nk they - I think that we enjoyed those days more than when afterwards in after years - when the - motor buses came along and - motor cars and - our children was taken and they used }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4405242\charrsid3212931 
to be taken to Carbis Bay or Sti}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 ves and - different places around the coast
, I think that we had more fun then, you know, in the old days than what they do now. Because when the band started up, my dear, we were in our seventh heaven of delight.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you remember the Sunday school organizing anything else, perhaps parties or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Oh we had our Sunday school - our Christmas - party always you see, and then we would have a concert, Sunday school concert, which I helped to train the children for very many years when I got - in my teens, I - I - I could play t
he piano you see, there wasn't a lot of - young people in those days that could play, but - I played and - I used to train the children.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 You belonged to the choir as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. And - with another young woman to help me would train the girls and 
the boys and - some of the - well - most of the young men, the middle aged - men in the village today can remember - the action songs I taught them and the fun they had singing them. And of course they would dress up for the different things they sang abo
u
t, the sea, the Navy and the Army and the - their mothers had to get their clothes, you see, for them to - dress up in, and - they really had a good time then, and then of course there'd be - in the afternoon there'd be free saffron buns distributed then,
 
to each one you see, and - then the concert in the evening, and - St Clements Hall would be packed full of parents, listening to their children. Never had to fear of a - audience in those days, when the children took part they would be - up - listening to
 them you see, and - solos in between and duets and - lots of fun and laughter. So there's always something here to - interest the children in the wintertime.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did the chapel organise any other sort of activities, perhaps like visiting people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh
 yes, they were - they - they visited the sick, there's always the - three or four people in my young days - who went around - sick visiting, anybody was - old and couldn't go to church, or - anyone that was sick, they would be - especially Sunday afterno
o
ns because most of the fishermen were busy in the week, and - didn't have any time, but Sunday afternoons you generally see a couple of men or - a lady or two going around you know to the houses, and - well, once a month we had Band of Hope meetings. I pl
ayed for that you see, and - from a very -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What was that, was that a temperance club?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
That was a temperance and - children, you know, boys and girls were invited and - teacher - we had - older people you see and there was two or three men that - 
gave talks - every month on - strong drink and smoking, and of course in my young day no women ever smoked, and - it was only when I got in my teens that that started here. But - you never saw anyone smoking, only - men or boys, you know, in their teens, 
then - and - one of our - stalwarts of the - in the temperance mo}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4405242\charrsid3212931 vement was - Mr Herbert Trickens}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
er and I can still remember him showing the charts of the human body and - pointing out the - the damage that - strong drink would do and smoking would do, and 
- he always finished up with this, now my boys, let me tell you this, and don't ever forget it, every cigarette you smoke is a nail in your coffin. I've thought on his words so often, especially now with all this controversy is all about the smoking, but 
that was always his - he tried to put the fear of God in them - for the -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Was this run by the chapel?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Yes. Out here, and the - and the - the vestries where we had the meeting - was - on the top vestry, near our St Clements church, Methodist churc
h, and I've got a book here now, the - the book - the - secretary's book, I was secretary for a long while - and - until they finished and - the war, the first world war I think the - that finished it up then. Never commenced any more and - all - pages of
 
boys names - you see, who were killed in the first world war - that signed their name, they'd to sign the pledge you see, sign the pledge and the names was put in a book, all be - and then we used to have a Band of Hope concert in the winter time, see, an
d - that - took weeks and weeks to get up so the - time was busy with the - time - Band of Hope concert was over they would have to practice again for the Sunday school concert. And -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What other sorts of thing did the choir do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 The choir? Well t
hey - when I was - quite young - in the choir, we - the organist, he was - a man from Lemona, he only had one leg and he would ride down on horseback - twice a week, Wednesday nights in all weathers wintertime, and Sundays. And - he was a marvellous man f
or - for music, he was very knowledg}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4405242\charrsid3212931 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
able and - he played the big organ, only had one leg. He entered the - our choir for a competition, singing competition in Truro, one year, and we entered, but I suppose - in a team, some other choirs - I think we got of
f fourth, which was very good in those days. And different - we were - invited out but we had a big choir in those days and - we would be invited different - places to give concerts. All around the district, and - we would have lots of fun then, and - the
n the farmers would invite us there to a supper, would go two or three to one house and two or three to another, and - then I -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Mousehole's always been r}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4405242\charrsid3212931 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 nowned for its singing voices hasn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Yes. And - then I'd played for - a Sheffield a
nniversary, in the little village, Sheffield you see and - Caris anniversary every year, and I would go up and - teach the children the anniversary music and - then on to Caris and we'd have a lovely day there, in one of the farm - Mr Tom Matthews's farm 
place, and - the same in Sheffield, so there was always something in the summer and the winter to interest us. You see?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 It WAS centred around the chapel?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 It was all - all centred around your place where you went for worship Sundays, if you were c
hurch well you went church activities, and we had a strong Salvation Army in the village at that time, and - the Salvation Army folk - had their various - things carrying on you see, and the band would be playing different parts of the village Sundays and
 
- in the week, and then of course the Methodists they had - their own activities, and between - the - the concerts getting up and - the Band of Hope meeting and the choir practice, you know, I never had a dull moment. No, I had to - and I had to teach mys
e
lf to play - the - the - the lady who was - who was teaching me, I had one lesson from her and then her mother died, she had a cancer and she was ill for a long long while, she gave it up, there was nobody else - in the village teaching music, at that tim
e
. So I had my tutor and my mother said, well you'll have to get on with it. And so I would run home from school and come down here, the music was down here then and - and - practice all I could you see and - father, when he went to Plymouth or when he wen
t
 to Scarborough before - or before he went I should say - he would - set me a task, he'd say, now if you can play - such and such a tune by the time I come home or hymn, I'll give you sixpence. And that sixpence loomed - like - more than a pound not would
 
now to the children, see. And - so I would stick at the old - music and - and one - one tune I - I was asked to play was Strike, oh Strike for Victory see. I think that was - two flats and - of course I had to go into flats and sharps and - get on the bes
t
 I could, and every day I should run home from school dinner hour, no school dinners then, run home and - come down here and - go at this - hymn. And one days my mother said to me when I went up into dinner, if you don't stop striking for victory soon I s
h
all. Anyway, I - I got on and learnt myself and - eventually when I got seventeen I was asked to play for the male voice choir. And I played for the male voice choir up 'til the time I was married, which is when I was twenty-three, and the - first - the -
 
first world war had started then. And of course the choir was diminished in numbers and - so my husband - if you ask him - about his courting days he would tell you all his courting was done waiting outside the vestry doors or Sunday school doors, either 
for concert practice or the male voice practice. Poor chap.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 I can't remember whether you said your parents said grace at meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. My mother - would tell me when I was young that - her father - if he was home from sea, always took - held the g
race and if he hadn't been in the house then grandmother would do it you see, and they always had it, but I'm afraid - that - when I was young my parents - my father was here very seldom in the week, and - we never had grace. But - I was - I was - we were
 brought up in }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4405242\charrsid3212931 a C}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 hristian home, and - everything - about religion was talked about - Sundays. The}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4405242\charrsid3212931  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
sermon was discussed, and - whether the - preacher kept to the text or whether he - went from it and everything was all talked about and - on the Sunday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Were you taught to say your prayers at night?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh always. Always told our prayers at night.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 By yourself or as a family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No, by - at the bedside, and the Gentle Jesus Meek and Mild was always told and then I would - ask to pray for differen
t things that - anyone was sick in the family and - anything - anyone - anything happening we were always asked to pray for them and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you have your mother with you when you were saying your prayers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well - if mother wasn't there - the - my 
sisters would be or my father, but I never went to bed in my life un - unless I told my prayers when I was a child.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you ever have family prayers?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No, I can't remember having family prayers. Grandfather - did, when he was young, I can rememb
er him, but I was only four when he died. Grandfather would pray, he was an old class leader, and grandfather would pray, and my father's father was a class leader. So both sides were very religious. And - grandfather would read the bible, a chapter of th
e bible every day. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 So it was basically religion and politics in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Religion and politics.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Was your father interested in politics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 He was, he was a Liberal - by - that was what he was and - at that time there was a big controversy about L}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid4405242\charrsid3212931 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
oyd George, he then come on the - scene and - they worshipped him really because he was the one that - first one that - brought about or passed the - the old age pension bill you see, and - they thought that - he was a great man to help -
 them out and that you see, the old age pensioners - I don't know whether it's more than five shilling or eight shilling when it started first. And - a good job that they never lived to hear about L}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid4405242\charrsid3212931 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 oyd George after 'cos I don't think that he - I think - b
it of a lady's man, but they - they didn't know anything about that which was a good job too. And - they had a great faith in Lloyd George.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you know what other views your father held?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 He was very strong - he had a very strong will and a very 
- determined - if he - you know, if he set his heart on anything or - if he thought he would - and he was no turncoat, he would never he put - down unless he knew that he was wrong.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 But as far as politics go what were his views?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well he was a Li
beral. That was - what his politics was and - he always voted Liberal, he - he - he thought the Conservative party were out for the rich, and - didn't have much - love or thought for the - for the poor people, and - Mousehole was a strong hold then of Lib
eralism. We knew - everyone's politics. It'll seem funny in this day. Everyone knew - in the village each other's politics, knew who - who was the Conservatives and who were the Liberals. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you remember election times?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Election times would be the most exciting time of the year.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you remember the general election?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Yes. I can remember the general election and Cliff - Sir Clifford Corey - in my young days, he - he - was the Liberal - he - he - he got in - for many many years,
 he was a very wealthy - coal - coal merchant, he owned coal and - mines in Wales. And - he helped the Liberal party, had their - first Liberal room here, and - they had - the - the - oh and then of course another - one other thing that we had in the vill
age was the Women}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4405242\charrsid3212931 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 s Liberal party and - they had a room too which I've had meetings - once a month.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Was your mother interested in politics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, mother was red hot Liberal. And I think I turned after them for - for that. But that'd be all or not
hing, there was no half measures, everybody knew what I was, for I would wear my rosette and would be a race and - many of the rows would happen here in the village between - different people over politics, some people never spoke to - one another again, 
and I think I suppose nearly not better than falling out over it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you know what your parents wanted the political parties to do, what were they for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 They were for - people who were - were poor, fisher people - here in the village, they were al
ways - they always had the opinion - that the Conservatives were - out to help the rich and - and never wanted for the poor to rise, as regards - education, they wanted for the - poor - poorer class children to have the same - laws and rules and - and cou
l
d get on just as - well as the rich, and in my young days you couldn't. If you didn't have money you couldn't go to universities, or colleges anything like that, you just had to stay in your own little - school. Your own little village school, you'd no ch
ance of getting on. And - they always was - of the opinion that it shouldn't be, if you had brains - this child had had the br}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4405242\charrsid3212931 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
ins had - must have the same chance as those who - had the money. And - so that was what they were always out for, for the betterm
ent - of mankind. Father was a great reader and he would read them all these - big politicians - and - Gladstone and Disraeli and all those - men they - you know, read about and talk about and he had - my - my uncle was another very learned man and they w
o
uld argue the point and - what they thought each thought and they all say in here between the fisherman was, m'lad, m'lad this and m'lad that, if they were - were conferring one to another, see. And - our living room would be like the deck of a boat. They
'
d be walking up and down smoking their pipes and - m'lad this, and and - I there and I were - perhaps mother in the bed sick and - I the other girl listening to all this you see and - and - no, I - I shall never hear so much politics or religion I don't t
hink any more.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you remember anything about election times themselves?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Yes. My goodness, I shall never forget them. Because - we were red hot, see all the family would be red hot on - Liberalism and - Sir Clifford Corey at that time - was - aft
er very many years of the Conservative here in the - this district, Sir Clifford Corey got in, a Liberal you see and that caused all - some racket, and - we had our bright blue rosettes. And - that day - two boys would be chosen from the Liberal party and
 
from the Conservatives, no Labour of course then, and the Liberal people had their room and the Conservative party had their room in the village. And - each party would have two - two boys - school of course closed that day for the voting was done in the 
s
chool, and - these two boys would be what they called runners, runners up. And - there'd be two Liberal boys and two Conservatives you see. Well they would go up to the schoolroom - while people was voting, and there would be - two or three men at the doo
r
, and as the men came in and the women came in to vote, those people there in the hallway would know what their politics were. You knew everybody's politics and religion here then. And - so they would put down on a piece of paper, the names of these peopl
e who had voted, as they were coming in, and - when the boys ran up - for these chits, they would hand them to them and they would - run down to the L}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4405242\charrsid3212931 iberal room or the Conservative}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931  room and hand them in. Well as soon as the - people there round the table you know cou}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4405242\charrsid3212931 n}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
ting up the votes as soon as they could see the names down, they knew - who had voted Liberal and who had voted Conservative. And they had a general idea the time that the voting finished in the evening - who had got in. So - and we never knew 
what boys should be chosen - from the school to - to - to be runners up, our two boys had been chosen - and very exciting - time they had too. So - then of course we shouldn't know until the next afternoon - who had got in, because this - the votes had to
 be counted on the Scilly Isles, and brought down by steamer.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 This would be a general election?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Yes. General election, and - so you had to wait until Tuesday - until the next afternoon. I think nearly always in our - in my young days the voting w
as on a Thursday, and - then the - farmers - was market day Thursdays in Penzance and seeing that was their free afternoon, and then the vote - the poll would be declared the Friday afternoon - outside St John's Hall. Friday afternoon my dear we was out t
h
ere and - no time I can tell you. And - hurrah sets in, sometimes we should have them pulled out. The Conservative - youngsters - just as mad as we were. And - then the poll would be declared you see, and great excitement that afternoon, wouldn't be much 
work done.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
In some places at that time men felt they risked losing their job or their house if they voted differently from their employers, do you know if your father felt himself under that kind of pressure to vote for a particular party? Or do you kn
ow of anybody who might have been under that sort of pressure?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well I think - I think lots of farm labourers - had - in the district would have to vote according to their - farmer friend who they worked for. I do believe that. But - and most of the f
armers around in the district - were Conservatives, but of course there were - a sprinkling of Liberals, but - our fishermen had never anyone to - to - to please because they were free agents for what they could do and what they couldn't do as regards - v
oting on anything. See - I think that this village then - was really Liberal, and - in fact Cornwall - at that time was a - all - all the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4405242\charrsid3212931 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931  fisher}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4405242\charrsid3212931 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 folk - were Liberals.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Was your father actually a member of the party?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 A paid up member?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What about your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Mother was a - no one didn't pay anything then. No, mother was a member and - we all we remembers of the Liberal party.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did they actually work for the party?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 I don't think father or mother - ever worked because they hadn't time, they were fisher}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid4405242\charrsid3212931 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 people and they were to sea you see, but - I have - when I was young, I worked for the Liberal party here in the - the election time. I -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How old were you when you were doing that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh I was 
seventeen or eighteen. Maybe younger - I think. And we would get up concerts, Liberal concerts and - oh I had to play lots of times and take part. It was a busy little village with one thing and the other, I mean we - we - we never felt very lonely or cut
 
off from anything. And we had to make our own - fun and pleasure you see. And - I played - at the electric - at the election meetings when the - when the - rooms would be packed full of people and questions asking and - and people getting annoyed and - st
o
mping out and - and - different old - songs they would sing, the Lamb, the Lamb, was God who gave the Land. God gave the land to the people and - and then we would alter the words in lots of things and - and put different to all according was the - who wa
s putting up. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 When your parents weren't working how did they spend their time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Our fishermen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 When your parents weren't working how did they spend their time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well I don't know that I ever saw them not working. Working was their -
 when they - when they had not housework to do they had nets, and the - the men's long oilers they made themselves, which came - came down to their - well feel nearly, and - would be made of - by a thick strong unbleach - mater}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4405242\charrsid3212931 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 al called unbleach, and it w
ould be oiled four or five times, oiled inside two or three times and oiled - outside, two or three times, what the men called cayed up. And - the women made them all by hand, and - then there'd be duck frocks to make - and - to wear under them and - sea 
boot stockings had to be knitted. Great long wool stockings that came up to their }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4405242\charrsid3212931 tights}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 . To wear under their sea}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4405242\charrsid3212931 -boo}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
ts, and took two or three pair to wear and - mittens for their hands. So when they weren't - doing the nets and - the fishing gear, they wou
ld be knitting or sewing or making oilers and everything, no one had machines, very few people had machines, sewing machines in those days.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did your mother have any interests outside the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well, mother, before she had her - her big - her -
 her sickness mother would be - very - attentive to the church, and - they had a sewing meeting once a week, Tuesday afternoons mother would - help in that, she always went out there sewing. And - that was the only thing then in the village you know that 
she was interested in your church work that you - helped. Anything - anything that was doing in the church, the - our Methodist church - other - would be there hel}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4405242\charrsid3212931 p}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 ing, and father in his spare time. But - there was mother - no other activity, there was no women}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4405242\charrsid3212931 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 s meetings or - anything at all in - in their day or -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you remember her ever going out just to enjoy herself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Went to Ilymorna or going to Pen}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4405242\charrsid3212931 z}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 ance - to the conce}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4405242\charrsid3212931 r}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 t parties they had in summertime.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Who would she go with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 A
nd - it was at - they would have them in the promenade, these - concert parties a what come down in the summertime in the marquee. Before the pavilion was built and - I - I - can't - I can't remember, I can't think of - of - the time that our - parents ha
d
 really in their young life, they were - work was the foremost thing for them to do and - that took up all their time, and thought. And they never seemed to - to want to have a lot of - outings or pleasure but - not like it is today where they - make up a
 
party and go away. The only time I can remember mother doing that was a cousin came - husband coming from Liverpool in the summer and they - they had a wagonette, hired a wagonette, you couldn't hire things then - then like you can now. And we went up to 
Gurners Head and around there, country.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 This was a family outing really?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Mm. But - not usually it was never done.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did your mother have any women friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 That she went out with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh yes, her friends, she had lots of - r
elatives, sisters - she'd one sister here and - and she had her sister Rose and - and her friend, her main friend - was - Bella, Mrs Harvey and - she would, like visiting her. But when mother got - when mother was forty-five or six she had this illness an
d she couldn't - walk a lot after that. She was a - a semi-invalid really. And - she couldn't go very far.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Your father was away from home quite a lot obviously when he was fishing? When he came home in the evenings what time would he get in?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 From
 sea? Well that was all according, you see, there was - they - they would - summertime pilchard driving - about - June or July, June and onto - October, and of October they would be - what they said pilchard driving here in the bay in the boats, they had 
smaller boats then working, and they would go out about two or three o'clock in the afternoon, and - sometimes only here in the bay they would be shooting, or sometimes deeper, and - they would begin again about eight or nine o'clock. See? So - this is -

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How many evenings a week would he get home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Not by in - no, they wouldn't be in then in the evenings by the time they - if they had fish - we would down on the piers all the children waiting for the boats to come in. They all had a nickname, these
 boats. And the boys would be shouting out as they came in, you know, their nickname. And - any fish? That'd be the first thing they would ask as the boat came round, well you could always tell - as the boats came around the pier, if they had their hatche
s
 down - well that was no fish. The hatches - or the boards on the decks, see. And when they had fish - these would be taken up and the nets would be - well a wonderful sight, the - the nets rigged up as far as the mast - as the - boats light, full of - th
e fish hanging like silver under the little - boat's - lantern that was lit. And so we needn't ask when we saw the boats coming in what fish they had because we could always tell. And - but shout out to our fathers, you know, little hearts}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4405242\charrsid3212931 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 beating out of ou
r body nearly waiting and thinking, oh I wonder will he have any fish and at last, ah, here comes the Pep, that was father's little pilchard driver.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you remember your father ever going to clubs or pubs at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. Well the only - the - he wen
t to the Liberal club, and - the Liberal club like the Conservative they always had their - games, chequers - draughts - they had all the card games and - the - different games, I would father saying whist or cure or - all the different things that they l
earnt to play you know and that but - and books would be provided and paper every day. But - no,}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4405242\charrsid3212931  never went to pub in my rememb}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
rance. Can never remember my father -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did he go very often?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well - he may go up there perhaps in the - in the night for a hour or half hour, but not to stay - very long.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did your mother go as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No, there was no - no women went, not to the - until the end of the - until - the - we - the Women}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid4405242\charrsid3212931 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 s Liberal party came in, see mother would have been dead many year
s before that started, but - some men spent most of their time in the evening up there but my father didn't he - he would be up there perhaps - and not every evening - be - before the - there were - books were cheap at that - at that time, but - there wer
e
 no papers that came to the village in my young days until the first world war. We never had a - a daily paper brought to the - well - brought to the village, it was only when the war - first world war started that we had a - a newspaper. A boy came aroun
d
 then bringing the news, you know, bringing the paper, and - our Methodist church - opened up a library - I supposed - a hundred and fifty or sixty years ago, for the - village people to - have something to read and - one or two of the wealthy people in t
he village - interested in the society would provide a - a paper, and bring magazines and books, so - I fetched my father often and my brother from the Methodist reading room to have dinner, sent}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid4405242\charrsid3212931  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 out and ask your father to come in and have dinner, and your 
brother you see, and that's what it would it be, heads down out there - reading all that they could read, and then they had a club at the - the Methodist party had a club - which - had club books, club books which were sent around the village, members, yo
u
 had - pay so much a year, and I can remember going down, an old gentleman collecting this club book once a month, brought from his place here and then from here but the names were all down in the flyleaf, covered in black leather, the thirst for knowledg
e
 was so much here, with the people that - they wanted to have the books to read and I have still two of those club books here - which were sold at the end of the year and the money what they made and the tea - tract tea or club book tea, and they would bu
y
 more books then you see, and then they would be sold at the end of the year and - I've still those two books where with the names down in the fly leaf. Writing in copperplate, and - the - the - they're so deep I don't know that anybody would have them to
 read now. They must have had a great thirst for knowledge in those days you know to - to read the books they did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did your father ever take part in any sport as a sort of leisure activity?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. No. I don't think they had time for sport in those days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did your mother or father belong to savings clubs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
No. Well, they - I should say no, they had - they paid in an insurance, against death for each one of the children, and themselves, but that was the only - I don't know if you could call t
hat insurance but - yes, well, the - the Prudential man called every week, from the time I can remember. And he still calls, not the same man but - I said to him the other day we ought to have a - a free do now because we've had you coming to the house - 
all these years.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Lots of people used to have clubs to save for things like boots or shoes or sickness or funerals, this sort of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, well we never went anywhere, we never had any holidays unless we went to our cousins in St Leytham parish 
and the farm. And - so - I don't know that they had - but they got enough money on the fishing to - to save for any holidays. Never had any money to spare, only from their - food and clothes, and I will say that for the - mothers - in my day - the childre
n
 were always clean and wholesome and - well fed and well looked after and I've thought so often - that they never knew from one day to the other, or from one week to the other what their wages were going to be, but they - they had to have faith - of havin
g
 a week's work, but the children was never - ragged, or dirty, they were a credit to the village. In the school, in all groups of pictures that we have now, looking at them you know, white pinafores with a little bit of lace or embroideries all around, ma
de by hand, and the children all looked clean and respectable, and great credit - is due to the parents and - those - of those days when they never had hardly - a shilling in their pocket.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How did you get on with your brothers and sisters?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh - y
es, my brother, well I - wonderfully well - my sis - my eldest sister was very - strict and - methodical and everything had to be done just so. And - I had to try and please her - more than my mother really, and - or I should have a sl}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4405242\charrsid3212931 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 p from her you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Was there any one of them that you felt particularly close to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Yes, my second sister, I was very close to her. Ten years and a half difference you see. In my second sister and myself, and - I think I was really closer to her than my eldest sister. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 When you were a child who did you play with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
I had companions. I didn't have anybody in the house to play with because they'd grown up, my sisters - brother had grown up you see and - were young people before I got high, when I was five my sister was fifteen and a half.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 When you say companions do you mean neighbours children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Neighbours children, and - my cousin. My cousin Cl}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4405242\charrsid3212931 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 ra and I were - great friends. And - we went - we had lots of time together, you know spent a lot of time together, and - played.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Where did you play?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
In the summertime we played in the harbour, that was the only place. And - still the only place, still no playing field here. And - we played in the street more than they do now because we ca
n play now - or they can't play now owing to the traffic, but - we had skipping ropes which we played across the street here, I had to stay here close by for mother to see that I was all right, and we would have skipping ropes with four or five girls jump
ing in at one time you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you ever go and play in other people's houses?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Yes. Yes. When we - when we went with the children, it was my cousin I spent hours in her house. And we would dress up in other peoples clothes and make out that we were - having concerts, and - I don't know how or why - we had little}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1651909\charrsid3212931  bazaars in the cellars, we'd h}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
old them in each other's cellars you see, and - for four pins you could come in. Pins were being used then, there was no - I couldn't have ha'pennies, and - w
e kept all the pins we could, and you could have a bit of - we'd make up little dolls things for - two pins or four pins. I've thought so often - how in the world - and do you know when you hear tell of the - old wells around the district, in the Cornish 
v
illages there are - wells - that - young people went and - wished over, and they would put in - before they wished they had to - put in an old bit of cloth or rag, and stick in a few pins, and they say if you was going to dredge Madwyn well and the wells 
around the district you would find thousands of pieces of - of cloth with - with thousands of pins, rusty enough by now I expect, but I - I don't know what the idea was, there always had to be a bit of cloth and pins. Stuck in it, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What other sort of games did you play?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 We played - as I said, skipping ropes - at different time}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1651909\charrsid3212931 
s of the year there would be hoo}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 ps rolling, who could have the biggest hoop, and - then - the boys would have tops or the - and the girls too.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Were there different seasons for playing games?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Different season}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1651909\charrsid3212931 s of the year, I suppose the hoo}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 ps and the rolling of the hoop would be - in the wintertime. And you could roll a hoop then and you could spin a top because it was just a stray horse and cart coming thro
ugh the village. And - marbles. Girls didn't play marbles much. Some did but - tomboys they - they would be called, but the boys would }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1651909\charrsid3212931 be kneeling down with a bag, b}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 alls and - marble playing, anyway, and - then we would have - in and out the windows, and w
hat we called tiggy, we'd play. Oranges and lemons, say the bells of St Clemens and - and London Bridge is breaking down my fair lady, oh we had no end of games to play.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Were you allowed to get dirty when you were playing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh well, no, we - we 
had to be - very careful over our clothes because those pinafores wore to school then and we - generally had to take them off when we got home from school and - put on an older one and - but - then there would be - hide and seek, we would have lots of fun
 
- in wintertime especially hiding in the peoples cellars up on top of the nets, from one another, the girls, and - one night I - we got chased by the policeman. He was a very strict man, Bobby well afraid of our souls of him, and - we - made a shriek, som
eone said, the policeman is coming, Bobby Wells is coming, and of course two or three ran down the street and I ran out, ran right into his arms, I had a good old shaking. Underneath his Inverness Cape. Oh dear, scared stiff.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Were you allowed to play with anyone you wanted to play with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. Some -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Were your parents particular about this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, very particular you - you all - you - had to know who you was playing with and you had to -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did they actually say don't play with some children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 I would be asked when I came home who - who did you play with.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 But they never actually sent you out saying don't play with so and so?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well, no, but if they - if I - if I had played with someone they didn't approve of I would be told we
ll - you're not to play with them any more.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did they say why you weren't to play with them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Yes. They'd say naughty words or - or be - or be something that they had against them you see and - they were very particular, who we - who I - went with.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you belong to any youth organisations?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Never had any here then, no. No, we - sorry, we had a Sunday morning class. And - a evening class besides in the week. And - then the - Wesley Guild was formed when I was in my teens. That's out Meth
odist Society - for young people on Thursday nights. That was - there was no - no youth clubs at all then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
How did you spend your free time then when you were at school, did you have hobbie or did you have pets or did you collect anything or do any gardening? Nothing like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Never had any gardens to do - to do or never had any pets. A cat. We always had a cat. Oh had the cat, very fond of, when I was thirteen I can remember the cat was thirteen. And mother would ask me sometimes to cry, make o
ur you're crying and I would cry and as soon as I cried the cat would cry. Can see her now, that - lovely old grey tabby, but - never had a dog.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you collect anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Collect? No. Nothing like that was - done then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What sort of things did you do then, were you a great reader?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Really. And - then - I remember the - the Sunday Companion, of course you know the Sunday Companion - that had then been printed - published, and - a man went around - the village and he happened to come to my
 - to our door and he asked me if I would - if I could collect twenty-five subscriber's names, to - who would have the Sunday Companion every week, it would be published on the Thursday. And if I could I would have a prize. I'd have a book, of course that
 
was a great challenge to me to have a book. And so - I - I suppose I was about - twelve then. I got twenty-five names in the village. And - sent them - by post to the - the address, and by return I had a beautiful book. Oh it was a book that thick. And - 
I
 can remember now, Winston Churchill and Lloyd George, all these - big - the politicians in the - the pictures they're young men then in the heyday of their youth you see, and - it was a very knowledgeable book and I was very thrilled.. And we had to go t
o
 Penzance every week then for the Christian - Sunday Companion, I know that was one of the - the highlights of my life, for Sun - for Thursday to come - for someone that I - I would enquire all over the village if anyone was going to Penzance to collect t
he Sunday Companion, and bring it home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you ever have a bicycle when you were small?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Never. Cold never afford a bicycle, never had a bicycle.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 You used to go for walks though?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Always walking, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 For pleasure?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Yes. I -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Who would you go with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
I'd go with my companions. Clara, this - my com - my cousin who I was talking about just now, she would know all the - of all the - anything - cheap in Penzance, you know, all the - tit bits, and cheap things and - on
e day she said to me - there are lovely shoes - being sold there, one and eleven}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1651909\charrsid3212931  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
pence ha'penny a pair. Will you go with me tomorrow for a pair, and of course - the park day was coming on, the gala day and - so I went - with her and we got these pair of shoes each, one and eleven}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid1651909\charrsid3212931  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 pence ha'penny a pair. Another day she said - there's a lovely soap powder is}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1651909\charrsid3212931  }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 used out, you don't have to - to rub your clothes if you have that, you wouldn't have to rub your clothes if you had that. I suppose I was about - fiftee
n then, and I said what is it? Well it's only sin one shop at Penzance. It's a - a new kind of soap powder called Persil, and it's only three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1651909\charrsid3212931  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 pence ha'penny a packet. And - she said - I'm going in tomorrow, I'm going to walk in. So - we walked in, three mi
le in and three mile back, that's all we bought, was a packet of Persil. And we came home proud as pussy now 'cos I can see it now, a little packet that size you see. And - of course we would be washing Mondays from morning 'til night, for - from - from e
i
ght o'clock in the morning 'til four or five, and - we had all the men's clothes to wash and funny thing was then they wore - which buck frocks to see and white dungaree trousers which had to be scrubbed - every Monday and buck frocks, and white hessian b
read bags, everything white on the dirtiest fishiest job imaginable, so - poor souls, we were glad to find something to - ease the washing. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 When you were at school did you ever go to a theatre or concerts?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No, I never went to - I don't think
 - the only thing that was - was outstanding in school life was Pool's Myorama, it came to Penzance in St John's Hall. Pool's - Pool's - Myorama.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What was all that about?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 We went in - we - the school was taken in, we walked to Penzance when we w
ere still at school, I left at thirteen so it was before I was thirteen, and - the afternoon in the St John's Hall, and - was a variety do, there, and - they were dressed up as soldiers part of the time and they came - perhaps a dozen came in one side and
 
a dozen and all met together in the middle you know and - dressed up in their red uniforms and that and - actions and - I can't tell you all about it now but - it was the - we were - we were thrilled to bits, we never saw anything like it in our lives. It
 was something so outstanding we never - I never forgotten it. Although now I don't suppose I should think it was worth looking at. But - that was the - never - never went to a theatre until was - married.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What about music halls?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1651909\charrsid3212931 This was a music M}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
yorama, yes. When we went up - when I went to London - I was married before I went to London - in fact I was - I never went for thirty years after I was married because I had to look after my - old father after mother died at seventy-two father lived to
 be ninety-four. And I never had a holiday in my life. And yet I never grumbled, we never grumbled. Looked after them, and - had the joy of - and satisfaction of knowing we did. And - through troubles and trials and tribulations but - I think - when we di
d have a holiday we appreciated - we - we appreciated that much more than - than what people - do who have it every year.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Were there any cinemas down here?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 I remember - yes, I remember our cinema b}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1651909\charrsid3212931 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 ing - built, in Colsby Head.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How old were you when it was built?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well I suppose I was only about twelve or fourteen. The - the old - the old one went to before that - I went with my sister - a few times, was called the bug house really, it was an old - it was very old place which they - where
 the - where the new block of flats is built now, there, opposite the Mar Gardens, you know where I mean? Yes, well the variety house and all picture house, very old there. Which just showed magic lanterns you know and - things like that. And that was - I
 
remember going in there when I was very young with my sister. And - then I was perhaps in my teens, twelve - when - the cinema was built, and that was wonderful, we would walk in and walk home eleven or twelve o'clock at night. And wouldn't - wouldn't nee
d
 - feel afraid at all. And - I - I've said lots of times when I went to my - husband - then, the first - the Christmas we went to cinema, and it wasn't over until eleven o'clock and the shops were open then when we came out, I - he bought my first - gold 
brooch - my first present, after we came from the cinema. I suppose half past eleven - Sammerson the jeweller - in the Green Market, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1651909\charrsid3212931 tobacconist}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931  shop is there now. Next door to Andrew Walker. And - he bought the gold brooch there, well that was the first present I ever had and that was bought nearly twelve o'clock of Saturday night after the cinema. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How did you manage for money, did you get pocket money when you were a child?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 The pocket money we had - would be a ha'penny or a penny Saturday nights.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Every Saturday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Ev - every Saturday, if they had it, but - but we had loads of Saturdays we didn't have any, in the wintertime. And - on the fishing, and I - knew - when my father got money and when he didn't, and when he didn't get it I
 never asked for any. And - if mother could give me a ha'penny, which was - and the - the - the beauty of it was or the tragedy of it was - every child in the village, or most of them were in the same - in the same predicament because - there was - a fish
i
ng village, and - nearly everyone was on the fishing unless they had - their parents was - were market gardeners, and had some land, you see, so all my companions and friends - were the same as myself, you see, if there was good fishing with one boat well
 the majority of boats had the same, and if there was no fishing well it was the same for everybody.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What did you spend the money on when you got it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 We would go around the different shops in the village looking in the windows to see where we cou
ld have the most sweets. And there was one old lady called Mrs Arrol, or Miss Allow, and she sold Coopers Whispers. Excuse me. And I think we had about thirteen for a ha'penny. And - so I think that was what our happennies would be spent on - Saturday nig
hts. Then Toblers chocolates came in vogue, a penny bar.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did anyone outside the home help your mother look after her house and family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Nobody?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What about relations or friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well if mother was sick - her - her sist
er would come in, or her nieces and help you know but otherwise - it was - her two daughters there, of course Ada was in the Post Office but Mary was always here to help.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What sort of things did they do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 They would - wash up the dishes and get the dinner.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Would they clean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
And clean, yes, our - all our people here in the village could clean their houses I suppose every - every young person - could paper rooms and paint the rooms and because - my mother always did it, and - since time I
 was fourteen or - fourteen or fifteen I done the - the papering of the house, I could hang a piece of paper as good as anybody and paper a room and I could paint the room and - or I could line the ceilings and - there wasn't a thing I couldn't do in the 
house. And - most of the - the girls that was reared here in the village were brought up in that way.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did your mother and father have any relatives living nearby?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, mother had a sister. And - a brother. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did they see very much of them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh yes. Yes, they were very close.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 At this house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
They - they - they both lived - close by. And my - my mother's brother, my uncle - his wife died - when he was - practically young - a young man, and his daughter, he lived with his dau
ghters they had and - they lived quite close and - he would spend lots of time here talking to father, as I said just now, politics and religion was always discussed - with three or four of the family, and - my father's brother was never married, and - he
 lived to be nearly eighty. And - he used to spend - most of his time in here. And so there was always plenty of - conversation and they were always very intelligent about - different topics of - of the day.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did your parents have friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 As opposed to just relatives?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Oh yes, father had - had a friends and he would speak about them and the roguery that they used to do when they were young. I wish I'd remembered all the stories he told me, but I'm afraid - I'm afraid I've forgotten them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did he see very much of them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Yes, but - one of two of his friends had gone away, gone to Wales, up in the mines to work, left the fishing you see and - and - one or two others had gone to America, and - so he never - he'd never see them a
nymore and - but he was always talk about the - the - good times he had when he was young.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did your parents share the same friends?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well she had - women friends of her own you see, which came to the house and - father's friends had gone away so
 he didn't have anybody but his brother that came - as regards his family, and his sister. He had a brother and sister who lived here, and he had several nieces, and they all came and were friendly and - mixed up with us you see, with - one another.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 When did he see them, did he go out to see them or did they come here to visit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Oh they came here. They would come - here in the evenings and - mother's sister would come in - of a evening, especially if her husband was to sea and - they would do all 
- all their knitting, the sister-in-laws - around the fire. No - no lamp lit, it was only lamp in those days, and - the fire, and the flickering of the - coal, the fire, the flames, and they - the faster they knitted the faster they talked, you could - I 
c
an see them now, they - the steel needles, eight steel needles at each frock, the click click of the needles. I tell you what they would do - also they would - go over to Newlyn and buy the white cotton, the men would have the cotton to make the nets and 
h
ave them barked after, but the women would go over and have the cotton and they would make their curtains for the windows. Mesh - mesh the curtains and then darn a pattern in them, a flower pattern or something, so the - the short curtains they would make
 and some people had made}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1651909\charrsid3212931  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 long curtains. Used to look lovely.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Were friends ever invited into the home, or did they just come as they felt like it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. They came in as they liked. No one was ever - specially invited in the family, not - not the co
usins or nieces or sisters, they always - took this house as the family house and it's still been that. When grandma and grandfather lived here}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1651909\charrsid3212931  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 all - all their family of - of sons and daughters came here you see and their - grandchildren, and even when the
y died it was still - they still did that. And - since my parents have died our family, my sisters and brothers and their nieces and nephews have taken - this home as their own you know and - seem to be the old family house.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 When they came here were they given things to eat and to drink?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh well, if sometimes - if we - if they were having a meal, mother would ask them to have a - a - cup of tea or anything and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What about special occasions?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No, any - any time in - any day, and - I can
 remember now - my cousins always coming in - if Aunt Lizzie had made any cakes they always said Aunt Lizzie's heavy cake was better than their own. And they'd like to have a pi}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1651909\charrsid3212931 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 ce of mother's I think all children thought that, and we always thought somebody else was different to our own.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did your parents ever go out to visit friends or neighbours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 My parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did they go out to visit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Oh yes, of a evening they would be invited out or sometimes they didn't - didn't want to be inv
ited, you just feel you would like to go to see your friends and you would go.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
People often tell us that in those days they made their own amusements, what do you think your parents did when they got together with their friends and their neighbours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well - they would - they would have a talk about the books they'd read - if they visited their neighbours and friends. But - our own amusements were - were made here in the house.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 But when they went out did they ever sort of go out to make music or to play games?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Many people divide society into different social classes or groups, in that time before 1918 did you think of some people belonging to one and some to another?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well - I can't - say much about that because - he
re in this little community - it wasn't very much done you see. Apart from - the religious side of the question and the - politics, it was just them two things, and there was just the religious meetings or the - the politicians and - meetings one with the
 other and - going. There were no debates, no debating society or anything in that way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you ever think of some people as being higher up the social ladder than yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Never. No. I never - I never thought that anyone was better than myself.
 And I can - look back now, a funny thing, a silly thing really, I can look back now as a child - coming home to school to dinner, coming home after dinner, coming home in the afternoon you know, and thinking when I got to our front door that it was the b
e
st door in Mousehole. And that is my opinion as a child, no one - no father was better than mine or mother, and I - I never thought that anyone was - better than me - money didn't me in my mind make anybody better, and - I - in my own opinion and - I'm gl
ad to say that I - never felt inferior to any body.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Nowadays we talk about the working class and the middle class and the upper class.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 You don't think there was anything like this in Mousehole at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No, I don't think that - I know for one thing that my father would never think anybody better than him. And - he - he was -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What about people worse than you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 He was intelligent, he read a lot and we all read and I think that that's a kind of - opened up our horizon an
d - took us to different countries - and all that but - in our - in our reading and our way of - books we read, my parents never believed in - in reading any trash, they always wanted to enlarge your memory and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did your father or you ever think that people were worse than yourselves?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What sort of people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well, even people here fishing that had the bigger families than us, had it hard pinch sometimes - to - to live, you know. And - no, we could always - have sympathy with th
e people that - we thought had hard times, although we had hard ourselves. But - it was a funny - life really, a funny thing to - think on now because - somehow - always something happened - and my father would say to me even when - when - he got old and 
I
 was young and married and still on the fishing and I would worry sometimes if the weeks was passing and the boats hadn't been to sea, and father would say, my child, don't worry, I've gone through it all, I've worried and everything had worked out. Well 
- and so don't - leave it there to time, and I think that - he was a great help to me in - that respect.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Were you ever taught by your father and mother to sort of curtsey to anybody?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 We were always told to be courteous and kind and I think that's
 how - there's so much delinquency now with the children because they're not taught in the home. You always - always had to respect old age and that was the hiding I had from my father that day, because I was disrespectful you see, which I never forgot.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 I said curtsey?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh - I'm sorry, yes, yes, take off your hat, yes. Always told that. Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Who would you do that to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well we always done it to - to anybody older than ourselves, and asked them if we - if we - were sitting in a - in a wag
onette when we were young - there were no buses then and - older per - person came in and there was hardly room for her we always got up, and sat on my parents lap or sat on - somebody else's lap you know to make room. Always asked to oblige and make room
 for old people.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Was there anyone that you would call sir or madam?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. No, not in the village, no. Oh no, we were all the same.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you remember anyone calling your father sir or your mother madam at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. No. We were of the working class, you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 And everybody was working class there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you remember who was considered the most important people in the village?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well, the people who - who owned the post - owned boats and farms and that, it's a few - we
althy farmers around, but still - we didn't - we didn't - think that that they were any better than ourselves. They may have had money but they - they didn't seem to be that - brainy and - intellectual that you know, we didn't - we ne - we never thought -

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
So if all the people were considered the same you got on with everybody in the village? Did you come into contact with people like shopkeepers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh yes, we would have to for our groceries, where the Lobster Pot is now was our grocery shop.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 You didn't think of them as being better than yourselves,
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What about teachers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well we look up to teachers because they were - knowledgeable and they were - teaching us every day, but - we were all good friends one with the other and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you come into contact with teachers socially?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you remember your birthday being different from any other day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No, my birthday was just the same as any ordinary day. We - we knew it was our birthday and - maybe we would have a car
d sent us from our parents, but - apart from that we didn't have any - any presents, not like they have now, my goodness they wouldn't be able to afford it. A - a handkerchief perhaps, I can't ever remember having any - a birthday cake made. We didn't exp
ect it, we - we didn't feel anything about it really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 You wouldn't find some of your family making odd little presents for you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. No. No, I don't think - I don't think anybody - my age and race - ever had any - presents from their parents, and 
- you see - money was - scarce, people were afraid to spend it if they had it with the fishing, they all lived by favour, fisher people and - they never knew from one week to the other what they would have or what their husbands would give them, and - so 
what they did have they had to be very careful about, and there was nothing spent - unless it was really wanted. But we were happy and if we had a ha'penny or a penny we would - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1651909\charrsid3212931 t}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 our the village and go and have a look in the windows and see and - the - the 
shop windows and the shops you know in the houses and - an old lady kept a little shop and I think she sold the sweets sweet - cheaper than anybody else, and we had - Coopers Shispers, thirteen I think we had for a ha'penny then. And we would count them t
o make sure that we had the thirteen, and - very interested in reading - our future and - hoping things would turn out as decided - in our childish way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What about Christmases?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh they were lovely, they were things to look forward to, yes, and yo
u know we had then - things that we'd - we - don't take any notice of now, what we have all the year round now. And don't think about, we only had Christmas time. As regards oranges, fruit, there was a time - when we were young we didn't see an orange unt
i
l - perhaps - in November, end of November, and then they were very very sour, and - when my father came home from Plymouth, fishing season was over perhaps in January - if they got any money he'd bring home a nice large bag of oranges, and they were very
 
large ones and juicy and - we looked forward to that. Box - sweets, the - the - the best sweets we would have for Christmas, chocolate sweets, what we wouldn't have in the ordinary way of - life. But Christmas was a lovely time of the year. And - of cours
e we were Methodists and - we always had a - a Christmas carol service in the church.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you go with your parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Yes, go every Sunday, yes, and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What else did you do with your parents at Christmas?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh yes - well - we always w
ent to church service, church Sunday Christmastime and every other Sunday morning my father would take me, and mother would be in doing the dish - the - the dinner and getting ready for - the meal, and - then my father always took me to chapel with him. A
n
d I know he was away perhaps for three months fishing and they came home, I was about three then and I remember so clearly him saying to me, now I've been away such a long time I've forgotten the way to the chapel, you'll have to show me the way. And - I 
felt very proud to think I was - showing my father where the church was you see, and leading him into the seat and saying, this is where we sit. And then we had a - Boxing Day we had a bazaar, and - I can still smell the barrels with the }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1651909\charrsid3212931 sawdust}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931  in them, yo
u know, you had dips, ha'penny dips. Oh - wonderful to pull up something really - you know, good. And then it'd come to the evening when the local talent of the village you know would - we had several funny people here in the village then you know - then 
t
hey'd always - it was always very good, the carol service, acting you know. Of course Boxing Day would be a wonderful day, bazaar in the afternoon, and the concert in the evening, and after the concert would be a - a supper in the vestry. And we would hav
e - one old stalwart over there carving up - the ham you know, nice piece of ham and another - another sailor carving up the meat and different things. So, we - we had a lovely Christmas in our small way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What about Christmas Day, did you sing carols?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
No. I - I remember - I did - did remember - well we always had our stocking hung up which was a - used to wear black knitted stockings then. Hand knitted of course, and they would be hung to the bed. And - we would have - our Christmas stocking with 
- nuts down the toe, different sort of nuts, all kinds of nuts and - and a bag with dates and a bag with all things, and another bag with sweets and then there would be an apple and an orange and a pear perhaps and a piece of coconut. And - if things were
 
going well on the fishing we may have a handkerchief and a penny put in it. That would be on the top. But one Christmas I might - I may have been about six years old I suppose then, and - we had a cupboard there with a - with a door on it, you see the rec
e
ss as we have now, and - I was searching for something, a little girl about - six years old, five or six years old, and I was searching for something, and I found a cup and saucer, a lovely cup and saucer tied up in red silk ribbon. And I could see bit of
 
- chocolate sweets on top. And it was such a luxury, it was something so very special that I knew it was for a special occasion. And although I would be just - six or seven I knew that that was for Christmas. And I didn't say anything, I'd seen it, I was 
crafty you see, and sure enough that year I - that Christmas I had this in my stocking. And I never let on to my mother that I'd found it, see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 We were talking about singing carols with your parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Was that when you used to play the piano?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
No, we didn't have a piano then, we had an American organ, and - before we had the American organ - we would sit around the fire, and - we had a tuning fork here that has been in my own sister's - my - my grandfather Mann had it - I don't k
now who had it before him, it's always been handed down in the family, for many years and when they went out to sing carols the old people before I believe would have a tuning fork, see, and - just strike it and have a note, so we had this here and we wou
l
d - strike up a tuning fork and have a note and - we'd sit around the fire singing the carols and - my father was a lovely tenor singer and - my brother was a bass and - and sister soprano, two sisters soprano and I, as a very young child - learned to sin
g a lot. So we could make a very good sound.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did your mother sing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Yes, yes. And - I was very proud to think that we as - as a family could amuse ourselves in around the fire singing the lovely carols and the hymns, and - then of course on the - 
the - Christmas Sunday, or Christmas Day we would go to the church and then afterwards the choir - would - would go out in the streets you see singing the carols when it got eleven o'clock at night. They would - they'd have supper first and I was very pro
u
d to go out with my parents and - we would go around to - all the people that was - old or sick, and - sing these lovely - lovely tunes. And when I got older, we went - up to Poole and around - the country places singing. And get home perhaps about twelve
 
or one o'clock. We never collected for money. IT WAS just to sing and - if they were - you know, sometimes they would say come in and have a little bit of - black Christmas cake and - sometimes - ginger wine which was the only drink that was ever made the
n
, so that would warm us up and give us a bit of impetus to go somewhere else and sing. And it's been continued until this last two or three years, I'm sorry that it's - it's just fallen through. I think television have altered all that, the people once th
e
y get home and after the service in church and - and watch the television, hear the carols on the television rather than - to go out and sing them. Yes, we used to have - we - we did have lovely Christmases. And then there was the glee dancing after that.
 Yes. And - we as children dressed up and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What sort of clothes did you wear?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Mm? Oh, I'd wear - anything then as children, but when I got older I was silly, I was still young in my mind and I liked to - have a bit of fun you see, and - my husba
nd would be at Plymouth, fishing all the winter long and - I know when my father was alive, he was a biggish man you see, and - some friends in Birmingham one Christmas sent us a - a parcel of things and - for the children, and among them was - a very - a
 
very old looking mask, with white whiskers. And - it was a very good get up, and - one minute I was in by myself, or in - in with my father he was reading, and children had gone out dressed up and I thought oh I'm going to dress up, so I went upstairs and
 
put on - father's - suit, and his jersey and his overcoat, and - his trilby had and this mask you see. And I came down and his walking stick was there beside him, he was reading, he didn't notice me coming down, and I just took his walking stick and gave 
h
im a tap you know on his legs. And he looked up, he said, hm. He was - he was scared stiff, he didn't know for one minute who it was, and he said, you great fool, you're not going out like that I said, I am. You'll be chased. I went. And as I got by Mr Ol
d
's shop there was a crowd of youngsters there, they chased me. And - I thought, I'm not going to run, if I do I - I'm finished, I just walked along very stately spinning my stick. I thought if my mother-in-law's - if she doesn't answer - her door is locke
d
 - and she's not in I shall collapse with fright, but - lo and he hold I put my finger to the latch and it opened, the door opened. Well I gave her another fright but I closed the door quick and locked it, and by the time I came out I've had my clothes of
f.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What about the guy dancers then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Oh - well, they were - older people would go round dressed up, and - the first I can ever remember of the - these dancers was when I was perhaps three or four years old, and - father had gone back to Plymouth 
after Christmas and mother and I were in on - on our own, and we heard this terrific noise in our road. And - mother said that's the - players, which they called them then, the players. And - she opened the door and I went out with her and when we got to 
t
he door the - the crowd of people passing by, and the weirdest looking people you ever saw. I was scared stiff as a child, and - mother said, don't be frightened, they're all dressed up you see, and I they had - funny hats on, one had a big hat, and a big
 
big crown to it and - and the suit all looking - as if it was made of bits and pieces, little bits of red cloth and - little - pieces on them hanging around and his hat was the same, and - one had a - a sword in his hand and the other one had a big bobble
, and - one was dressed up in a - in a - suit like a doctor wears or what - what they wore in the old days, and - they - they - they were making for the Keigwen, the bake}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1651909\charrsid3212931 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 house, we had - our bake}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1651909\charrsid3212931 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
house was in the Keigwen you see, above the - old manor house, and at that time it was a very nice bake}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1651909\charrsid3212931 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
house and all the district around baked their bread and cakes and dinners there. So - these - this - these - these dancers were making for the - for the Keigwen, and - mother and I went in after them. Oh there wer
e a crowd of them, and of course collecting the people as they were passing houses, going by, and - they were - they were - reacting the old play St George and the Dragon, that was the first I can remember of the glee dancers. And - when they came out the
 
- the first one said with a very - high hat, the funny hat and that, here comes Father Christmas. I hope old Father Christmas will never be forgot. With a head a like a pig and a body like a sow, and a great long nose like the beam of a plough. And of cou
r
se the speech was finished and then two more figures got there between them and they had a fight. They had a wood sword as it happened you know, lance, and - they - they made out that they were having a big old fight and then one of them fell to the groun
d. And -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Was all their speech in verse?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Pardon? Yes. All in verse, and - then this one fell on the ground and he was supposed to be mortally wounded, and - he said - the skirmish came to a sudden end you know and he looked around and he said, is
 there any doctor to be found? To cure this deep and deadly welt. Of course - I was - I was so young that I thought it - he was really wounded you know, until my mother consoled me and said no, it was just a play and that, and they all acted their part, a
nd that was my first remembrances of Christmas, of glee dancers. And do you know that - is still being}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1651909\charrsid3212931  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
acted as yet, last year we had a - the St John's Folk Society came down and - they - they gave a concert, and they acted that old play, St George and the Dragon.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Where do they do it now?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Pardon? Oh - they acted it - at our - schoolroom. Methodist schoolroom. And - we acted it years ago, in our institute. So we're trying to revive - these old plays and to still make use of them. And the funny thing was - I've a l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1651909\charrsid3212931 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1651909\charrsid3212931 t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
er in my - one of my books - was - sent to America, some visitors bought me in Pen}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1651909\charrsid3212931 z}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
ance when they were - this summer and I had a letter, it was a month - fortnight ago from these visitors and the - the gentleman wrote and said that his w
ife had ordered the books in - from Penzance when she was there and - he was so interested to know about the - the glee dancing which I had mentioned - in the book and - he said that he remembered - reading about - Cornwall in the book and how the - how t
hese old plays of St George and the Dragon, and he quoted the - the verse I just said, and said how much he would love to have seen it being acted.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 You had books, you have a lot of books now I see?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh yes. I was - we was always great readers, my 
father was a great reader and he always encouraged us - the family to read. I don't think anyone - in the village of - of - read more than we have as a family, and we never wanted - if father - had any fish at all in Plymouth - or Scarborough or Ireland, 
he went all round you see, fishing, the Isle of Man - but no matter where he went I never wanted anything but a book. See? And - sure enough he would - he would generally manage to bring a book home for me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What sort of books did he like reading?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Oh, I used to read - I would love to read - well in my early days of course before I got into reading - novels or anything of that sort I used to read children}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1651909\charrsid3212931 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 s books. Or - educational books like - Robinson Crusoe and - things like that you see, and then
 - you'd go - but - I had the Wide Wide World brought home one day, oh that was a lovely book, American story, and it had lots of tears in reading that. And - well they were - and then of course we had missionary prizes from chapel, for collecting for mis
sionaries and they were always very nice - books. Religious books some of them were and oh very interesting. And then of course as I got older you could have the - all the authors of the day, O'Kane, the Eternal City and the Next Land \{BLANK\}
 Mrs Henry Wood, her books, one by one as they were printed, and I know we - I cried over the - over her books, and -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What about your mother and father, they did a lot of reading, what sort of things did they read?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh - yes, they were reading too all the time
. Always borrowing books then to read. We had a library in our Methodist church when my grandfather was alive and - of course - it lasted up 'til this last - this was - fifty years - no books at all available unless you were - joined that and - I can reme
m
ber carrying them around, carry - going to collect my grandfather's book once a month - long list of the members in the fly leaf and the books were bound with black leather. Oilcloth I should say and then attached you know inside and - I would collect - h
i
s books from an old man called Prade, Mr Prade, and - then - of course - he would - he would have grandfather's and they went around all the members then. They were so thirsty for knowledge and - the books we - two - two here now and they were so - deep r
eally that no - I - I think no one would ever have them to read now. Very very religious books, but they would always like to - have them. I suppose they were pretty cheap to buy then but money was so scarce that they could never afford to put it to that.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did your mother buy magazines?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Yes. Yes. We had the - I think we were the - a gentleman came here one day at the door knocking and asked me if I could sell - if I could get twenty-five members names, and - then - issue the book or printed the magazine called the Sunday Companion, and -

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How old would you have been then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Oh, about - ten or eleven that's all. Well then I went around to our friends and neighbours, they got twenty-five names, and that was the first of introducing the - Sunda
y Companion to the village, and of course we had to collect it from Penzance every Thursday, and oh I couldn't wait for Thursday to come. I had a - a lovely book sent me by the Sunday Companion, for getting these twenty-five - members you see. And - a ver
y
 nice hand bound book. And - so as we've gone older and got - older, we - our - our tastes have differed. I was - made on Lawrence's books sometime, then Hugh Walpole's and - of course - the Forsyte Saga, Golsworthy's books, I can - read them all over aga
in, they were marvellous.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you read newspapers when you were young?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
There was no newspapers here my dear. No. No, we only had the Cornishman once a week, up to the first world war, and up to that time only those well to do people who - who co
uld afford it had the - the Morning News sent them by coach you see which came every - day. But not to - there was only I suppose two or three people that ever had that, here in my young days. So we didn't see a paper Only - when the first world war came.
 
And then it was a Sunday paper that a man brought out or a chap on a bike, Sunday morning. There was never any papers in the village until - the - the only paper that we had was the Cornishman Thursdays, and the local chap - used to bring that around. So 
there was no paper until - the first world war.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you ever read aloud to each other?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Yes. Oh yes, yes, we liked to read to each other. And when we had a dail - had a daily paper you see, and all the little titbits you know, if someone was busy 
doing something the other one would read. And then we were very fond - my father was very fond of John Masefield and - he loved to read - his sea - stories you see of course. And - as a little - as I think in later year we were - I think - I think the Mou
sehole - the fishermen really were very knowledg}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1651909\charrsid3212931 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
able. My father left school - when he was eight, to go to sea, and yet he was a wonderful knowledge of things and he was a wonderful - writer, and - he was - well in fact - if they came to the school and ther
e were exams wanting to know the certain river or anything, where it was, father could always tell them see. And - he would read all the books - two or three times over if he couldn't have a new one to read.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What sort of books did he like reading?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
He - he loved reading - father did, historical books, and - books about - history, historical novels and historical books of any sort, and - he - he didn't want the - the light books, he used to say to me when I was at the library don't b}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1651909\charrsid3212931 r}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 ing home any o
f that light trash. Something I can get my teeth into he'd say. And - so I tried to please him and - bring all these three books a week. Of course that was our - you know, we were - we were village folk but we were never lonely because there's always some
thing to do here in the village. And no - no wireless - and no - no - well - only our church, no matter what church you belonged to here, you was - you was interested in it you see. And - we didn't look for very much in that - in those days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you ever remember a funeral in the family when you were young?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Oh my grandfather - my grandmother was the first funeral I can remember, I was three when she died. But I was in so much - I was taken to the funeral. As a little girl, three years old, put in b
lack. Yes, and - got - got - got a picture here somewhere about - that I had taken with my - we three sisters in black from head to foot.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you have to wear a hat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, was a black hat and your hair tied with black hair ribbon, but - I can't 
remember much about that funeral 'cos I cried so much, and - but the only - the - the - the first funeral I can remember vividly was - one - a Salvation Army funeral, and - our Sunday school was - at the end of the village in Cannons Hall, just below Pool
 Hill, or Poole Lane, and - I should say of course Mousehole Lane leading up to Poole, and we came out this Sunday - about half past three and there was this Army funeral, and - we could hear this - ba}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6365406\charrsid3212931 nd and the drum beating very solem}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 nly coming up you see,
 we children was very thrilled to hear - the band coming. When it came the - the flag was half mast. They carried the flat in front you see, and - they all had these black crepe armbands on and carrying the corpse which - everybody had - was carried in th
ose days. No - hearse or anything then. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 In a coffin?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What would the coffin be made of, do you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Wood, and covered with a flag, covered with the Army flag, but - oh dear - we were - frightened really, because the
y were singing, the people were singing, the Salvation Army h}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6365406\charrsid3212931 y}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
mns you see, and then when they - when they - we - we followed suit, two or three of us little children went up behind, and - wondered wh}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6365406\charrsid3212931 atever in the world was happen}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 ing and of course - the - w
hen they - when they left the village and gone beyond the houses - they stopped singing and they just beat the drum all the way. And we followed them to the cemetery and we saw what happened there and - when we came home mother wanted to know what had hap
pened and where I'd been and when I told her I'd been to the funeral - she was very annoyed about it. I was threatened never to go again. But I couldn't put it out of my mind for a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6365406\charrsid3212931 
long time this weir}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 d funeral.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 When members of your family died how did you feel then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How - I felt - you know, as a child I felt awful when my grandfather died and my grandmother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How old were you when your grandfather died?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Four. Just twelve - twelve months older than when my grandmother died. And - he died 
twelve months to the day, and - oh I can - I can remember so plainly. Took to the funeral. All children went to the funeral then, which I don't think was - Yes.. And everybody went in black, they would go in black in those days for cousins, no matter how 
d
istant, third and fourth cousins they had - all went in black. I don't know what they'd say now when they - if they could see the funerals but then - they - everybody - I can't remember my mother only wearing black or navy. - clothes, always someone dying
 
in the family, you see, and - I know I - I bought some grey silk for her to have a dress and - she vowed she'd never wear it. But - eventually she did. But you know looking back on my parents my mother, I can't - she always seemed old to me because they a
l
ways dressed old. And long dresses down to their toes, see, and - of course little turn over shawls, yes. No - no - no cardigans in my young days for - for parents to wear, they all wore shawls. This - this here is one of the shawls that they would wear, 
i
n the wintertime, and - I remember as a child being cuddled - in under the lovely great warm thick shawl which the men would bring home from Scotland, you see. Nice and thick and warm, but - now - don't see a shawl, although they are getting fashionable a
gain, three cornered ways.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you ever meet teachers socially?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did they ever come to visit you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, our teacher was very friendly with my sister, and mother and - would come here pretty often, and - the on - the only complaint 
she had against me was that I talked too much. I - I think it's still - complaints is still lasting.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you feel that the minister at the chapel - did you get on with him socially?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Yes, the minister - came and - had their dinner here - of 
a Sunday very often and - came in to see father or - father, whoever was ill, and - I think the - the minister was the only one that we - that I looked up to a little bit but - I -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you think your parents did as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well I think so, yes - I 
think that we looked - in - in the past more to the ministers than what we do now. I don't know for why but - it seemed as if we did - have them more in regard than we do now. Because I think they visited more in the old days and took more interest in peo
ple.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What did you think about people who were farming? Did you think they were of a different social class to yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 They were - they were wealthy people. But not with - any - any different social class to ourselves I'm afraid. I think that we
 were a little bit big headed as a family, we - felt we could hold our heads up - intellectually and - and - every other way just as good as them, they had - we always knew that they had lots of money, but - we - we didn't think that money made happiness 
really, and thought there was lots of things and we could have done with a lot more but we didn't ever put that as a standard of - being better than anybody else.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you have any friends who were farmers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, had cousins. And - we've always ha
d - farmer friends - well this - this afternoon, but - we've always had from my early - early childhood stayed at farm places with people, and they were - very happy days, when we - could get away from the sea, my father especially enjoyed - getting into 
the country and - for weekends you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What sort of people do you think when to church, as opposed to chapel?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well - I - in our younger days - the Conservative people - as we thought went to church you see. I've heard my parents talk about the l
anded gentry, you know, they were the church people and - the - the - what - what the church people thought was the poorer class - were non-conformists, but - we always thought the opposite.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What sort of people do you think went to chapel?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well - the Methodists went to chapel, those who came under John Wesley when he came in 1774.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 But you said that perhaps the landed gentry went to church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Well we were all - we were all considered poor people, the fisher people you see, this littl
e community - was a fishing village. And - we - my - ancestors - got converted to Charles - to John Wesley when he came here as a - young man on horseback, or he wasn't very old when he got here, and - anyway -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you remember who went to church from the village people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What sort of people in the village went to church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well - they were mostly Conservative families that went to church.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What did they do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Fisher - oh one or two families was fishing people. In fact it was 
only just the - the - the couple of families in our day that went to church from the village. More people go now because they're visitors who have come here to live. Buy the village people, the majority of them were - attended to the - there's two Methodi
st churches here you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Do you think everybody in the same sort of class as yourself, your own family, like the fishing people, do you think they all had the same standard of living?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 I think so, the majority of them, I think of course you know
, every - everyone - every family is different as regards what their interests are, some - same families like ours were - readers, all - all of the family, even our grandchildren today all they want is - are - are books, and yet you see some children don'
t - don't ever read a book.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What about standards of things like cleanliness or Godliness?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well cleanliness and Godliness go together don't they, that's what they say, and
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 You mentioned earlier that some of the fishing families perhaps weren'
t so clean about the house as your own family, and that your own front door was the smartest in the street?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well - and then - and - I don't know the smartest, but I always thought that it was the best, it was the best, and I always - our village was 
very clean, I can't pick out a family when I was young - but what had - they were all clean and - tried to bring up their children and know who could get the - the clothes the whitest, you know, they always sent their children to school looking - very cle
an.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Were some families thought of as being respectable and some as being rough?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Yes. Well - I - there were only about one or two - families in - in my young days that were - really, you know the boys were rough and that, and of course those children we didn't play with.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What about the parents of these boys, were they thought of as being rough?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well, no. Funnily enough they weren't but somehow - children - children seemed to be. But we were always told to - to - not to play with the - the rough children.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Presumably in the village you had people like craftsmen, you would have carpenters possibly or you'd have blacksmiths, this sort of thing, do you remember these?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you think of there being any difference between people who were craftsmen and people who worked?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
No. I - I - we used to think that the - that those who had trades were - were really - one up you know, they - they - they had a trade at their back and trades in those days were - were - everybody could
n't put their children to trades, and they were always kind of - thought to be - a step above anybody else, just as much as a farmer would be. But - we had blacksmith shop here in the village and - and we had boat building - carpenters - boat builders who
 built boats and - I can remember the boats being built and christened here, in the village, and we thought that they were remarkable people to do it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did your mother and father behave in the same way to people in different classes, did your father per
haps off his cap to the minister and your mother not, this sort of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well - I don't know, no, I -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you think they behave thed same?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 All the same, yes. And - in my young days the ministers were very friendly with my parents, they cam
e here to see my grandparents, and they got - always - always seemed to be on friendly terms with the ministers that we - you know we didn't - have - well take them in awe as I should say - as somebody superior.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did your father perhaps look up to somebody and your mother not look up to somebody?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Father would not make up to anybody. He - he would never bow - no, to anybody, he was - very very - what shall I say, the - how can I explain what he was like. He - he never thought anyone better than himself, that was his attitude you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you think your mother thought she belonged to a particular social group?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Mother was - perhaps a softer woman than father in her - in her - attitude to life in her way and all that but - no, I don't know th
at mother was - would - know tow to anybody very much.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you think it was possible at that time to move from one social group to another?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Like if you were a fisherman?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Can you remember anyone who did?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Ye
s, we - we - those who thought they were the top of the village - different people - we were just as friendly with them. I didn't - make anybody - any - any different I don't think in the village, I think that it - the - this village perhaps was different
 to - some other villages. We all seemed to be - one family, you know everyone was friendly one with another and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 There was really no difference between you all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Can you remember anyone being described as a real lady or a real gentleman?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well, the only ones that - we thought of then is - retired people coming down from London. In those days, they were looked up to I think more than anybody else because they'd dress smarter and - could have a different - appearance and had a dif
ferent home, they had travel}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6365406\charrsid3212931 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
ed and they had seen - my friend is coming - and they was - those were the only people that - I had a - I had a - a cousin - two cousins, they were sisters whose mother had died young and - their aunt - had never married and sh
e was an housekeeper to a well to do family in London, and they went there in this house in service and we always thought when they came home that they were gentry, when I was young and these two cousins came down with their parasols, because they dressed
 like the Londoners and they had their - parasols with them, and we - we thought that they were gentry.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 So you think a lady or gentleman is what then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. They were so important in our eyes as a - as - a - as if they had - thousands of pounds, didn't have anything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 In fact it was the way they behaved and the way they dressed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Yes. They'd been in service from the time that they'd been young and they'd - acted just like - well to do people you see and - that was our opinion of them then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you ever remember seeing a policeman around where you lived?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. We were afraid of him. He kept us all in order.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 When you were naughty did your mother ever say I'll call the policeman?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 I'll tell the policeman. Yes. If - if we wa
s naughty and that, or if we perhaps - were naughty out and the neighbours might say you know - wanted for us to go out of the street from playing, we used to play in the road all the time and sometimes the old wom}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6365406\charrsid3212931 en would get next door get tease}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 y and say I'll tell the policeman - you mustn't stay here in the street playing you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How do you think the policeman treated people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well he was a very strict man, and - the children were very much afraid of him. Until we got older. But - he was - sca
red the wits out of - he was a tall man and he was very very strict and stern. I - met his daughter in America a few years ago and - his eldest daughter who I knew here as a girl you see and I said to her one day about her father - and I - said to her, we
 were afraid of our souls of him as children, she said, never afraid of my father? I said, well, he was your father but he was our policeman. And that was the difference.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Was your home rented?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No, my - the home was - my grandparents - the house I
 live in now and have always where I was born - was my grandparents - home, and - they invited my mother to come and live with them when they got old, which she did and I happened to be born here, and my mother - left the house to me when she died. And th
at's how I'm still here.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you remember feeling that your parents had to struggle to make ends meet?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Yes. Yes, that was - one of the great things in my young life, that - always worried me. And - when at school lots of times - my mind was not on
 my lessons but on my parents and - especially if there had been no fish for a long time, and thinking about my mother and - the hardship and the - worry that she had and also my father - which I think kind of - spoiled my school life, I think I was - a v
e
ry sensitive - a - a very sensitive child, and - those things were always on top - I would never ask for pocket money on a Saturday, we never had any, only on a Saturday, but if my father had - not been to sea and caught any fish I wouldn't ask for - anyt
hing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What difference do you think it made if your father was ill or out of work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well my father practically was a very strong man, and - luckily for him he didn't have much sickness, but - the - no one but fisher people - I don't think could eve
r have lived in the old days as they did. They were very thirty, as I said before, and very careful - on what they had, and because they had a few pounds one week they didn't waste it, they always looked out for a rainy day, and - I felt so often that - t
hey deserved medals.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you ever get help from the Guardians or the Parish or any other charity?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. No, we never had any help from any - from anybody.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 There was no Poor Relief?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No, never had it in our lives - when I was - sometimes 
in the winters - the - Mr Bolitho the - the Bolitho family were very - very good in there for - for making work, they would have - roads - roads - road making - in the country, and if there had been many - many - weeks or months of - of - of bad weather o
r
 no fish - our fishermen or - some of them would apply for a job, and - my father have - had worked lots of times in the slack season, by Mr Bolitho on road - making and different things, which my mother always thought was a - was a Godsend and - I think 
the last time he - he went on that job he - the - magnificent sum of eighteen shillings a week, which - my mother and him thought was - well was a Godsend.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 When there was someone in the district whom your parents disapproved of very strongly was there any special way in which they showed it?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well - no, I don't - I don't know that they disapproved of - very many people. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you remember anyone being made to leave by rough music?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh I don't know about rough music, but there - there w
ere - there - are - there there were - several - what we called tramps coming around the village you know and - well many years ago one of these - men - got friendly with a young woman and - in the end she was - she had to leave the village. Yes, and -

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What had happened?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well in the end she went to the Union, and died in the Union. The Union was what we called the big house, where everybody - all old people were afraid that - that they would finish up.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 This was the work house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, the work house, and - that was the - the terror really of - elderly people. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you remember effig}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6365406\charrsid3212931 ie}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 s ever being made of people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Yes. Yes. Well - one was made, a - a - I don't know that my family done it but - some Americans - American co
uple came here to live years ago when I was a young woman and I'd had a very big illness, a burst ulcer, and I had been for - I suppose three months on a - milk diet, and these Americans came - a man and wife and - and - rented a house on the front - of t
h
e village, just around the corner from here, and my - daughter - came one day and said that I could - I could go and sit in the sun, and I hadn't been out for a long while, and - my mother helped me down - at the front there where the - the cottage that I
 
sat on the steps was my grandparents, and of course, they had been dead many years and - a relative was still living there, but the house that - these Americans lived in well they had to pass this cottage you see, I sat at - on the steps, and the - and a 
n
eighbour had bought a cushion for me, it was a very - very pleasant morning and the sun hot and - just after the first world war. So I was sitting there with my sister-in-law and - enjoying the sun and the work lady, the work woman, she was a Mousehole pe
r
son who was working for this American couple was coming out looking toward me, quite often and going back again, and I wondered whatever in the world she was doing. And - at last she came to me, and - she said - look, she said, Nettie, you must - you must
 
move off the front here, you can't stay here. I said, I can't, why? Well, she said, Mrs Fisher - she said, is afraid to pass you because you've got consumption. And - her sister had died in consumption and she didn't want to get the germs from you, and sh
e
 doesn't want to pass, so you must go and - go off this wharf. And then she'd come out, she's waiting to go to Penzance. Well, you know, I - I felt that I had it - I - I - I suppose I thought that - I hadn't been told what I had and I thought it was stoma
c
h and - anyway - I was very upset about this, and all the neighbourhood at that time was up in arms about it. Well I came off - the wharf and - my mother was indignant because she had been born there and - you know, she was very indignant about it. Well t
h
e - the neighbours, they'd had - and afterwards - after this happened they - had lost of money, in fact he was a millionaire. He had - he had permission of the harbour to put a wall - and a gate, to come into that part of the wharf then, which was all ope
n
 before you see. Money could speak all languages in those days, more so than now. Neighbours - the neighbours then - to show their indignation after the wall had been built to keep everybody out - and the fisher people had always gone in that little wharf
 
to watch the boat coming in at nights you see, and they took it as a great affront to think these Americans could come here and do a thing like that and turn me off from a place where my parents had always lived, and - so - they burnt a - an effigy - a ma
n dressed up like Mr Fisher, with a great big - hat, you know, and used to wear those would be California}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6365406\charrsid3212931 n}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
s, and - they burnt this effigy that night, on top of the wall, much to the - Fisher's disgust, and they were never really - thought of as - people tha
t they liked, you know, the - everyone took a dislike to these - Americans and - were very glad - when they left the village. And funnily enough they - they've both been dead many many years - and - I'm still here.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Were you given lessons by one of your parents or a tutor or a governess at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
No. I went to school when I was three. My sister was - going in for teaching at that time and - she would take me up - with her in the mornings and - I was always there when the bell was being run, they ha
d a - a school bell which - rang out at a quarter to - nine in the mornings and quarter to two - and - quarter past one in the afternoons to collect the children, all came home to dinner - at that time. But - I never had - only my - mother, she would - sh
e would make me do my homework in the nights and - for spelling and that and - of course I was always poring over books that I think I learnt to read very early.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 When you first went to school what time in the morning did you go and what time did you come back at night?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well, my sister would leave here about half past eight, and I would go with her, three years old. And - I would wait for her in the evenings and I was nearly always five before I come with her you see, and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you actually take part in the lessons?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Oh yes. Yes, we had - we were all - all the classes were in one - big room, except the very - the young infants had a room to themselves but all the other classes were in one large room. I don't know how we ever learnt anything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What kind of school was it, was it a church school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. No, it was a Methodist school. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Was it mixed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Two hundred children. I can see the board now - every day it was marked with how many children you see. And the littl
e playground was so small - and the boy - the boys then wore half boots because they went to sea when they were only nine or ten, and they would wear these little half boots up to school and we had our legs kicked, very small playground. So we didn't have
 much - life.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How did you get to school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 You walked there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Where is it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 End of the village. At the top of the village on the way to Pool.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How long would it take you to get there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well about - just - perhaps - ten minutes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Where did you have your midday meal?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No, we came home. Came home to have all our meals then. And our children. No school meals until - our boys had left school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What did you think of school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well - I don't think that I enjoyed it very 
much. I don't know for why because I was - I didn't seem to be too bad at scholar, but - and I was - I was very interested in - history and geography. But - I couldn't say that I was sorry when I left, at thirteen. I - I was supposed to have stayed until 
fourteen buy my mother being - very ill I was kept home to - help.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What did you feel about the teachers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well, I - we - we loved our school - our schoolmistress, our - infant mistress. And - and - the other - the - other teacher who helped her, a
lthough when I come to look back on things I - I've - I think that - you know, if we couldn't - get on with our sums very easily that and - was - what they call a bit backwards, the child would be put into the - in the corner of the room with a slate, hol
ding a slate up - in their arms, for perhaps minutes you know, 'til your little arms would - feel tired and - droop down. But - the - the schoolmistress - I always held in great respect, and - lots of -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Were you scared of her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. I don't think so. No, she was - very kind, but lots of things that she told us you know, I - I've never forgotten. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did the teachers emphasise certain things as being important in life?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What sort of things would they be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6365406\charrsid3212931 Well they would try and instil}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
 you - well - the good things I should say - as a matter of fact you know the - she'd say to me - or say to all of us, now children be very careful of who you - play with, because birds of a feather flock together. And we didn't know - I didn't 
know what she meant then, until latter years. But - she was very religious, and - she would - she would talk to us about the Bible and - everything that she could think of to - enlighten us on religious subjects, see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What about things like manners or tidiness or punctuality?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well yes, that was instilled in us also, to always be - have towards elderly people with respect, see, and - to give up our seat to them - in a conveyance or anywhere where any old people had to stand for the young one to ge
t up, always show respect to the elderly, or the sick, and I - I've come to the conclusion that those things aren't - aren't - spoken of much in schools, not in this day, I - I think we got - most of our training in the schools and with our parents at tha
t time.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 If you did something the teachers didn't approve of what would happen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Oh we'd we were had over the coals for that. If we were naughty in the playground or - if any of the - any of the other children came in and - told on us you see, we would be called out and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What sort of things would you have to have done?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Oh, well - perhaps we had had a little bit of a fight or - some other - girl or - had kicked anybody or somebody had kicked us and - our - or took our - our hat away and 
hid our hat and - which was all sorts and kinds of things - were done like that with a mixed school, and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What sort of punishments did you get?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Get a slap you know, if you - if you were late in the mornings. The headmaster at that time was Mr B
irch. He was very strict, and if we were late he - we would have a - a - smack across our head, he was very fond of giving you a smack across your head at which we always hated. And our two ears would be - sore afterwards you know with his hand. So - I'm 
afraid I was late - pretty often.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Were the girls punished the same as the boys?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Yes. Called out in front of the school. And - made to look very small. See? If you didn't do the right thing or - if you had been misbehaving, speaking was one of the
 things that we weren't allowed to do in school, I've been surprised - in recent years to - to go to schools and - and find out how the children - walk about the school and - and talk to one another, different to what we were ever allowed. If we wanted a 
pencil - or a pen or a rubber we - had to put our hands up, and ask. See? But I think they now go out and take them and - comeback again, they seem to be walking around all the time. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Were your parents interested in your school work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, very much. Very much.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did they ask you what you did at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Yes, and if I - if I had been kept in - for speaking - which is one of the things we were never allowed to do - my mother would be very indignant. About it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Would they ever go up to the school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 I don't think she ever went.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What about your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
But - no, father was always at sea or if he was home you know, he - I don't think they ever took up to make any - to send up notes or anything. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did they ever meet the teachers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
And my husband - who was three years older than me, he was kept in one day for something and - his mother went after - his dinner was ready and going cold and he - hadn't been told to go home, he was kept in and - half past twelve ca
me and - his mother went up and - the teacher was there as well with him and - she ordered my husband out, she ordered him out. And - said, your dinner is prepared and - spoiling, so now come home and - eat what's left.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did your parents ever meet the teachers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 To talk about you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Yes, because - the - the lady teacher we had - who I had after - when I got out in to the big room, was - Emmeline Curnow, and - funnily enough I had a letter from her - her daughter last week from
 New Zealand, and - she was - well kind of related to my parents, my mother and would come down very often, but I think the only re - only - mother would ask her how I behaved, and did I give her any trouble, the only excuse - only thing she would say was
 that I talked too much, I suppose I'm still doing that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 All the children from the village went to the school did they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Yes. Well - I - yes, two or three, I don't know for why, I never knew how, but - but - three or four children from Mouseh
ole went to Pool school. I don't know what reason they had to attend Pool but they would always - pass us up you know in the lane when we were going to school. One family.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do-you remember the teachers singling out some children for different treatment from the others?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well we always - we always - felt that - the very - brilliant scholars - was - fawned on more than the children who were - who were backward. I never think the teachers are - have got the patience for backward children - as they hav
e for those who can - especially in - arithmetic, you know, some children}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6365406\charrsid3212931 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
s brains were quicker than others - for arithmetic, and - I think as a matter of fact that that was my weak subject. I could never grasp it so quickly as - perhaps the - one or two o
f the other children. But - as soon as the other - the sharper children had got hold of the - mathematics was doing that, then they went on to a higher grade instead of putting more time - on - what they were - teaching us you see. Because one or two had 
- had got it quicker than the others, then the others had to - manage the best they could, which in - thinking about things after I thought that - we hardly had a - fair chance.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you remember any gangs at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh yes. Yes. There were gangs and - I suppose in every - school, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you remember children being left out of things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Some children - were I think, if you were favour}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6365406\charrsid3212931 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 tes you know you had - more opportunity to - get into things. If you were good at singing or - reciting and things like that, you had more chance in concerts of taking part, than those who hadn't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you just go to this one school or did you go on to another school afterwards?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No, I never went anywhere else, only there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How old were you when you left school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Thirteen. Thirteen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Would you have stayed longer if you could have done?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well I don't think so, no, I felt very happy - that I came home, and - I will say that I'm - I am sure I have - learnt more or - learnt myself more since I finished school than I did - when I went.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you ever take part in any part time education after you left school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you ever go to evening classes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No, never.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you have any regrets about your education?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Wel
l I - I - if I had the chance of - of learning more I suppose I should have had. It would have been for my benefit. But I think when you're thirteen you didn't see - didn't think on those things, and my mother was very very ill, and at that time I was ver
y worried and upset, we didn't think that she would live. And - because I could stay home, you see, and be here - helping I was happier than if I had - kept in school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6365406\charrsid3212931 Do you think you benefi}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 ted from attending school in any way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Sure did, it
 gave me a love of - of knowing about - other places, the - geography and - I loved geography lessons and history. And - reading, I was always the - the best one - for reading in the class, I used - my name would be called out for reading when the examine
 - when the examination was and - the gentleman came who - would be - well - he was supposed to be the examiner - as in different subjects you see, and - so often - every year they would come and I'd be always called out to read.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 While you were at school did you have a part time job or any means of earning a little regular money?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No, no, no means of getting money. I would have my - my jobs given me, and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 This is at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, before I left school at thirteen I would have - jobs, Friday
 afternoons would be cleaning the brick things of - the brickwork down with the knives, to clean on the brick}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6365406\charrsid3212931 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
boarded, with brick.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 You had no paid work though did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No paid work, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you have a full time job after you left school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Yes, I - went - when I was fourteen in February month, my father got a job for me at Higher Kemyel which is - nearly three miles from here, and - to bunch the flowers, the workmen would pick the flowers in the meadows, and then - we girls would bunch t
hem. For the - for the grand sum of three ha'pence an hour. That was the first year, and - the flowers would last say perhaps about - two or three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6365406\charrsid3212931  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 months. And then - the next year - it would be tuppence ha'penny, but the wages never rose, from tuppence ha'penny and hour. Just fancy now - anybody walking nearly three mile - for three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6365406\charrsid3212931  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 ha'pence an hour.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Was that the only sort of job you did?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 When I was - when I was - no, I - I worked in the fish cellar when I was - fourteen. In the winter, that's a
 winter job. Now those things were the only thing to do in the village. There was no factories, there were no factories and there was only out to work by the day - or in the fish cellar, in the pilchard season and the flower season would be - from January
 perhaps 'til Easter, and the fish cellar would be from - October up to Christmas.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What things did you do in the fish cellar?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Packed. Packed the pilchards in casks. See? Very cold job in the winter time and especially when you put your hand in th
e basket first thing in the morning. That was the same rate of wage. Three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6365406\charrsid3212931  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
ha'pence an hour for the first year, and then - tuppence ha'penny for the second - for - ever after that was tuppence ha'penny an hour.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What sort of hours did you work while you were doing these jobs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 We worked from nine - until twelve. Then came home and had our dinner, and - from one o'clock until six in the evening.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 This is both in the flowers and in the fish cellar?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. That was - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 You stayed at home after you left school didn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Looking after your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Yes, looked after my mother in between times, did the housework before I went up for the flowers and - what I couldn't do before I went I did after I came home and the same for the - fish cellar.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did starting work change your relationship with your parents at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. Not at all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What about with your brother and your sisters?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 My - my brother was - married and - my two sisters and my brother were married the same year. When I was fourteen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 So you were starting work as they left home?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. So I had to - I was here and then of course my brother went to America.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you spend Sunday any differently when you were working from before you started working?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
No. I rose still at the same time Sunday mornings and - and - had breakfast and went out to my class and - and then on to the church for my - morning service. And didn't make a bit of difference - when I commenced to work.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you take any interest in politics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Oh yes. Yes, great politician I thought I was. Anyway - I - I put my whole heart into politics the same as I did in - in anything else, in my work and - in - religious matters, and do you know my - my great friend, who 
was - much older than I always said to me, politics, Nettie, and religion always go together. And I found that out, I found that to be true.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 You said earlier on how you spent your spare time while you were at school, did your spare time activities cha
nge in any way when you were working?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
No. No. There was - you mean as regards the - practicing, the concerts, the singing. Yes. Always - always the - always something on, Wesley Guild when I got older and - getting up - meetings for that every week a
nd playing, playing the piano and - I - I can't see that I - I'm - had much of that time when I was young.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you go out in the evenings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Only for practicing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Where was that to, the chapel?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well different places, would be for the mal
e voice sometimes and - for different things in the society. And - Band of Hope and - and children coming here practicing and - individual you know coming here to practice solos, my mother would get fed up sometimes, you've always got - always got crowds 
of people coming in practicing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Did you find that working helped you make any new friends, boys or girls or did you find that your friends were still the same when you were at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh well we would alter sometimes or - I think we used to have 
bits of squabbles you know with our friends and - change around, occasionally.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 But did you actually enlarge your horizons as far as friends were concerned?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Oh yes. Yes. Yes I did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How did you meet your new friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well through 
the church and - through the - through politics. Politics I met - quite a few. That enlarged my mind and different subjects, and - Mr Edwin Tregenser was - a very very - intellectual person and - I was about - not quite good friends with her, and differen
t friends I made - as I got older.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you ever bring them home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Yes. We could always bring our friends here.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you have any special friends at this time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Yes I did, I have a - a very special friend whom I met who I - got -
 friendly with when I was perhaps seventeen or eighteen, through being in the choir. And we were great friends up to the time that she - she got married and went to America. And - I spent a fortnight with her when we went out about ten years ago. Great fr
iends.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you go anywhere special with her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
No, I couldn't because she was in - her mother was an invalid, and she had to look after her mother just like I did you see. I think that's the reason we had this close tie.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did your parents meet your friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, oh yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did they want to know where you were when you went out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Yes. Yes. And - sometimes I'd be twelve o'clock before I'd come home, some of my friends, and my mother would be worried to death and saying - whatever
 in the world's the attraction up there. And the attraction was something I was never allowed to do home, and that was have a game of cards. And that was taboo but - never allowed in this house you see, and you - you know, I've thought lots of times if yo
u
 try to keep children from something they will in - eventually - try it out you see, and - Eva was a - she was a shut in you see like me but - she had sisters - who were home, not married, and - nieces and nephews coming to the house and she taught me whi
st - the game of whist. Well of course I was very interested in whist, never played for money in my life, never have yet, but I loved the game of whist. And - so I wouldn't dare tell my mother what we done.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you have to be home by a certain time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What time was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 This was after I was married I'd be up there perhaps by twelve you know and mother could never think why I wanted -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Before you were married did you have to be home by a certain time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, mother always
 wanted - nine - nine o'clock, if we were after nine I had to give an account of myself, and where I'd been and who I'd been with. They were very strict on if you were out in the night. They never thought that we - it was nice for a young woman to be out 
late. Of course now this days a different day.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 When were you married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 I was married in - at - May month, third of May, 1917. Mm hm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How old were you then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Twenty-three.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How long had you known your husband before you got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well I'd known him all my life because he was born here in the same village - but we went together about four years.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How did you meet?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 I - I think we met first at the - our gala, or Park as we called it. And - kept friends ever - well from 
that. But - he was - he went at that time - on Lord Leave's yacht, he was - what we call a yachtsman, and these millionaires that owned these yachts would send to Cornwall for their - crews, they always depended on the Cornish fishermen, well thought that
 
they would be - up in the knowledge of - navigation and that and - so the - most of the - yachts were manned by Cornish crews, and - my young man at that time would be - yachting. So - we went together for a few months and then the time was up for him to 
g
o - on the yachts and they would practically be away all the summer months. And that would be the - every - every year the same thing and then they would go away in the wintertime to the Mediterranean, for the gentry, so I didn't see much of him, and - ne
ver home to take me to any of the - outings or galas or anything in the summertime. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Can you remember the first time you met his parents?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well I always knew his parents you see, yes. And - always - although - his parents - parents lived in 
the upper part of the village and we lived down town. But - I knew them very well.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What kind of home did he come from, was it similar to yours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, they were - his parents - his father was a fisherman, and - lived in one of the cottages here in
 Mousehole. Had the same upbringing, went to the same school. Although he was three years older I didn't know - very much about him when I was - attending school see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did he go to chapel or to church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Chapel, Methodist, but they attended the other Methodist church in the village. And - at that time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 As time went on were you treated as one of the family before you were married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, always very good to me, no trouble at all - Jack's mother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Would, they let you talk together by yourselves?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Oh yes. Yes, we always visited. Jack was the eldest you see of the family. And - he was the elder - elder of - four brothers and two sisters, there were five brothers altogether and two sisters. So - they all looked up to Jack when he - you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 When did you actually have time to talk together at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well we didn't have much time in the home to talk together, my parents would be here you see and - his parents and the other children, being a big family - we got - if we went f
or a walk together that was the only - free time we had for - having anything - to converse about or - talk.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How did you get on with your parents in law after you were married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh very well.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you see very much of them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 My parents, well I lived here -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Your parents in law?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh - yes, practically nearly every day.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you help them with old jobs and things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 I did. Yes, I always helped as much as I could, I used to - I was always very handy with my - hands and pape
ring a room or painting or - doing ce}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6365406\charrsid3212931 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6365406\charrsid3212931 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
ngs and I - and I think all the - young women in the village you know could always keep our houses clean and - never hired to have any rooms papered or painted, and - it - granny Pender wanted a hand - to clean a room, I was always available to help.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What did you call your parents in law before you were married and did you call them anything different after you were married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well I'm afraid - up to the time I was married I was Mrs Pender, and Mr Pender, but
 after the children were born it was Grandma Pender, I can't remember what I called her after I was married at first, I suppose I was - Mrs Pender I think. But - being my mother was alive and father I couldn't very well call her mother, and - after the ch
ildren - after - I was - married thirteen months when - our first child was born, and - I think for about - after that it was always grandmother and grandfather.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Presumably your husband knew your parents before you were married just as well as you knew his parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, yes, we all knew - one and the other here in the village then, of course not now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Was he the first boy that you brought home for them to meet, as a boyfriend?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. The first one that came in. Uh huh.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did they ever warn you off certain others?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Or encourage you to go out with somebody specific?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Yes. I - been put off - two or three chaps before that. And I'm afraid that no one was ever good enough - in their eyes, for their daughter, and - I thi
nk that by - hearing my sisters - telling me after they were the same. They had always - obstacles put in the way as soon as they went with anyone.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did your parents know his parents before you started courting?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, yes, everyone knew one and the other here in the village, yes. Especially the fisher folk.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How would they know each other?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well by being - in the - in this little village you see, the small village and everyone knew one another, and - they knew the different families and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did they see very much of each other, the two sets of parents after you were married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well - yes, yes, they always - Grandma Pender always came down, of course my mother couldn't visit - up there because she was - invalid you see, didn't go out
 a lot, only around the door perhaps, but - my mother-in-law and father-in-law came - my father-in-law died - very young, he was only fifty-four when he died. And then Grandma Pender would come down most evenings and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What sort of things would they do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Oh well they would just sit and talk about what happened in the day and - and the other members of the family, what was happening to them and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Generally gossiping?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Going back to the time when you first started courting can yo
u tell me how often you saw each other? What sort of things did you - used to do together at that time? Did this change as time went on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No - well I - I think we would see each other perhaps about - three or four evenings a week, not every evening. I
 used to have - things to do in the house and there would be practicing different meeting - different evenings and I don't know that I - I - I saw Jack so often as that, unless he came and waited for the practice to be over and - but even so we couldn't g
o for much walks because I had to be in early, see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 So what would you do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Come home then, and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What would you do when you were together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Go for a walk. We went - people used to go for country walks then all around and - have a talk on
 what was happening and what the news was and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did your relationship change at all as you got nearer to being married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No, all the same.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you carry on going out in groups of friends while you were courting, did you still see all your friends, did you go out in groups?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well - in the war years, when the men were away we went out in groups - our girlfriends then kept company, but - as regards - Jack and I in walking around you know having a nice country walk or sometimes - of a Satur
day evening we'd go Penzance and pictures or - maybe two evenings a week but that'd be all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 You didn't ever go out in a foursome?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh yes, no - if we went off for the day somewhere maybe we went foursome - another girlfriend and - his brother was
 engaged to - my cousin, and - if they were home, from yachting or from the war years - that they happened to be home together we would go off then, two couples.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 And during the war years you went out with your girlfriends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you go on any holidays together during your courtship?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Never had a holiday together.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you remember a moment when you actually decided to get married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. I - I remember that very well, because there was a row. A row from my parents - as a matte
r of fact my brother-in-law had been drowned - in a mine sweeper - in - February, and - his wife had then had a little baby about a month before that, she had - she was left with four boys, and a baby a month old you see, this happened in May, and - we ha
d
 been in with her, my mother and father and I had been in there sleeping and all that see, and - she was in a lot of trouble and - these - and her children - and - Jack had been in Africa - about fourteen months after - he was taken off the yacht, the war
 
was declared while - exactly as they came home from the Mediterranean and they were dismantling the yacht when - the war started and he had - they couldn't come home to - even had their Naval Reserve clothes, he was in the Naval Reserve, and - he was neve
r
 allowed to come home, he had to have his clothes sent on to him. And - sent to Portsmouth. So - they were sent away then, he'd been away then fourteen or fifteen months yachting, and - in the Miranda, Lord Leave's yacht and then - he was put on the Kinto
n
's Castle - which was a - was an African liner and - she was armed, guns put on her, and he was in Africa about - nearly eighteen months you see. And - that - my - my brother-in-law was drowned - while he was in Africa. Of course I slept with my sister at
 
the time that she had her trouble and - I was very upset and worried with her being so - ill, and this little family to help to look after. And I got run down myself, so Jack came home from Africa at that time and had leave. Had leave from the Monday, cam
e home Monday night until the Sunday morning, he had to go back - and - when he came home and saw I was looking so - ill, he - decided he was going to get married you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did either of you actually say, will you marry me?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No, he said - this nig
ht when he came you know he said, look I'm going to get the licence tomorrow. So I said, oh for goodness sake don't get that, I'll never be allowed to get married. And - he said, well if I don't marry you soon I shall have nothing to marry. And - with all
 
I said to him about not getting it and I said my mother and father would be very annoyed about it - anyway he was insistent of - of getting this license and getting this license and - I was working with the flowers at the time, here in the village, I got 
a
 job then - the few years before that here in the village, and in between times looking after my sister and my mother had been in there I - was there that day and - coming home from work he called me - I passed by his parents, and he was waiting for me yo
u see and he said I've been up Penzance and got the licence and then we're getting married at Thursday morning. I had that bombshell then to tell my parents.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Were you surprised that he wanted to marry you then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well he was determined you see, he was - very determined chap, and - anyway -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did he actually ask your parents permission?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
No. No we didn't. I don't think that - they troubled about that very much as long as the girl gave her consent and - in those days. Anyway -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How did your parents react?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Oh very very bad about it. They didn't like it. They thought that - I was getting married to - bring more trouble on them. Anyway, we were married and - Thursday morning in Chapel Street in Penzance. And - if you'd like to hear the r
emainder of it - we went - we - there was no motor cars in those days you see and the village - boasted of a carriage and pair, you know, we could always have a carriage to take you anywhere, so that was always in demand for weddings, and - with - my - bo
y
friend, he went up and spoke to the carriage you see to come and collect me at Thursday morning and we were being married in Chapel Street, and - we hadn't time for a honeymoon - in those days, so we went for a drive, we went for a ride to Lands End, and 
-
 we went to the - Lands End Hotel, we'd been heavily rationed now in the war years, the first world war was heavily rationed, no potatoes - for - two years I suppose, and not much else, and we were looking forward to having a nice dinner at the Lands End 
H
otel, anyway Jack ordered up dinner, his - his brother and my cousin, and his sister also went that day, and - he ordered up a - a nice - smash up dinner you see, and - when he came back from ordering - you should have seen our faces. He said that the - h
otel proprietor had told him that - all we could have would be a boiled egg. And only one each. So that was our - our wedding day dinner, a boiled egg. We generally have a boiled egg every - anniversary the third of May. And - our hearts went down in our}
{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6365406\charrsid3212931  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 bo
ots. Anyway we had to make the best of that, and bread and butter, I don't know there was anything else, I can't remember that part of it, but I can't remember the disappointment we had, and - then I had a cousin who was a school master in Sennan at the t
i
me, and - Sennan is just - a mile from Lands End, so he had - had written me a card and told me to come up and - have tea with - come and have tea with them. My mother had written and - and let them know you see, so - we went there for our tea and they ha
d
 a nice tea - waiting for us. And - the Satur - the Sunday morning we walked to Penzance, my husband had to go back then on the early train to Cardiff, to meet the ship. And he went - we - we walked in to Penzance on the Sunday morning - we met the minist
e
r who had married us walking to Newlyn to take the service in Newlyn chapel, he recognised us and - came across to where we were and wished us - or wished my husband all the best of luck. The Reverend Alfred Hold, and - then we went in and he caught the t
r
ain and went and then I walked home. And - I had a - a - few lines from him the Tuesday morning to say that his ship had sailed and gone, and the guns were taken off - this - the ship had gone and he had had to go on a smaller boat with another gun, he wa
s
 a gunner, and he couldn't tell me where you see. So I never heard any more from him for three months. So my mother always - kept on saying to me - well you'll never see your husband any more. See? And at the end of three months I had a letter from Scotla
n
d, they'd been - up in Archagnel, and they'd been snowed in, see, and he couldn't receive any mail, and he couldn't send any mail - he - he would write but I - I had them all in a heap afterwards you see. So that was our married life. Not very - enthralli
ng was it. Not a very good start was it? No. I think I had lots of disappointments - in the early part of my life that - it got me accustomed to bearing a lot since. Mm hm.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Were you ever engaged?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh yes, yes. I had my -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you have a ring?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. I had my engagement ring.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What sort of ring was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
It was a ring with - well, we - we say diamonds but they looked you know - we always - he always said diamonds are the - but it was a very nice little ring. Three stones in it, very nice.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did Jack wear a ring as well?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No, I never bought a ring for him, the - that wasn't the time, I've never - it wasn't the custom I should say, at that time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you think that one can be engaged without having a ring?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, I thin
k so. My - husband's brother never bought a ring for his girl friend because he didn't believe in it. He always stuck out you didn't have to have a ring so he didn't, he didn't buy a ring for her. But all the same, she - she was very - sad about that beca
use she would love to have a ring. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 When you were engaged was there an announcement in the paper?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. No announcements in that - at that time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you have a party, to celebrate?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. When we - when we came home - we had - friends 
of the family, his - my husband's family and - mine here in the house and we had a very nice meal, games and that in the evening, but that was - all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How long was this before you were actually married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 That was the - that was the evening we were married. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you have a party when you were engaged?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. No parties in those days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you get presents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. No, no presents at all. When I look back on our young life, my goodness what a difference it is - then - it was then and
 now. No parties for anything, only once a year - choir parties or - no, we didn't have the - excitement that they get today.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did your parents treat you any differently when you were engaged?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No, not a bit. No. No different whatever.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 You still had to be in at the same time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did they leave you alone together more often?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How did you choose your wedding ring?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well I - I wanted to have a - I knew what I would like, at that time, you know the 
fashion of the - wedding ring was a wide band of gold, and that's what my husband chose. Not long after that they were being - the - the fashion altered to a narrow band.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What about your engagement ring, who chose that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Jack. He chose the engagement ring.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did he pay for both of them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Were you with him when he bought both of them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. He bought my engagement}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6365406\charrsid3212931  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 ring in Plymouth. When he was there - fishing. Bought it home in the Christmas.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 And your wedding ring he bought?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 I went with him to buy the wedding ring. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 In Penzance?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Has he given you any rings since you got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Have you given him any rings since you got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6365406\charrsid3212931 Nothing like an e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 ternity ring?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you exchange any other tokens?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No, not at all, nothing - no.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 You didn't have time to save up before you got married did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 I - I saved up for my bedding, and - in those days if you could buy your own bedding -
 the young woman would like to buy her own, and - excuse me - I did - save up and - help to buy my bedding, which I was very proud of doing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 That was all you saved up for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you find a house to live in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well I took two dif
ferent cottages here - after I was married, but my parents were so upset about it - and - afraid that they would be left by themselves and mother not able to do very much, that in the end I gave them up again and I kept on here.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you buy any household equipment before you got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
We - after I got married I bought - I bought the bedding before I got married. And then - coming here - mother had everything in the way of - eventually I furnished - my bedroom and - different things I bought in the houses you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you have a bottom drawer at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Oh yes, what I kept my - always looked out for our - what shall I say, underwear and - things like that and - different things to - to help things on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Who started it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Me. I started it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 And you kept on with it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Who did you first see to arrange about the wedding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
The arrangements about the wedding? Well my husband - he went - well my young - man then - he went and - saw the minister in Penzance, and - spoke to him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 This was four days before you got married was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
The Monday, the - the Tuesday, and we were married the Thursday. He went the Tuesday morning and when he went to the - he had to see the - Registrar because it was special license you see, and -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 So you had to wait three days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, he saw the minister, an arranged and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Why did you choose to get married in Penzance?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well it - it was a quiet wedding, and - I didn't want for anyone like my sister didn't want for me 
to be married you see, she was very much against it being - she'd then been made a widow, and - she - put obstacles in the way and all that and - so I wanted it quiet, as quiet as I could and I knew if I'd been married in our own church - been a lot of pe
ople there, so that was the reason that we went to Penzance.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Why did you choose a religious ceremony? Did a civil ceremony ever occur to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh no. I wouldn't be married in Registry office because we'd always been brought up - Methodists and - a
ttending the Methodist church, and when we had our Golden Wedding - it was five years ago, we went into Chapel Street that morning at the same time, and knelt at the same rail. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you have any difficulty in getting your parents to agree eventually to your marriage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well - at - for once in my life I stood out. And - was firm on that matter see. Because I knew how - how much Jack wanted it and - so I gave in then to him. And I think mother and father could see that I was determined - to pleas
e him and I but they didn't like it very well.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 They came round to it eventually?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you know if a girl who was expectin}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6365406\charrsid3212931 g}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931  a baby could be married in church in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 I don't think so, not unless - not un - if the minister knew about it. I don't know that they - they can now of course. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you know if she could wear white?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
She wasn't supposed to wear white. No, no one would ever - wear white in their might mind if they were going to have a child. It would be a suit or a dress or some other - kind.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Before you got married in the circumstances that you did, had you wanted a large wedding, or had you always wanted a small wedding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 I would like to have had a larger wedding, I would - I always thought I woul
d like to have a better wedding than I had. And - I - I've said so often, my Golden Wedding Anniversary day was much happier one than my wedding day. I think it was a shame really that - you know - my parents were so strict on that and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How many people did you invite to your wedding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Went with us to the wedding do you mean? Oh my - husband's brother and his sister and my friend. Five of us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How did you invite them? Did you invite them by word of mouth?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Yes. No need to write them if we saw them every day.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How were the costs of the wedding met? Who paid for the wedding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Oh - the wedding ring my husband bought. But - my dress and - the - the - supper after, my parents. It would be terrible in that - at that time if - a young}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6365406\charrsid3212931  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 man bought your - bought your - clothes or - provided anything, that wouldn't be the thing at all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What did you both wear for the wedding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well what would you think I wore?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 I should think probably a dress?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 It was a dress, black vel
vet. Yes. I - my - my brother-in-law had died you see and - velvet at that time was very fashionable, and I had a - a black chiffon velvet dress made in Penzance, with the tailor, and it was very nicely made and
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Was this specially for the wedding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
No. This was - the time my - my brother-in-law died, and - you know, I was so upset by my - parents being so much against me marrying at that time, and - that I - I wouldn't allow them to - to buy anything for me. And - then - when mother said, well wha
t are you going to wear, I said, I'll wear what I have, I'll wear the last dress I had. And a cream leghorn hat. And that was my wedding attire
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What did Jack wear?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 He wore his Naval Reserve un - uniform. You see that was in the middle of the first world war.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you wear something old and something new and something borrowed, something blue?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 I think I had an handkerchief that my - my best friend had given me, you know, tucked in, and I carried that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 You didn't have any attendants at all did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Only my cousin, my cousin was there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you ever wear your wedding dress again afterwards?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh yes. Oh yes, yes, I wore it lots of times.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did somebody give you away?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, my husband's brother. My father was so m
uch against me getting married at that, it was - it was nothing against my - my boyfriend at all, but it was at the time of - just - a month or two after my brother-in-law had - drowned that - my parents had the idea that I was bringing trouble on myself.
 And - they - they didn't approve of me getting married until after the war ended you see, and - so - my brother-in-law gave me - my husband's brother gave me away.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you wear flowers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, I had a bouquet of flowers. Or - I should say a corsage of flow - of flowers, didn't carry any.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Were any presents given to you when you left the church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Horse}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6365406\charrsid3212931 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
hoses - no, nothing at all, there was nobody there, only our -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Were any photographs taken?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Was anything like confetti or rice thrown?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No one there to throw it. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 There was a gathering afterwards in the evening?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Where was that held?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Here in the house, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Could you describe it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh well we had a nice meal when we - when
 we got home, and - my aunts and my cousins and - friends came see and the party that went to the wedding, and - then after that they'd have - games, you know, I suppose it would - it'd be thought childish now, but until we had television that was - all t
he parties would be would be -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 It's a very informal sot of party?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes? Informal - party.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Who prepared the food?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh my parents, provided the food. I -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did your mother get it ready?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No, mother didn't do anything about it, she 
was - she was with my sister you see, she was in - in with my sister living - or staying at the time with my father. My cousins, my cousin got the meal ready, and my mother-in-law.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Was it a sit down or a buffet meal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Sit - sit down meal. I don't know now what we had - ham and tongue I suppose and salad and different things like that and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Was there a cake?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Any decorations on it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 I bought a wedding cake, I bought - some wedding cake, and different things see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you have decorations on the top of it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Yes, it was - decorated.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 With what?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well - the - I'll tell you what - Chegwin was our - had a - a - a lovely confectioners shop in Penzance at that time, and they always had a large wedding cake and you - you could have a p}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6365406\charrsid3212931 ie}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 ce cut off, see. And so we had a piece of - Chegwin's wedding cake cut which was nicely iced and almond paste and all that, and - to send to our friends. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you remember how the seating was arranged, you had a sit down meal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Was there a special seating arrangement?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well I don't know if I know. No, my husband I suppose sat beside me and - I - his father and mother and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 But you don't remember anything special?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you have any wedding presents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Were they on display?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
No. No, I had them - some - because it was a very quiet wedding, and - just my intimate friend knew anything about it, see it was so quiet, they kept - and - I had - well few presents I suppo
se - at that time, after the wedding I had the most I think, but - they were all very useful. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you have any speeches here in the evening?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. Nothing like that was every - every done then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you have any dancing or singing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How long did the party last for in the evening?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well I suppose until twelve o'clock I think, around that time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you go away on honeymoon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 You went to your cottage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Came here, yes, yes, this is where we would 
be - we came back to this house, and - that was the Thursday, and the Sat - the Sunday morning Jack went.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Were there any practical jokes played on you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. No. No. No practical jokes whatever. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did Jack carry you over the threshold when you got back here?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you remember going to other weddings when you were young?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Not very many when I was young, I went to my - I went to my brother's and my sisters.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Were they very different from your own wedding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No
, all the same because at that time - there were no - big does like what - like there are now, and - weren't so different - hotels - to have a meal, or going to honeymoon - the - for a honeymoon anywhere, and I don't think anybody ever went for a honeymoo
n in my young days, can't remember, not here, in this village especially.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Were perhaps their clothes any different? Did the bridges get married in white?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Not - not necessarily, no, my sister - my - my - one sister went to America to get married, 
she had a - a white dress to take out with her. But - my - elder sister - wasn't married in white, and in those days they were married mostly in a suit, or a - a dress, white was not - you know, so fashionable then as now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 You stayed on living in this house after you got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Never lived anywhere else. That's - I've been here all the time with my parents.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How old was your husband when you got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Twenty-six.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What was his job, he was in the Navy at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well, h
e was - yes, a yachtsman until he went into the Navy. He was - he - most of our fishermen at that time had joined the Naval Reserve - which - would would give them perhaps a month's - work, a month or two in the - worst time of the year, the wintertime wh
en it was a slack time they would do this month's drink once in a while you'd have to go abo}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6365406\charrsid3212931 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
rd ship to do it you see, go to Plymouth. And - or other times they could go in Penzance and do their drill. And - then a the end of fifty years I think they would 
have the pension. Have so much lump sum, see. And - most of the fishermen, practically all the fishermen joined the Naval Reserve, and - at that - in the first world war there were more Naval Reserve men lost in the Navy than anyone else.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did he go back to fishing after the war ended?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well while the - while he was - just as the war started - before the war had started, while - Jack had been - had been yachting and his - next to him, his brother next to him, Sidney - his father had bought a boat.
 Now he had five sons you see, and himself would be six so he would only have to have - another man to make the crew, see. And - so unfortunately the war - came in and - this boat then had to be laid up until the war ended. Well that finished my husband' 
y
achting. Which he was sad - he was sorry about himself and - I was also, because - it was a different life then and - he liked - he liked yachting and going around like he - he had been all over - Europe and - different countries, and - then of course whe
n
 he came home in the yachts - to - to pay up the yacht the war started and as I said just now he - hadn't had a chance to come home for his clothes. And then from that time then he was sent - to Africa on the Kinton Castle. And - they were there about - I
 think about eighteen months.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 And then what happened?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well he came home then and - he wanted to get married.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 And after you got married he went away again?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 He went again and that - the gun was put onto another boat, they hadn't enough g
uns to go around in the first world war, and while the ship was being discharge they would take off the gun and - put it on another one that was ready to go. I - how - how many - how many different ships Jack was on in the first world war I can't tell you
.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 When he came back after the war then he worked in his father's boat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, then he went on the boats, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did that keep going then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 That kept going then - his father went - of course as the captain of the boat and - the boys, and the
n of course - his father was taken very ill and he died a fifty-four, and Jack had to take on - control of the boat. Well then - about - well I suppose it's forty - forty years now, they had a bigger boat built at Port Leven, the Lioness. Called for the l
ost land, between Lands End and the - Scilly Isles. A large - much larger boat then you see and they only sold that about ten years ago.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 So he was working on that boat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Until they - until his brother and him retired, then the boat was sold then. And she was sold for a yacht.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 The Lioness was?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did he do any casual or part time jobs while he was fishing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Didn't he have the time to do it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No, didn't have time. They had a - a - a net full of - a loft full 
of nets to look after, and he being the elder of the - boys - they had enough - he had enough to get on with. Didn't have the chance to do anything else.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you work after you were married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did me? Well I didn't work until - after Jack was - bo
rn, after - after we were married - after Jack came home from Africa - he went in for - for - for gunnery lessons, he wanted to learn more on the gun and - he went to Devon}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6365406\charrsid3212931 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 port barracks. And - he got a room for me - up there, a bed}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6365406\charrsid3212931  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 sitting room, and we we
re up there about four months, and then he was drafted out on another ship. So I came home then, and - I didn't do anything until - Jack and Bill were - bigger boys, big boys, and then I went back on my old job with the flowers in the flower season here i
n the village.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How did Jack feel about that, did he mind you working?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Didn't like it. That was the only thing I -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you know why?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well he - yes, he - I think he - he always thought that - a man should - be sort of earn enough for his 
wife - I don't know what - in those days men had different thoughts to what they have now 'cos the men are now very pleased for their wives to work, but - at that time it was - thought to be - belittling the men if they - they couldn't get enough to keep 
t
he wife. But - I liked to do something in the slack time of the year and - help as best I could. And - so mother was here an she could get the meat sometimes you know, she - managed to get the food, I'd prepare it before I went, and - I'd come home to lun
ch and children would be home from school then, no school dinners. So -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you think Jack liked his job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Father Jack. What fishing? Well, I don't know, no, I don't think that he - I know - someone said to him when the boat was sold are you - sad
 that your boat has gone and - he said, what am I sad about it? Why should I be sad? Battling the waves and - the elements for - all these years, caught out in gales and storms. I think he was relieved and - felt relaxed after the boat was sold.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you think he'd ever have considere}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6365406\charrsid3212931 d}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931  doing anything else?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
I don't think he'd ever do it again. I don't think he'd ever - I think he'd - he - he - his idea would have been if his father hadn't bought the boat to have kept yachting, and - took that as his career. He - he loved that kind of - job.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How many children do you have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 I've got - three.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How old are they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Jack, the eldest is - fifty-four, and June, the first of June. He - he's born 1918. And there's - Bill was born eighteen mon
ths - after. The fourth of December.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 1920?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Were they born at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. No one - no one went away then to have their children in hospital.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you know what to expect in childbirth?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How did you get on?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Oh I got on very well. Except on - I had three difficult births. But - and there was eight years and a half between - Sylvia and - William. The first two were quick and the - then I went on - eight years and a half between the three of them yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you have any medical help?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Oh yes. Yes. I had the doctor and the nurse was in the village living then. A wonderful nurse we had, she married a Mousehole fisherman in the end, and lived here and she carried on here for}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6365406\charrsid3212931  }
{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 many many years. And - I had 
- spoke for the nurse you see, and no one went away to a - hospitals or maternity homes in my day to have - to have their babies, and so - our three children were born here in the house, and the doctor was spoke - be spoke for and the nurse.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did your husband help when the children were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Only for fetching the water. He had to go to Penycon top of the hill - hill for spring water, the nurse wouldn't allow the - the water from our local - no water brought around in the houses then, you had to c
arry the water, and we put that could in water what we called from - a shoot here in the middle of the village, but the nurse didn't think that that was clean enough and so he had to bring down the - turn after turn of - it was the first of June, a very h
ot summer, very hot day but - Jack was born. Fairs Saturday. And Saturday afternoon or evening really before he was born. But that was the only help that I had from Jack was to bringing the water.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How soon were you out of bed after Jack was born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Ten or eleven days, ten days I think was the - time then that - we had to stay in bed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you get out of bed straight away for the whole day or did you just get out for a little bit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 We got out at the tenth day and - came down. Had to stay alw
ays in the bed at that time, ten days was the - the limit, and - you know, it was a fun - I think about it so often and laugh because - my mother's sister came in and it was such a hot day that the doctor when he came in the room, he was there hours, I ha
d
 a hard birth on Jack, and he opened the window right down you see all the way, and - it was left there and - Saturday evening after the child was born my - mother's sister - my old aunt came into see me. And when she came in the room she said, oh Lizzie,
 
my dear Lizzie, how have you left this - this window - down like this, why she'll catch her death, she'll have gathered bosoms. Put the window up, and - of course - my mother was scared stiff and she said that, she hadn't thought of the windows so mother 
when - the window was soon put up. The nurse you know at that time she - had - different - methods - to what my parents had and - that's hygi}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6365406\charrsid3212931 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 ne the window open and that and the window was open again the next day which I didn't mind.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How did everybody manage while you were in bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Oh well my sister came in, I had a - well I'm sorry, I think I made a mistake on this lot, my husband was away when Jack was born. Yes. It was on the other baby - babies that he brought in the water, but when Jack was b
orn - I didn't know where my husband was, he was - he was still in the Navy, in - away you see. And - he - I didn't know where to - send word to him. When Jack was born. And - I think Jack was six months old before he saw him. So - that was Jack's birth.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How did the rest of the household manage while you were in bed? Your sister came in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well my - my sister-in-law came in and done for me. What they would say in - in those days was - keep you in. Have someone to keep you in. And - my husband's sis
ter hadn't - got married then, she went to America the following year and was married, and - so she was here for - three or four weeks looking after me. And looking after mother see and father, because Jack was away, and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did any of the neighbours help while you were giving birth to Jack?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. No, only the nurse. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you have a nurse to live in with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No, she would come twice a day. She was a marvellous nurse, she'd come in the mornings - early, about half past nine, and she wo
uld come again last thing in the evening.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How did you feed your first baby?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 I nursed him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you enjoy it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you have any difficulties in feeding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 I did at first. Great difficulty. And - I got over that after.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How long did it take you to get into it?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well it took me quite a few weeks you know to get accustomed to - nursing. It was - pretty painful at first you know for them to - start off.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 If you needed advice who did you ask for advice?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 I
 asked the nurse. Because my mother was never very communicative to me in - talking about - different things - pertaining to marriage and - having - having babies, she was a very reserved person and I think I took after her in that lot and - so we were bo
th the same and - if I wanted to know anything I'd ask the nurse. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 If the baby was asleep would you wake it for a feed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well - I know at that time she gave me a little book, and - when she'd finished you know and - how to proceed with him and
 all that and - I think he had to be wakened ever four hours.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you do this religiously?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Yes, I did, and my mother would be saying I - how foolish I was, mother would say I would be ridiculous to wake a child when he went - as he went to sleep
, and - she wouldn't wake a child, never, you know to - mother nursed us you see, and she didn't believe in - having - waking a child up to nurse. But - of course I wouldn't go against the nurse and - and the book and - I remember - I remember now the - m
other's strict rule was to give him half a teaspoonful of olive oil, before he had his feed first thing in the morning, and that was religiously done you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 If he woke and started crying before it was time for a feed would you feed him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. No,
 and that was another thing that - my moth - my parent - my mother would think I was - hard. You know - she would say so different - things were so different from her day to mine, and I suppose the - the - the - change even now from my day to what's being
 done now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What did you do if he didn't seem hungry but it was time to be fed? Would you still feed him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How long would you let it go on feeding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well - until he was satisfied, I - I don't know whether - I suppose we had a sp
ecified time, I - I've forgotten that now, but I suppose we did have a specified time on the - the book which I studied - I was going to say like the Bible.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 When did you first give Jack solid food? How old was he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well I don't think I gave him 
any solid food - any - anything - anything different to nursing until he was about - nine or ten months old. I think - I think now a - days they - they give them solid food much - much quicker than that, I've heard tell of a baby just born having solid fo
od. Which I didn't agree with her.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you wean him suddenly or gradually?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 I weaned him gradually.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Over what sort of period of time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well I'm afraid I've forgotten that now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you remember if he minded?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, he did, he didn
't - he didn't like having other kind of food after being nursed. I know - I know that - some people now think it's - a - a lot of trouble to nurse a child but - I always found it much easier than getting bottles ready and all the paraph}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6365406\charrsid3212931 er}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 nalia of - washing them out and one thing and the other.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you think at that time that it did any harm to the baby to let it cry?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well - well I don't think that ours ever cried all that. If they - if they cried too much - mother would say, well I think he's go
t wind or - and of course - her - her - she always advocated a little drop of - warm - water - wouldn't do them any harm, and perhaps would - kind of - stop the crying. So if they cried very - very hard you know for a while - I would give them a little dr
op of warm water, and - perhaps a little tiny bit of sugar and not too much in it, and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you punish it when it was naughty?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. Never - never punished them, I always - brought them up on love. I - I - thought so often when I was young - that 
if - if - if love for the child couldn't - help to train him, I'm sure smacking him - wouldn't. And I don't know whether I was right or whether I was wrong but I - I - I never - I never dealt very hard - hard with my children, any of - any of them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How much did your husband have to do with the children when they were under one?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Not very much because he - he was away fishing you see and Jack he wasn't home until he was six months old, and then - they was - he was busy then getting this boat ready
 and - helping his father all he could you see and - so I'm afraid that Jack couldn't do a lot - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did he ever feed them or bath them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, if I'd been poorly and unable to do it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What about things like changing nappies?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well he's had to do that too. And wash them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did he play with them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Oh yes, very - very fond of the children. He was a very good - father.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you ever go out with him and the children when they were babies?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Oh yes, if wheel the children out in the prams.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did he ever take them out by himself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Yes. Yes. In the mornings he would take the child out after - after they were washed and - if they hadn't been to sea he would take them down on the pier and sist down in the sun with them and - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you think he liked doing it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
But - for - his mother lost two - two children when they were young with measles or chickenpox or something, and Jack was a boy then about thirteen or fourteen and he grieved over these - the babies 
dying you see and when our children came he was always very careful, never a night but what he would get out of the bed if he was in the bed, if he wasn't too sea, and - never shut their - bedroom door or ours, always left the door partly open - to go in 
and have a look to see if they were covered up and - always afraid that anything was going to happen to them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How did you manage the housekeeping in the years before 1919, that would be the first year and a half after you were married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Mm hm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you know how much your husband was earning at that time?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well - there is an old book here that Jack kept a - the - the boats book you see, and - every - every - shot that they had every night like they went to sea, what fish they had, and the 
price. Well I don't know how we lived - honestly. Things were very cheap I know in those days. But when you look on that book and see the difference in the - weekly money then and what they have now, well - I think that we done a marvellous job.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How much of his wages would he give you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
He gave me what he had. And he would keep out perhaps enough for a packet of cigarettes or I don't know what they had then, mostly - Jack smoked a pipe in those days. And - he would keep perhaps enough for his - to
bacco, but would hadn't over the rest, he never kept any pocket money.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did he ever discuss with you how the money should be spent?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. Never. Never have, he's given me the money and he always trusted me to - carry on, he never questioned anythin
g about - this or that. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 When you were first married you were living here?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Who did you have living with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Mother and father was living here you see, and - my - money from the Navy - my Naval Reserve pay was twelve and s
ix a week. Yes. Twelve and six a week and then when the child was born, when Jack was born, it rose to the magnificent sum of sixteen and six. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you have any paid help coming in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Paid help? No, couldn't afford any paid help. No, I had to carry on myself, doing the work.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 There was nobody coming in to do the washing or cleaning?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No, I done the washing myself and - all the -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you do the washing at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. We had a - a - a copper down in the basement, what
 we called the cellar, and - I would wash the clothed down there. I'd bring the water in, no - no water in the houses then. And no sanitation, so - we had to fetch our water from the shoot. And was hard work.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you make your own clothes and mend them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
I mended my own clothes but I - I was - I couldn't make them, I never had a machine. I had a cousin who was a dressmaker and - if I wanted anything made she would make them. But - I could mend, that was one of the things that we learnt at school 
was - to sew a patch.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you ever have second}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6365406\charrsid3212931  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 hand clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. No, we never - wore second}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6365406\charrsid3212931  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 hand clothes, I always had my own.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Where did you buy your new clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 We bought the material in Penzance. In the shop. Mitchell\rquote s or Pulser\rquote s and - and then my cousin would make up -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How often would you have new clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh not - about once a year perhaps we'd have something new. But not very often, not like now. No off the peg in those days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What about shoes after you were married? Did you buy shoes very often?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. No, we didn't go out a lot you see, it was just - short distance to go, we didn't go to Penzance very often. Might be once a year.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did your husband help you with jobs in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What sort of things did he do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
If he was in from the sea, and I was - wanting - needing help, he would wipe the floor out - we had lino and - had linoleum on the floors at that time and in the - living room and the kitchen, and he would - if I was busy or not
 too well - if I was well he didn't do it. And he had time, he would wash the - he would - do the floors for me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did he help you with the children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh yes. Yes, see to all the children or do anything for them, feed them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Dress them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, he would - he could dress them or bath them,
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did he read to them or tell them stories?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 And he could read to them, yes, and play games with them. Draughts and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did he ever look after them when you were out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. He was a good husband, he could - always help with the children.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did the children have regular jobs to do about the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well - no I don't think they did no more than - kept themselves it - kept the rooms tidy, you know, they would - take up their clothes and 
fold them and put them one side and - that, but - no specified jobs of making the beds, they never done that when they were young. And - I suppose I was a foolish mother, I never allowed them to clean their boots, or shoes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Who did that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 I clean
ed them. You see. Until after the war. And when they went in the Army they had to go in the Army - they were - called up you see in the war and - put into the Army which they hated, and when they came home of course they wouldn't allow me to clean their s
hoes any more. They said, no, we've cleaned them now for five or six years, and they could carry on, but up to that time I'm afraid I spoiled them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What time did the children go to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well - they would go six o'clock when they were very young, 
from the time they were babies and - they would have their feed and go at six o'clock, and - as they grew older and - time they - they went to school, they would stay down until eight, but they were always put up - by eight o'clock, and - seeing my mother
 and father was here - I - I was living here with them - they were always glad when the children went to bed. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did the children put themselves to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Not until - I - I always saw that they had a wash - I would - a good wash before they went
, and had something that'll - and always had their cup of milk and a piece of bread and butter - before they went and - that was what happened every night, of course as they grew older they may be later but they were always put to bed before - half past e
ight every night.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did they share a bed or share a bedroom?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 They shared a bed.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 This is Jack and Bill is it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. They had a double bed in the back bedroom facing the harbour, and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did they have the bedroom to themselves?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What about when Sylvia came along?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Sylvia slept here on the divan after she got too big for the cot. In her own room. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 So the sleeping arrangements then were that you and Jack shared one room?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 And your mother and father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 The other. The three bedrooms. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Two boys in one bedroom?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. And then Sylvia had a divan bed here, so they were - well -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 The cot was in your room originally?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Which room did you use for bathing? When you had the children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Oh - in the bedrooms. In their own bedrooms, they all done their - had their - had their - before the zinc baths came out - in - in my young days up to the time when - after we were married, many years, was just the - the hot 
water - large jug of hot water being carried up - each room had a - a - what we called then a wash stand and a - table set, large bowl, and - and once a week - you had to strip off and - Friday night generally, and have a good old wash.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How often did the children bath?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well they had a good old wash every night. And summertime they would be - swimming every evening after school they would - as soon as they went to school the children would carry their bathing clothes with them when they went to sc
hool they would take their bathing clothes with them and - go down on the beach from the school. And had a good old swim down there, they - they had pools then - on the rocks - it's filled in now and made into a - or filled in, it's made larger really and
 made into a little bathing pool for the children, but - they always had a good old wash every night in the summertime.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 But how often did they have baths?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 In the house? Well we didn't have a bath then. It was only after - recent years that the zinc baths came, and - they had them -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did your children have baths?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Yes. Up to the time they went to war we hadn't had a bath. And - of course I don't know what happened when they went to war, they would have a bath when they could and - I expec
t the baths were provided in the - in the barracks when they were doing their training but I don't suppose they had many baths - in the war years, no, I don't think so either.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How often did the children have clean clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Once a week at least. 
In the wintertime they always had clean - under - you know, we were old fashioned in our - Jack and - and - especially was always bronchial every tooth he cut, and - our doctor was a very old fashioned doctor and - he advised me to - to make little flanne
l
s for him, so I used to buy the - the fine flannel and make these little flannels, and - what - making them for - for Jack when he was young I made them for Bill. And they all wore - they wore these flannels - up to the time they got I suppose nearly in t
h
eir teens. I'd make them - every other winter you see and - when they got too - thin for winter they would be passed on for summertime and until in the end they - they made a protest and said they were the only - only children who were flannels, everybody
 else was wearing vests or nothing at all. But - I tried to take care of their chests in the wintertime, and I would make them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Which day did they have clean clothes on, do you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 I - always Friday nights, they had a good old wash from top
 to toe, and - changed their - put on a change - their cleans clothes for - Friday night or -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Where did you eat your meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 In our living room. Always in the living room, yes, always sat around the table.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you ever eat in another room?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Where did you cook?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 In the - in the kitchen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What sort of equipment did you use to cook with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well - in those days we had a baker - we had a - a large bake-house, no one didn't have - it was very - very few villagers tha
t had a Cornish slab, and in the village at that time there were - I think six - or seven, public bake-houses.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 This was when Jack was a baby?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, yes up to the time that - they were married I think, not - no argue that - up to the time they wen
t to war, I think the bake-houses were still going, the - they closed one by one, and in the end everybody - everyone had to have a - cooking range, and then we had - I had here what they called a - the - at that time - the American - stove, which you cou
ld make open fire or you could close up and it would cook. And we had that in the living room. And - I cooked my own food then, but it - it was -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 When did you get that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 After the bake-house shu - closed. Our bake-house was in the Keigwen, Keigwen
 Arms it is now, yes, and - it was wonderful how they - they - cooked the different - food - dinners were done beautifully and the cakes, every description, and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What happened at breakfast time, did you have breakfast at a special time every day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well we had to have breakfast early for the children to go to school you see, and - we had breakfast about eight.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 All together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Yes. Unless father had gone to sea, if my husband had gone to sea - we all -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What did you eat for breakfast, do you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Oh yes, we used to have - sometimes we had Quaker oats in the wintertime. Very often they'd ask for something hot and have Quaker Oats and cocoa, wintertime they had - cocoa made with milk, but - as it got warmer weather they di
dn't want the hot - the Quaker Oats or the cocoa. So they had tea then perhaps and bread and butter and - bacon or a boiled egg.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you remember eating anything different on perhaps Sundays, special days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well we had - I don't know anything dif
ferent, we always had - a bigger dinner I - I - I - I suppose on a Sunday, you know, than we had in the week but - I don't think that breakfast or the - tea was any different.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you make your own bread?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, I made bread three four - three times a week, white bread and brown bread.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What about jam?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Oh we had - I made my own jam when the blackberries came around and apples and - different sorts of fruit, and - bottled - bottled the - had the proper bottles then, they were - that had co
me out, the bottling of fruit, and - there were all different - fruit in their season.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you - make wine, or beer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No, the only wine I made was - sloe wine.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 The same as your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. That was the only wine, at Christmas time we 
made ginger wine. Yes. We would buy the - the powder - and the liquid, be little bottles that you could buy of the - brown liquid and then there'd be a powder to put in it from one of the chemists in Penzance, an old chemist - Cannon, and he passed - the 
recipe was passed on then to Pierce goods, always the chemist there at the moment, and up to a couple of years ago he still carried on that same recipe but - unfortunately - he finished on that and - but it was a very - very good wine.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 You didn't grow your own vegetables did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you have to buy them all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Bought everything. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What about tinned vegetables, did you buy tinned vegetables in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. And I don't buy them now. And I - I - I don't know, I suppose 
there are habits that you can't get away from but - always accustomed to your own fresh vegetables.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 You never bought dried vegetables or dried fruit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Never. Never br - never bought any dried vegetables or tinned vegetables.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you ever keep hens or pigs or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 You never had a smallholding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Or a market garden or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How many times a week did you eat meat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh - most days, the different - have - cut of - stewing meat one day for stew, and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you have any tinned meat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
No, never had tinned meat, and - pie another day, there'd we always had a good dinner for the children. All came home from school then, no school dinners in those days. And - pie or stew or sometimes 
roast potatoes with the meat, roast. Soup. Always found - and then perhaps a fish meal in between times.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you recollect poaching going on at that time, do you ever recollect getting extra meat from poaching?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Poaching? No. None of our men ever 
- well of course some men - had a gun and - would go - shooting rabbits and that, but my husband never had time for that sort of thing, and - he had all - all his spare time was on the lot, in the loft, attending to the - gear, nets up there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you ever remember going short of food so that Jack or the children could have more?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No, I don't think we ever went short, we always - managed to have enough for the children and ourselves.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you think that Jack needed more food than you, and your children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well as a matter of fact he didn't because he had a very small appetitie. And - food - somehow didn't interest him very much, I - he had stomach trouble for years and I think that was the reason, but - he was never interested in - in food lik
e some men are, no.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you let your children talk during mealtimes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
No. Not - not keep on a continual conversation - if they came in - if they - you know for instance had a yarn or talk - say very much, we'd say now come on, get on with the di
nner, your dinner's getting cold and - you can speak about that after, and - so that was the -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you let them choose what they wanted to eat, or did they have to eat a bit of everything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well they would like to have something different sometim
es, and I'm afraid that - at one time I did - spoil them a little bit and try to please each one. But - my mother would say I was very silly, you're making a - a stick for your own back, so anyway - up to the time the war - started I - I did try and - ple
ase each one a little bit. But - things they didn't eat - before the war they - when they came home they ate, they found that - they had to eat it then or go short.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How did you react if they left food?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well I would be vexed with them and - try and persuade them to - eat it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What about Jack, how did he react?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Their father? Well he - he would say, if they're hungry they'll eat it, and if they're if they're not hungry they won't. So I was left to that, but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did they have to wait until things were passed to them or could they ask for things like salt to be passed down the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh well they could have anything what they wanted it. They -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 They didn't have to wait until somebody did it for them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. Oh no, if they - if they wanted anything more they could take it. They could help themselves.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 They could have second helpings of food?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you teach them to hold their knife and fork in a certain way?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh they were - they were told that. When they c
ommenced to eat, with - when they got too large for a spoon, too big for spoon-fed - child, and they were brought up to - hold their knife and fork properly. They soon got into the way of doing it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What about sitting properly at the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 And sit properly, were never allowed to slouch or - were brought up to always sit nicely to the table.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Were they allowed to bring toys or books to the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. Only books when my mother was out of sight. And - my father was a great reader and of co
urse I was also and - we had a book, my father and I - if we have had - if we had breakfast on our own any time, but - for the children present they - we never had a book. And they were never allowed to bring a book
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 When did they leave the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 They'd ask can we leave the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did they all leave together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
No, they would want to go - play - perhaps, but while we were there speaking or having - having a talk over something, and - then they would ask if they could leave and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did all the family sit at the table or did you find one or two standing up to eat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
No, never stood up to eat here. My father, when he got - elderly, he would have his - tray, I would take his out on a tray, and - put him - in the living room, he always 
sat there in a - rocking chair in the corner and he would have his put on a tray and - taken to him. But he was the only one that didn't sit to the table.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did everyone have their own regular places to sit at?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 You didn't ever change places?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. Always sat at the same place, they all knew their places.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you serve the food up?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. I always -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you serve it up in any order, was anybody first?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 My father. And mother while they were alive. Mother was in the b
ed most of the time, so hers was take - was taken up first of all, and - father's and mother's were taken up always first, up to the time he died and - the rest would be the - my husband and children, then my own last.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you feed the children when they were too young to feed themselves, did they sit up to table then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
They always had a chair. A - a high chair - and - they would sit in that you see and when they got - from babyhood to a bit bigger than a baby and they would sit in a chair, high chair and I would feed them there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 When they start joining in properly family meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well I don't know now, I suppose it's so many years ago since that happened I - perhaps when they were - ten or eleven months, when they got old enough to hold t
he spoon. We had a proper little baby spoon for them. This little short handle, I've got it here in the drawer saving, and - they would feed their - theirselves then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 When your children were young did you feel there was a right way or a wrong way of bringing them up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
I was, I was always very jealous or always very afraid I - I wasn't doing right and I always - tried to learn to - feed them right and do the right thing for them in their - in their dressing and health.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you and Jack have the same way of looking at this thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you talk about whether something was right or something was wrong?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, we always - talked over these things and - I think - I think he thought that I was doing a very good job.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Was there anyone you used to talk to if you were worried about things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Who would that be?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. If they were sick, if they had a cold or if they developed - measles or - chickenpox, children\rquote 
s complaints in those days I was worry - a gr
eat worrier afraid that something was going to happen to them. And Jack - through losing - a couple of children, or his mother and father you see lost a little girl and boy - he could remember all that and - he said he felt terrible when those children di
ed - and - through that I think he got - he was very careful and always very anxious over them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Your mother was alive when the children were young wasn't she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, mother died when the eldest was fourteen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you ask her advice on bringing up the children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well - she would - try and - and tell me what to do in her way of - bringing up children, and I found that - mother's way was old fashioned to what was - people were - was being done or children was being - treated when - ours was young.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 So whose advice would you follow?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
And - I followed her advice in lots of way, but the - the nurse's book that she gave me kind of - I would - mother was very annoyed at me always taking the book, she felt she could tell me lots.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What about your mother-in-law, did you see her very often when your children were small?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Oh she was very good.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did she come round here?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 She came down most days to see the children.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you ask her advice about how to bring up your children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well she had ten children herself so she knew all about it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did her advice agree with how you thought about things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 She never interfered. She never interfered about anything I did. She was very -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did she have the same ideas as you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Yes, I think so you know. I think every generation act differently in - in those days they were long robes and - different sorts of - well long - under skirts, and - little - linen bodies which wrapped around them, the flannel band first of all. 
And - then there was a little white linen bodice and the - long skirt and the long robes. Yards of - in length. And of course - now they're - they're just like little - like little dress. And no long robes at all now. So even in - in baby things everythin
g alter, and even in the way of dressing them. Shawls are different and - the way to handle them, everything seems to - to be different. Mm.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Can you tell me some of the things you felt you ought to do for your children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well I don't know that I can do anything different. In looking back on - on my life - on the children\rquote 
s lives and that, I - I can't see I could do anything - anything different in our circumstances.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What sort of things did you feel you had to do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 I - I should like for t
hem to have - I - I should like to have had more money to have brought them up differently and - and - for them to have gone to - grammar schools and - had a higher education. And - that was the thing that was uppermost in my mind, the education part of t
he business, but - as - as things were we could do anything - we couldn't do anything else.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you think you gave them enough affection?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 I couldn't give them any more. I think our children had all the affection that - anyone could - give them, an
d - I thought lots of times I think that - if children had more affection now, there wouldn't be so much - delinquency, because - parents then, mothers then in those days didn't work, they had more time to put on their babies and their children than - the
r
e's one thing that I loved when I was young was to be - what we called lushed in, old Cornish word of - being - fondled and - rocked in my mother's arms, and sang to, little old fashioned lullabies and different things which I can still remember and I did
 
the same for mine, there was certain times after - in the day when you held the and loved them, and more often than not they would go to sleep in your arms, after they had their dinner, or afternoon feed and that and you'd - be hours, you would hold them 
a
nd - love them - in a day, and - when they got bigger you you could read little fairy tales, little stories to them and - I think that's one thing that children are lacking in this day iss the love - of parents and especially the mother. The - the modern 
mother of today hasn't time, if they're working they haven't time to put that on the children and - dropped in the cot or put in the playpen. We had no playpens in those days. We had our children around us all the time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you think you gave them enough food and enough discipline?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. They had enough food, they never went hungry.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What about discipline?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 And discipline - I think that they would tell you if they were here that - they always knew when I meant anything and - their father also.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you want them to share their worries with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
I - yes. I - I - always encouraged them to come to us if they had any troubles, which they did I think, and - I don't know if - they were here would they tell you anything different.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How did you want them to behave towards you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Act kind. And affectionate. And if you read my - the article in the Cornish \{BLAN}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid11608922\charrsid3212931 K\} that my - that my eldest son}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931  wrote on my father - you can see the affection that - the children had for my parents. And my
 father would - tell me in the war years he wanted the same as I did, because - he loved them so much and they never gave him an unkind word - in his life, which - I thought was a wonderful thing for him to say.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 When the children were young did you and Jack ever manage to leave them so that you could go out together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well we never left them, unless our parents were here to look after them. And - in that article you will also see that my father was - Jack said - if we went out, father would baby}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11608922\charrsid3212931 -}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 sit, after mother died, or before even - or before even then - he would baby}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11608922\charrsid3212931 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 sit with them and - he would - draw for them and give them a copy to draw and - or he would read to them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you let the children join in when the grown ups were talking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well they - sometimes they would be asked their opinion, but they never interfered. Children no - never - weren't allowed to in those days, not like even now, interrupt.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What did you bring your children up to consider was important in life?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 T
o be well behaved. And to respect old age. And sick people. And always do what was right, and never to take what didn't belong to them. That was one of the things that - most important thing I said was never to - to - take anything from anybody else that 
didn't belong.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you tell them that they should hit back or not if another child hurt them?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well, I don't know that they'd ever come to tell me that but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 You didn't ever lay down the law about it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Were there any children you discouraged them from playing with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well if they were wild yes, there were sometimes you know, children who they couldn't get on with, not so well as others, and I - we would always try and impress on them not to - go anywhere near them if they couldn't get on with them, just stay away.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What was it you didn't like about these children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well sometimes they would be swearing a lot and - using - language that wasn't good for their ears and we didn't think that they - were good companions and - when they were young they would try to - teach them not to - mix with those sort of children.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 If your children did something you disapproved of what would happen then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well I should - have them over the coals for it and - and try and find out the reason and - whose fault it was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you punish them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 They'd have a slap. But I don't - I - I never beat them, not hard like some people would or with a stick, you know, they'd always -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did they need slapping often?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did Jack ever slap them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Yes, sometimes if they were - if they were - if he thought that they were very naughty when he was around. I think that - one slap from him, his hand I think was a bit harder than mine.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you remember any particular occasion when you punished them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 There's nothing that stands out in your mind?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Would you say that your children received the ideas they had about how to behave from both of you, or perhaps did one of you play a more important part than the other?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well I think the both of us - would - they would - they would think about. And - I'm always tried to impress them to do - when we weren't there - what they wouldn't do when we were.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you work after you had children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Not until they were perhaps nearly thirteen or fourteen, and - then I went up and done the same job at - with the flowers, bunching the flowers, as I did - that was - in the wintertime, after Christmas. It had been a very bad season and - I wanted to help
 out a little bit. Of course my mother and father were here then, and - I would get the food ready before I went and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 They were old enough by that time not to really worry about them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh yes, they were - they were - old enough then to - bring up a cup of tea if we wanted it during the flower trimming.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 When your children had a birthday would it be different from any other day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh we always arranged for - for our children to have a birthday - and - I mean have a birthday party where they
 bring their boyfriends in and - have tea, birthday tea and I - always made a birthday cake and had a little - party, fancy tea and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did they get presents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Yes, they had presents.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Can you remember anything you did with your husband and children on Christmas Day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well Christmas Day was a special day - here in the village because everyone - everybody knew one and the other and - there'd be calling in each others houses and here for our own place, it - very - very early in the morni
ng when they would - wake and see what they had in their - pillowslip, because - by the time that they - were born stockings had gone out of vogue, and - they hadn't - and they wouldn't hold enough so they - we had to have a pillowslip each for the childr
en and - we always had something for the children, a toy of some sort. And great excitement in the morning. And then we'd be to chapel and - have a - have a nice Christmas dinner. Always had something special for Christmas.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did your mother-in-law and father-in-law come down on Christmas Day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
They'd come down sometime in the evening, but they'd have their own family, they had ten children you see and - they had - quite a - Jack was the eldest one of the family and he was married a few years before
 the others got married, so they always had a houseful - and we would go up there one part of the day to - stay with them a little while.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you have any musical instruments in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Yes, we had a - an American organ when I was young.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 When you had your children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. I learnt that when I was perhaps about ten or eleven. And that was always in the house until we had the piano.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 When did you have the piano?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well I suppose the children were about - Jack was about - ten or eleven, when we had the piano.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did your children play any instruments?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, they all learnt to play.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did any of you sing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. I was in the choir - from the time I was eleven.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 So there was singing amongst the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 I
n the - yes, we always - always had singing here in the house and - I would play the piano you see and the children would sing. A funny thing enough though - Sylvia - would always cry when we commenced - singing, as I went to the piano to play she used to
 get - very hysterical and say she didn't like to hear the singing. But she laughs at it now, she's very fond of singing, she can't understand how she had that little phase. But we were always singing, the children here and - taking part in things.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you play games with the children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What sort of games?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 We played all sorts and kinds of games.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What sort of games did you play?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well, in those days they would have a - a board for snakes and ladders and - ludo and - cheque
rs, and dominoes. And - snap. Those were the games that were in vogue then and - in the evenings when they were young and generally one or the other would be brought out or - maybe sometimes they would want a read - have a - have a story read, see, and be
i
ng so - not so much different in their ages, just eighteen months in Jack and Bill, if they had a book bought for them for Christmas, one would - one would read - want to have a story read from - his book, and then - the other one would want a story read 
o
f his book. So I'd take turns, I'd read the story from the elder boy's book first and then Bill's - a story from his book after so - we varied different evenings what - happened, in wintertime especially their father would be away fishing, always away in 
Plymouth and - in the winter season, so we had the children practically - I had the children practically by myself, or my parents here in the wintertime.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did your husband ever join in with you at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh yes, yes. And then -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11608922\charrsid3212931  he - one year brought home mec}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 ano sets for them, an}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11608922\charrsid3212931 d - they had their mec}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
ano then to build and make what they wanted to, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11608922\charrsid3212931 that had come in vogue then, me}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
cano, and - they had their own box of - things there and then they would pass away - many many evenings, and another - Chris
tmas they'd have a fretwork - saw and different things and they would make fretwork. So as they grew older they would have their own toys and different rent things to play with, tool - tool sets and one thing and the other that they were - easily amused.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you have lots of books in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Our house was always full of books. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Newspapers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Always reading. If father went away - or my brother, they always tried to bring home a book. And in those days there was - wonderful writers, or we thought so at that time, Mrs Henry Wood and - Marie Carelli and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Was this when your children were young or when you were young?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 When I was young. And - all the same, they - they always - paid - if they'd any pocket money in the week and 
Saturdays have pocket money and they would always put a - penny or something on - on a club, here in the village. There was - Mr Herbert Victor, he had a little art shop and he sold books, and they would - put so much a week of their pocket money - to - p
u
t it towards a book for Christmas. And - then when Mr Victor finished, Mr Lander had the - had the paper shop, he had this club, club cards and so they transferred their - had their - club card there, and - they wouldn't - wouldn't dream of - of going for
 
the book until Christmas Eve after dinner. They would be change - washed and have a good old - wash up and changed and they would go then and collect their book. Very very proud when they came home with their book, they had theirs heads in that then - for
 a week or more, you never - heard a sound. And they'd compare notes, and - and - loan each other their books.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 When your children were young did you always buy your books or did you belong to a library?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 We had no library in the village then, and 
it'd be three mile to to walk to Penzance and three mile book. So the books that we had we had to borrow from our friends, you see, or books we had here in the house, and I think I can remember that - Jack - and Bill, their first books }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11608922\charrsid3212931 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931  children}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11608922\charrsid3212931 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 s books, 
the poetry and - stories about teddy bears and - animals, and I used to say to my mother - he was very young and - Bill, they could - they could recite them as soon as the page was turned over they knew what was coming. And they could and they could - rea
d perhaps - carry on from memory, nearly half the story, be}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11608922\charrsid3212931 f}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
ore, you know, they - read it over so often and heard it read so often that they knew what to expect. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you read aloud to your husband or to the children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 To the children. Read alo
ud - I'd lose my voice nearly sometimes, every night they wanted me to read you see. That's before they got - old enough to read themselves, and as I said just now I'd read a story from one book and read a story from the other, to please the two of them.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you ever take the children our visiting, to see friends or neighbours or relations?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Yes. And they were always very good, I used to say to my mother when I come back well I'm very thankful that the children can behave themselves and be quiet a
nd not go round meddling and fiddling with different things in the persons house, you know, they'd always - some children come in and they handle everything that they see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did they ever go out with anybody else besides you?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, my grand - thei
r - their other grandparents - mother would go out but - their - their grandfather - Pender died when he was fifty - two. Fifty-two or three and - so I'm sure that - they - missed him a bit too, he would have been very happy to have taken them out.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Were they taken out shopping?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, oh yes, they always went - they loved going visiting, they loved going shopping.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Who would take them shopping?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 To help me, yes, to help me - with the groceries, at the Lobster Pot, where the Lobster Pot is 
now, that was our grocer's shop, and - an old lady kept the shop, yes. And everything had to be weighed at that time, there was no - everything - you know would come in big - chests, currants would be in a - chest and - all loose and - sugar, all loose, i
n
 a sack. Sacks of coal the sugar would be and - the lard would be in bladders, used to call a bladder lard, be in this - stiff greaseproof paper, all different sizes, I can hear still the cracking of the paper as the old shopkeeper cut her knife in throug
h
, and - weighed it, 'cos the - the butcher's lard would be in - in - she would run down her own lard for - what we call the butcher's lard, the best lard, she'd buy the - bacon - the pork and run it down, and that would be extra - good lard, cost more. So
 everything had to be weighed, except the tea, the tea all came in packets, four}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11608922\charrsid3212931  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 pence ha }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid11608922\charrsid3212931 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931  four}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11608922\charrsid3212931  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
pence ha'penny a quarter, and - the sugar tuppence ha'penny a pound, or tuppence, and currants the same. And - all that stuff, flour had to be weighed. She had 
a big - big scales in the back of the shop, and - it would be from a pound to twenty pound being weighed. All according if you had the - big family, take twenty pound to put you over the weekend and making bread and cake, and different things, because eve
rybody then made their own bread. Very few had bought bread.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did the children ever go out with just their father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Go out with their father? Oh - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 They never went out with him by himself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, and as I was sick, if I was sick they wo
uld go out with their father, but - any other time you know if - if Jack was home - over a weekend we would go out together, with the children, Saturdays or Sundays.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you remember doing anything special on Bank Holidays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Bank Holidays - would 
be perhaps, if the weather was fine we'd go to St Ives. St Ives would be a treat in those days. We'd go by train. No - no buses when the children were young.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you walk to Penzance then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, sometimes we did, yes, or go - in the wagonette or - other times you'd have to walk. And - go to St Ives or Car}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11608922\charrsid3212931 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 lli}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11608922\charrsid3212931 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 s Bay.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What would you do when you got there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Sit on the sand and go bathing and - if the weather was fine enough. Well we'd go to Lemorna in the spring of the year before the - su
n came on hot, we used to go walk to Lemorna and back, especially on Good Friday, Easter time was - flocks of people would go there. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you ever go away for a holiday with the children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Never had a holiday with the children. Go away for th
e day perhaps, Plymouth sometimes with them, of a Saturday. Navy week or something on special. But - never had a - a - a holiday all together in our lives. And when I went to London with Sylvia to stay with my cousin, my husband couldn't - he said he coul
dn't be spared from the boat, and he didn't go.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How did you spend Saturdays in those days when you had the children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well we were busy up to dinner time finishing up the work and - Saturday mornings we'd be getting the dinner and - finishing the 
work we hadn't done - everything had to be scrubbed and polished and - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11608922\charrsid3212931 as we said shining like dagger}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
, and - then in the afternoon, if it was fine we'd go for a walk, and - I may go visiting or Penzance, children would have their clothes changed, they'd be
 off - maybe - football, that was the - that had started then in the village, football team you see, after the - after the first world war, and after that time we didn't have any football, and - everyone then would flock to the - Upper Guin}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11608922\charrsid3212931 n}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 ess where the f
ootball match was being held, and of course they were too young to go on their own and - and Jack'd want to go off with the men and sometimes - they would go with their father, and - other times I would take them. And that was - every Saturday afternoon i
n the wintertime. The time the football started.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What about Saturday night?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Mm. Saturday evening? Oh, in - reading, or having their games.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Were Sundays different?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. Yes, oh - quite different Sundays were, there'd be church mornings a
nd Sunday school in the afternoons and church again in the evening, and then in the evening after church they would have a book, if we didn't go out visiting our friends or relations - they always loved visiting or someone coming in here in the nights, an
d - Sunday evenings they could have a book, but never had any toys.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 This is when your children were young?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Mm hm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you think it was wrong to work or to enjoy yourself on a Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well we were brought up in that at - that narrow wa
y that - I - I never done it myself, I never - washed or - didn't sew a button on of a Sunday, and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 You continued that way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 The children - yes, we didn't allow the children to - any - their - or not too much playing around. Never went out in th
e road to play, never allowed to do that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you have clean clothes on a Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. But we always put our under clothes clean Saturdays. After a good old wash and - change Saturday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Were there children allowed to play games on Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Not rough games.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What about things like snakes and ladders?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
No. No, never played any - any - board games, snakes and ladders or - and - even now the children say to me, grandchildren, shall we have a game of snap? I say, no, not today, it's Sunday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 You went to chapel on Sundays didn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How often did you go?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well I know you'll laugh because no one - no one wouldn't do it now, we've had a class - our - class meetings was always Sunday mornings before the - ser
vice. And - a lady, Mrs Evan Tregensa, she took our class for years. And - we all turned out on Sunday morning and we would - go from there into the church for the service. And then after that we'd come in and have our dinner and half past two was Sunday 
- quarter to three was Sunday school.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you go to Sunday school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Yes. And - up - up to the time I was married until I was - when I - when I was going to have my first child I went. And - went to Sunday school in the afternoons and church again in the evenings.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did Jack go along too when you were married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. No. He never went with me. He attended a different church to I, when he was young.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Which one was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 He attended the - the - United Methodist church at the other end of the village. Now it's amalgamated into one.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 This was the same chapel you went to when you were younger?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Were you a member of the temperance club?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Band of Hope we called it. Yes, Band of Hope. I played for them when I was
 - well perhaps eleven or twelve, I - I was asked to play for them and - and then when I got - a bit older I was secretary, I've still got the old books here - with the boys names on it, promising to keep the pledge, singing their names, how many of them 
- were - were killed in the first world war.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you belong to any other club after you were married that were affiliated to the chapel?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh no, Wesley Guild that was affiliated to the chapel, and - the Band of Hope we as the chapel and - and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did your children go to Sunday school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Until the war years.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you ever take them to chapel, with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, they always went with us.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Just you or with Jack as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 My husband in the evenings, he went - always went in 
the evenings and the children went - in the mornings as well, and - be four of us in the evenings.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 When you had the children here did you say grace at meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. No, we never said - never said grace at meals, I don't know for why but - it was ne
ver started, and - I'm afraid my parents didn't for us and I suppose that's - that's the reason that I didn't do it. But - my grandparents - did. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you have family prayers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. Never had family prayers.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Were your children taught to say prayers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Yes, every night they had a - a prayer. They never went to bed unless they said their prayers and asked - the Lord to help all that was sick or sorry and they would - go off sometimes without being told anything you know, raking up everyth
ing under the sun.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Who taught them, did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, no I taught them their prayers, Gentle Jesus meek and mild was the - first prayer that they were told.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How long did they keep saying prayers for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well they were big - big boys you know when they - they - then they wanted to say their prayers to theirselves and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 But before that did they actually say them aloud to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you take an interest in politics after you were married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Always did - politics, we a
re always - we were brought up - to think on politics - as one of the essential things you know. And I'm afraid - this latter years I don't take the interest that I did take.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 But at that time what were your political views?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well we were Liberals, and that was what we always - voted, and -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Was your husband politically interested?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 He was Liberal. He was Liberal in his politics, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you vote in a general election before 1919?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you remember what year it was?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 I couldn't say now, no, I don't -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did your husband vote?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you know what party he voted for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Liberal, he was always very - Liberal minded.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you or your husband ever feel any pressure from anybody to vote for a particular party?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
No, I never tried to inflict my - my opinion on him. He always pleased himself I don't think that he was a man that would - change for anything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 But were you pressurized from somebody outside the family at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. No. Everybody was allowed to please themselves.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Were you actually a member of the Liberal party?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Were you a paid up member?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. We didn't pay in our Liberal party, because - Sir Clifford Corey was our - our - our - our member for 
very many years, he was a very wealthy man, he had - he owned lots of - coalmines and that in Wales, and - he built or had built the Liberal room, and - he fitted it all out, what was required and we had a women's room upstairs and - we had a - our monthl
y meetings, the same as - well - the men was there every night or every day with their papers and that provided.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 After you were married did you ever work for any of the parties at elections?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 I used to help - on elections.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What sort of things would you do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
I would be in the room and - and check up the votes that were being brought in. Or you could go and see anybody that was sick and not able to - go themselves and help them or - try and get a conveyance for them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did your husband ever do that sort of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. He was always too busy. Lots - lots of elections he wasn't home to vote so - he was away.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you take part in any political activity at any other time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Not just election times?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Concerts and 
that we would - we would do to help out the - get some funds of our own and that. And then we would get up the concerts in the - middle of the season. We'd have a - a special evening and at that time in the village there would be - I suppose it was a Libe
ral village, quite different to now with all the - locals dead and - moving away from the village and visitors coming in, you don't know now who the visitors, what they are or - no, or how they vote.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 When you and your husband were not working how did you spend your time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well, we would be - we - I don't know when my husband wasn't working because with all the boat's - gear to - to get ready - even if they were in from sea in poor weather there were always things that he had to do. And see about.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you ever go out together in the evening?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What sort of thing did you go to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well we had that - we had - not all that to go to, we just went out for a walk in the evening or went visiting. And - seeing friends. We didn't have al
l that money to spare to go to - any - big does or - concerts - that - was taking part - taking place in Penzance. I don't think we - we went there very often. But - we could always go for a walk or - amuse ourselves with the children, take the children o
u
t somewhere and - on the beach in the summer if there was any time - to spare. And I'll tell you what we - we did very often, Jack would go out in a - in a boat, little boat, the punt, small boat and take us out and the children and - we've had lots of pi
c
nics on the island when we were - when the children were younger. And - different places, you see, go away with - and in the boat. Boats used to go away at that time, when the children were small, what they called trouting. They'd go across the bay to Por
t
 Levin, or Mullion, and - we've done that several times in the summer. Would be quite a lot of people then, have a nice - lot of - our friends would go with us, and we'd tale our food, and - have it on the boat. Land at Port Levin, especially at St Peters
 time when there was a special weekend for galas and - big does down there. So - in the old days or when we were young or our children were young there was lots of boating done, more so than - is done now.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Was your husband ever working so that he would get home every evening?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
No, he didn't - he never done anything but - the - the fishing, and then at certain times of the year, pilchard driving, that was in the summertime they would be in perhaps about ten, eleven o'clock or twelve or one, but never early in the evening.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 When he was home, presumably he was home sometimes early in the evening?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15207351\charrsid3212931 f he was lin}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 ing, if they were out for two or three days lining. That's - they would be in perhaps in the afternoon to land their fish, which 
would be turbot, ray, ling, white fish, and - then - after being out two or three days they might land on the Wednesday afternoon and be in that evening. Then the Thursday morning they would go to sea again, for a couple of days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What sort of things would he do in the evenings when he was in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Read. Or - if the children was young amuse the children. And - that would be much - as much as he would do.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did he ever go out to any clubs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Not very often. Not very often.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Which one would he go to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well the Liberal Club would be here but }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15207351\charrsid3212931 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931  Jack}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15207351\charrsid3212931  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 was - it's - it's many years since Jack went to any clubs.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did he ever go to pubs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What about institutes of any sort?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No, he never went.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you go together ever to the clubs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 You always stayed at home did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you belong to any savings clubs when you were married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Savings clubs? No, not - particularly, the bazaar club at our - our church bazaar we paid in - thrift you know to
 pick up anything at the end of the year but - not - any club we never paid in for.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did either of you take part in any sport?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Perhaps like cricket or football?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Or fishing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. Oh yes, fishing, the boys - the boys - 
took part in football when they got older. But we never had a cricket match here in the village. No, it's a funny thing, Pool, the little village above us here, they always had a cricket club, but we never did. Mm. Yes, a good job too or there'd be fricti
on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you ever go bicycling together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No, I never rode a bicycle.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you ever bet on anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No, I never bet in my life.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What about Jack?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No, he didn't very often. You know, he always he said he missed his chance one ye
ar because his birthday came on April the fifth, his birthday is April the fifth I should say, and - he was fishing at the time and when he got into the market Saturday - or Friday, the men were putting - some men putting their money on different horses, 
a
nd - I think someone said to him, aren't you going to put a horse on April the fifth? And - being not accustomed to doing it he didn't. And that horse came in first next day and - I think some odd - it was a lot of money but he always said he missed his c
hance.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you think he ever bet apart from that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
No. No, never bet on horses or anything. I tell you they had some - they had some - little money that they was always afraid to - to waste any of it. Very careful.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 When you were married did you go to theatres or concerts, music halls, that sort of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
No. You see we were three mile from Penzance and we didn't have anything like that happen here. Might have a concert once in a while, we'd go to a concert. But never went to Penzance to theatricals after we were married.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 When did the cinema come to Penzance, did you ever go to that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Yes. Oh yes. Yes. Yes. When we went together first - the winter, that winter - and - as I said before Jack went for yachting early in the spring. H
e was made Quartermaster - on the - on the yacht that he was on - two or three years before we were married, and he was hoping to have made that his - job in life, yachting you know and - if it hadn't been for the boat that his father had bought, but - he
 - we went to the cinema, we used to - walk - forth and back, three mile - never thought anything about it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you have any hobbies?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Jack? No. No, well I had hobbies and crochet, I could crochet or - knit, things like that you know. Loads of dif
ferent things - in the house, but not to - I never done rug making.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you ever keep pets of any sort?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
No. We did have a dog and I'm sorry, we had a little dog when - the children when the boys were young, they wanted a dog and we had a dog for quite a few years, when they were young.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you have a garden?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 A small garden at the back.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you do that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, we've still got the small garden at the back of the house.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you ever collect anything as a sort of hobby?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No, I never collected stamps, only for the children. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What about for yourself, did you ever collect anything for yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you ever go out to enjoy yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well we did because - in later - well there was choir practic
e which I enjoyed very much when I was young. I think I said before we were all - I was out most nights when I was young.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What about when you were married though, did you go out to do things that you enjoyed when you were married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well I - I did
 until I was - I had Jack, six months - with Jack and then I - I finished with the male voice then. And - I couldn't - take an anything more after that then of course I had the other - had Bill quickly after Jack. I had no time to do that kind of thing, n
o
t be tied down - every - Monday night for practice. And - I've been asked - to - today to - had a letter today to ask me to be vice-president of the male voice choir, which was very nice. But - apart from - male voice I went to - help - in concerts after 
I was married, and - bazaar - opened bazaars at the church and different things. And I went in the choir for many years after I was married.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did anyone outside the home help you look after the house and family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No, not very many. I would have lik
ed lots of times when my parents - got old for somebody to have - helped me to have gone out for a few evenings - you know, to - been a break for me, but I had my parents all the day and - mother was in a bed there, eighteen months before she died and fat
her was in a bed - nearly that - eighteen months before he died, but - I had not chance of - going out very much.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you ever have anybody in to do any housework at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. I had to have help for - lots of times when - mother and father were i
ll - to do the wash - help me with the washing, because we washed down in the basement, see, and I should be up and down two flights of stairs, and - I got very run down at one time, and we had a young woman to come in every Monday then to help me for - u
ntil she got married, two or three years after, she got married. But - you know I washed - I done all of me own work periodically, it was just - at times when I was sick that I had to have help.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How did the family manage when you were in bed sick?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well my husband would get the food. If he was home. And - if I didn't my sister would - she was around - she went to live in Plymouth - for many years after but - or a neighbour would come in, my sister-in-law sometimes used to come down and - give me a
 cup of tea or anything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you have lots of relatives living near?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
No, a very small family. My sister was here, me only sister, it was the second sister went to America, and my eldest brother went to America and - they both died there, and - m
y sister was the - was the only person here until - perhaps about ten years before father died she went to Plymouth to live, so I was here on my own and I - had - only one or two first cousins - here.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you have friends as opposed to relatives?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 I - we'd lots of friends in the village, always had lots of friends.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Where did you see them in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well they would come down perhaps of a evening to see me, or call in of a afternoon. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you and Jack share the same friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
He had his men friends you know, I don't know that his friends were the same as mine. He mixed with you know - seafaring men and men he met on the yachts and that. It's - he - he had a big family, Jack, he had a sister - his mother had the - another
 sister and two or three brothers and he was - he had more relatives than what I had.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Where did he meet his friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh out in the - on the - on the cliff if they were out walking or that sometimes they'd come in.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Were friends ever invited here?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes, they - they didn't want to be invited, this is open house for anybody.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 How often would you friends come?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh well, pretty often, they used to call in different times, there was no - phoning to ask could they come in those days, 
in fact we'd - we never had a phone in the village, and - they just called in casually to see us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you give them things to eat and drink?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well we always had a cup of tea ready for our friends}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15207351\charrsid3212931 
, and still do if they come. Kettle}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931  is on - and call in any odd time of the day.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Would they come on particular days or particular occasions?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No. No, just any time - afternoons generally.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Would you say that the friends invited in were your friends or your husband's friends or perhaps both?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well I had more friends than me husband who came in casually you know, his friends would be working - people, working men and - would only call in the evenings.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you ever go out to visit your friends or neighbours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 By yourself or with Jack?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Yes. Go out of a odd evening if we - if we had - a few minutes to spare with the children gone to bed and - we'd go out and visit our - relatives - relations or friends for a little while.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you make music when you went to visit or play games with them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Oh yes, we had music, I'd play the piano in lots of houses if we went in and - had a sing-song, that was the - I think the most of our en - entertainments in the evening was singing the old songs, and - I could always - play 
impromptu, I - I could play by ear what they - say you know, without the music, if I heard anything once I could always - rattle it off on the piano after. So we'd have lots of fun when we were younger in - singing off the old pieces and - you could tell 
a song in those days, you could play it off, it's a hard job now to know what they're singing and - I'm sure I would never be able to play them. Don't seem any beginning or end.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you play any games with the people you went to visit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Yes. In the wintertime. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What games would you have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
Well, different games - I don't know whether you've never heard of the games, boots without the spurs, and - which was very laughable, we had lots of fun over that. And - blindfolding - somebody - an
d - giving them a target before they had a - a handkerchief put over their eyes and - something on the walk they had to - think you could - walk straight with your finger out like that you see and you'd put them in the right direction and then you'd be th
e
re waiting for them to come and try and put their finger and you would just - have your mouth ready to give their finger a snap. Oh we had lots of fun, with silly old games like that you know, and - but they caused a lot of amusement in those days, and we
 had to make our own amusement. We didn't have it made - made for us like we do now and television, different things. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Do you think on the whole that you had to struggle to make ends meet in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Oh yes, our - our lives were one hard struggle in those days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What did you think about it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 
In looking back - in retrospect on - on my life and on our - our way of living I don't know how we managed, honestly, I think very often don't know what the young wives - now - would do, if th
ey had the same money as we had - in fact we never knew from one week to the other - what we would have to spend - on the fishing we lived on faith. And - I think lots of times that we done a marvellous job, and our children, we tried to - do - I never to
l
d our children whether we had much or little. I never worried them like I had been worried when I was young. I always - always - made up my mind on that lot that - I would never tell the children, to bother their little minds like mine was, I was a very s
ensitive child I think and - I worried a lot of my young life away thinking about my father and - what was happening if there was no fish, and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 What difference did it make if your husband was ill?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Well, if he happened to be ill and the boat was 
fishing he would always have his share - of the - fish that was caught you see because his nets - he had his own gear on the boat, each man had their own, then the - four brothers on the boat had the - had the nets for the family you see that they had the
ir share. And - then if - when the National Health - was passed that benefit came in - if you had a doctor you would have so much from the doctor, see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6429687 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 Did you ever get help from the parish or a charity or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2506258 NP  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14897221\charrsid3212931 No, I never had any help in my life. What my husband never got I didn't get my - I never had.
\par }}