{\rtf1\adeflang1025\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\adeff0\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang2057\deflangfe2057{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}{\f38\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f39\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f41\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f42\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f43\fbidi \froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}
{\f44\fbidi \froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f45\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f46\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f48\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}
{\f49\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f51\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f52\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f53\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f54\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}
{\f55\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f56\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden 
Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs20 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{
\s15\qj \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext15 Body Text;}}
{\*\latentstyles\lsdstimax156\lsdlockeddef0}{\*\revtbl {Unknown;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid1256529\rsid4066929\rsid4265682\rsid5603085\rsid6489771\rsid10708135\rsid11012655\rsid11536143\rsid12204954\rsid13568115\rsid13978893\rsid14835199\rsid15204880\rsid15297942\rsid16659532}
{\*\generator Microsoft Word 11.0.0000;}{\info{\title Int072}{\author PRASAD3}{\operator lhorto}{\creatim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min7}{\revtim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min7}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords50370}{\nofchars287115}{\nofcharsws336812}
{\vern24613}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 http://schemas.microsoft.com/office/word/2003/wordml}{\xmlns2 urn:schemas-microsoft-com:office:smarttags}}\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1800\margr1800\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0\ltrsect 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\donotembedsysfont0\donotembedlingdata0\grfdocevents0\validatexml1\showplaceholdtext0\ignoremixedcontent0\saveinvalidxml0\showxmlerrors1\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace180
\dgvspace180\dghorigin1800\dgvorigin1440\dghshow1\dgvshow1\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\splytwnine\ftnlytwnine\htmautsp\nolnhtadjtbl\useltbaln\alntblind\lytcalctblwd\lyttblrtgr\lnbrkrule\nojkernpunct\rsidroot10708135 \fet0
{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}\ilfomacatclnup0\ltrpar \sectd \ltrsect\linex0\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ltrpar
\ql \fi-461\li461\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid11012655 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\ul\insrsid11012655\charrsid16072257 Information about interviewee}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid11012655 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid11012655\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\ql \fi-461\li461\ri0\widctlpar\tx2057\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid11012655 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid11012655\charrsid16072257 Date of birth}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid11012655    \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid11012655\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid11012655  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid14835199 1891}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid11012655\charrsid16072257 
\par Gender}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid11012655           \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid11012655\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid11012655  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid14835199 F}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid11012655 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid11012655\charrsid16072257 Marital status}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid11012655 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid11012655\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid11012655  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid12204954 Single
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid11012655\charrsid16072257 Occupation}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid11012655 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid11012655\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid11012655  
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid14835199 Woman officer - National Insurance}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid11012655\charrsid16072257 
\par Geographic region}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid11012655 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid11012655\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid11012655  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid14835199 
Boton, Lancs}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid11012655\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\qj \fi-461\li461\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid11012655 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Would you give me your full name?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Alice Foley.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 And your present address?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 2, {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Burnside Road{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}, 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Bolton{\*\xmlclose}, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Marital Status?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Single.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 The year of your birth?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname date}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Year}{\xmlattrvalue 1891}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Day}
{\xmlattrvalue 18}}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname Month}{\xmlattrvalue 11}}}18 - November 1891{\*\xmlclose}.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 The place where you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Bolton}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 {\*\xmlclose}. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 What part of {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Bolton{\*\xmlclose}?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Well, it's no longer there now - it was - {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Milk Street
{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} it was {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Milk Street{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} and - I don't know what the district would be called - near {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Pilkington Street{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} now if {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Pilkingston Street{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}'s still in existence - off 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Derby Street{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}, off {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Derby Street{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Can you remember how long you lived in that house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Well, I was born there but we removed when I was four.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Do you know where you moved to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Yes, 11 - number {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}11 Rankin Street{\*\xmlclose}
{\*\xmlclose}, {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Bolton{\*\xmlclose}. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 Rankin - {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Rankin Street{\*\xmlclose}
{\*\xmlclose}.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 How long did you live there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Oh, how many years - probably - nine
 or ten I should say - no - yes, probably going up to nine or ten but then we moved to various - various other streets near round about there you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Do you know why it was that the family made these moves?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Well, really - the family where I was
 born it was a back to back dwelling. There was only one room downstairs and one up and there were seven of a family and eight with myself as a baby and presumably the house was so crowded that something had to be done about it you see and my eldest siste
r - there were three boys and two girls older than, of course, I was the last to be born in the family - and presumably my eldest sister then started work in the mill. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 
At that time they could go at twelve - twelve years of age - and she - she was twelve, sh
e was twelve years my senior, and presumably her wage coming into the house, small as it was, did enable them to move to this Rankin Street which was of course a two roomed - four roomed house, two rooms up and two down which gave them more breathing spac
e you see and I presume that was the reason they - they went because for the first time they had a bit of money.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 What about the other houses that you moved to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Well, they were all similar - two up, two down - until the war - about the war period.
 And then I had started to work by the, the other - the boys were working and consequently you could pay a better rental you see, but during - when the war came in '14 of course well then the boys were called up and the family was reduced so the girls - t
h
e three girls - the two older ones and myself decided it was high time we went into a more decent house with more sanitary conveniences - a bath - we'd never had a bath before - a bathroom and - so then we moved to Fern Street which was off Jean Road but 
it was a much better house because it had a little parlour, living room, kitchen, bathroom and two bedrooms you see. That would be about 1914 - '14/15 - in between - just when - after the war had started.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Were these other houses you moved to in between better than the previous ones?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Well they weren't better in the sense that there was still only two up, two down., no hot water - no baths or anything but of course we were a difficult family - my father was an Irishman. His people - father and moth
er - had originally come over from Ireland during the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 potato}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 famine and they had - they should - they came over in a ship that went to Liverpool with a lot of the other migrants and Liverpool had had it's quota so they were sent to Bolton and settled near 
St. Patrick's church in Great Moore Street - that was the Irish quarter then in Bolton. Dawe Street, that's gone now, that's been - removed you see - but there was an Irish colony there - Irish Catholics - and his father - my father - my grandfather and g
r
andmother went there, you see, so that I'm not sure whether he was born there or whether he came with them as a baby from Ireland you see. That's all I know about that part of it, you see. Well, now, why we had to keep moving around like this was - this i
s
 - this is rather intimate. Father of course was a heavy drinker and a heavy gambler and he scarcely ever worked. The result was that my mother had to bring us all up as we say, out of the wash-tub. She did washing for people. She also worked in the mill 
b
efore I was born but after I was born she just went washing for people or taking people washing in, and there was constant rows going on with the older boys because of father - inability to do anything, only drink and gamble, that they were constantly lea
ving him and - having to get in other houses because of the position in those days where the wife had very little protection from the law. You know, you couldn't get a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 divorce}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  unless you could prove such and such things about your husband and - consequently
 there was these constant shiftings I couldn't understand it of course, I was too young part of the time to understand why - but later on I could put two and two together and realize that this was an attempt on the part of the family to get away from fath
e
r. But the legal position, at least so I was told after mother had consulted some solicitor, and he said they could only leave the house, go elsewhere, but they'd to leave the biggest share of the furniture in the house with father's name being in the ren
t book, that was the legal position. So, of course, the thing was that they did - did this kind of thing - moved about from house to house - but they merely had to leave the bulk of the furniture in the house which was in father's }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 home}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 . And the result was t
hat usually he sold most of the valuable possessions to live on and then when he was destitute they took him back, you see, which was a peculiar situation, but probably common at that time because the - the - you see, the husband's name was in the rent bo
ok and the wife really had no property in her own name. The legal position was so - so much against the - the woman so that that accounted more or less, I could }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 tell after}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  - wards, why }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 we}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  moved }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 to}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  these other houses, you see. And the last house we went into
 was probably the worst of the lot because it had no - we - we had to share an outside toilet with other people - other neighbours. In the other houses we had at least had our own toilet in the backyard but in that particular house that we stayed the long
e
st and where father died was really the - the worst house of the lot. It was up steps that had - a big cellar where the old hand loom weavers used - used to weave their - their cloths and - it had an attic but apart from that it was no better than the oth
e
r houses because there was no hot water and no bath you see. But it was, I suppose it was because they'd had to get somewhere quickly and they'd taken it and that was the house that we decided the girls - after the boys were called up for military service
 - decided that we'd had enough of it and it was about time we looked round for a - a better - better }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4265682\charrsid11536143 accommodation}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 you see and of course the three girls were working you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 This was when you went to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Fern Street{\*\xmlclose}
{\*\xmlclose}?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Yes, we moved to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Fern Street{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 then where we had the better accommodation.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 You said there were three brothers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 And two sisters?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Sisters.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 And yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 What order did the boys and girls come in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 The elder - the eldest - no, the - the b
oy - there was one - the boy - there was a boy, John, who preceded my sister probably would be, I should say three years between the birth of the boy and the birth of this - the first sister you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Was John the eldest of the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 John was t
he eldest, yes. The - the sister came - Katherine - she was - twelve years older than myself, you see, so she would be - she would be born twelve years earlier than 1891. Now, the next boy was Thomas. He came after Katherine and I should say probably two 
a
nd a half to three years between them - probably two and a half I should say. And then there was - another boy called James. And there was a gap there because I believe there had been a - a child born but had died between Thomas and James there was a gap 
o
f some years. Probably six or seven I should say but there had been a - a baby that had born - been born between them and died, you see. Then there was Emily - the next girl. And I should say there would be three or four years between James and Emily. And
 then there was myself and there was two years between Emily and myself.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Your father came from {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}Ireland{\*\xmlclose}
{\*\xmlclose} or he may have been born in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Bolton{\*\xmlclose}?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Yes, I never saw his birth certificate.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Have you any idea how old he would be when you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Well, I was sixteen when he died, I remember that very clearly.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 How old was he when he died?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 He was fifty - fifty-six I think or fifty-four - fifty-six I think he was - yes, fifty-six.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 His occupation?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Well, it's difficult to say - I
 don't think he had one really. What I remember him doing more than anything was - they called it engine tenting in those days - looking after the engine in the cotton mill, you see, and I think he was rather good at that if he could have stuck it, you se
e
, but usually he either got drunk or - lost his temper - he was rather wild Irishman - and was nearly always out of work and then he would go labouring - caretaking at foundries at night - all night caretaking, you know, jobs like that with very little mo
n
ey attached to them. But more or less in and out of work and I don't remember him working for about the last - well I - I - he was - I was sixteen when he died and I don't remember him having a job for six years previous. I don't ever remember him - we - 
he just simply lived as part of the family but not - not working you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Do you know how old your mother was when you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 I should - no, I don't really know - but I should say about forty-four.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Where did she come from?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 She was {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Bolton{\*\xmlclose} - yes, her parents did live in - had lived in 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Bolton{\*\xmlclose} - they were dead of course when - but they had lived in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Bolton{\*\xmlclose}
. Now, her's was a peculiar and rather sad life because you see I only picked up a lot of these things when I was very, very much olde
r and I found out that - she had formerly been a child in a large family and her father had been a cotton weaver with a loom in his cellar, you see, which they had in - had had in those days and she used to tell me as a little girl about her jobs that she
 
did - around the loom you see, all the family had to work and contribute to the waving of the cloth. Now, then came the civil war - the American civil war - there's a lot of history you see in this - the American Civil War came along and - the Lancashire 
o
f course was almost dead because they couldn't get any cotton - raw cotton. You see, the war was on and there were no ships and they couldn't get any cotton. So they went through a very, very hard time and I remember her telling me about she as a little g
i
rl used to go out for jug - with a jug and got the soup you see. And - then the father died - her father died - of typhoid fever - she always said it was almost through semi-starvation and she was sent onto a servant - she was seven years of age, she neve
r
 went to school - she had no schooling at all - and she was sent onto a little farm somewhere at Lostock, just outside Bolton, for a shilling a week and her keep and she stayed there until she was old enough to go to - to work in the mill. I think she wen
t
 in at about ten or eleven. And she never learned to read or write, so that all through her life she depended on the family reading aloud to her. Father was a good reader - he had a good intelligence and he had paid for his schooling I understand at tuppe
n
ce a week at a dame school. He earned this money by the Bolton theatre at that time was in Dawe Street, near where they lived, you see, the Irish people, and he used to go as a scne shifter as a boy, scene shifting at this theater with the result that he 
earned this money - not very much - but it paid for his schooling and he was an excellent reader and of course with watching these plays he heard all the great - great actors of the time with }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 Shakespeare\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  plays - he had learned off by heart most of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 Shakespeare\rquote s}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 plays. And so as a young child we all had to sit round on little stools while father read aloud which was probably a good thing in my life you see, because I became initiated into Shakespeare before ever I went to school you see, and he was very fond of 
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 Dickens\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 novels and - and George Elliott and quite a lot of very, very good English literature. So that was one good part of his nature that he read aloud and then after his death I had to take the job on. Strange that the older people - older member
s of the family never tried to teach mother to read or write, you see, they were - 'course mind you she was busy - always busy working - and so consequently I was the - after father died I took on the job of reading aloud to her. I read aloud to her until
 
of course she died at the age of eighty-two and she had a very good brain and could of course - I am quite sure - she told me - I asked her once why she never - went to Sunday school because in those days they taught them in the Sunday school you see, to 
read the Bible at least. And she said she was - she used to go to the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 Wesleyan}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 chapel in Fletcher Street, Bolton, and she was so ashamed at letting the other girls know that she couldn't read that she used to memorize the verse - they had to read a verse in
 turn - and so she used to go round the class and memorize this verse in the Bible so that when it came her turn she could recite it without them knowing that she couldn't read you see. It was a pity that she did that because probably they might have put 
h
er in the way of having some reading lessons, you see. But she didn't like to let on to the other girls who could read that she couldn't you see, and then she left when they found out. One time some other girls missed turning up or something and she was g
i
ven this girls verse and of course she had to admit she didn't know it and she couldn't read. So she was so ashamed that she left this Sunday school, you see, and never went again. But that was mother's background, but she was an ideal mother from many, m
a
ny points of view. She - she had a sound instinct for what was right and wrong and though she - her leadership in the family was gentle compared to father's - 'cos father kept a great big trap hanging up by the fireplace and if any of us were unruly of co
u
rse we got a good belt with the strap you see. But mother's was a rather quieter way and - what I respected her for was in later years she gave you the benefit of feeling that you knew what was the right thing to do and she trusted you she didn't - she wa
sn't always questioning you - where'd you'd been - how long had you stayed out - she seemed as though she had a - a kind of instinct that she knew that - she wouldn't interfere - she knew that you had some degree of reasoning }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 power}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  you see and could - could
 go along without too much mothering as it were. Yes, she was a very, very fine - fine person and - I was only sorry that - after father died of course it was a great relief to us because you see, mother wasn't a catholic. He was. And he insisted on us go
i
ng to the catholic church you see - religiously - he never went himself - but we had to go you see. So we were then - I was probably about fourteen and my sister - the eldest sister - was a very intelligent person - she had already broken away from the ca
t
holic church so had the older boys and they refused - of course I wasn't old enough - the two sisters - Emily and I - the one who was two years older than myself - we were very close together you see and we had to go and - father of course was a radical -
 
utterly opposed to the Boer War - he made us all pro-Boers I can remember, because he - he didn't approve at all of the British being in Pretoria and Africa - and the result was that he made us pro-Boers and I can remember to this day the fierce battles w
e
 had in the street because we were always the Boers and of course the group were always English - the English and we used to get some terrible pastings. But father was right and we accepted it you see. And of course I was grateful for that because it's al
w
ays made me able to stand on the unpopular side - take the unpopular side, you see, it was good - it was good training really. And - then, you see, of course, we were drifting away from the catholic faith - Emily and I. My sister coming - she had then joi
n
ed the Labour party - and the - well, it was called the Independent Labour party at that time - and they had a Labour church in Bolton - they were rather strong Labour church at that time in Bolton and she used to come home telling us about the things the
y
 were doing at this Labour church which rather shocked me as a little good catholic and - I remember her telling us once that they were reading - William Morris - his News from Nowhere and John - The Dream of John Ball - and I was shocked to think that th
e
y were reading these things on a Sunday of all times - I remember putting her name - had a little prayer book and I remember putting her name in this prayer book, you see, as needing - in need of my prayers for her salvation but I'm sorry to say - or am I
 
sorry, I don't know - I - two years after - after father died we left the catholic both Emily and I and I - we joined and we've more or less been in the Socialist movement ever since. You see. So that - we're a queer family - very queer, you see, a mix up
. But - that's really the early background. Is there anything else that you - arising out of that?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Your mother worked as a weaver?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 No, she was in the card room but that was - in the cotton mill you know. In the she wasn't a weaver - her father w
as a weaver. She used to go in - she went in the mill at - I think she was ten - about ten or eleven - so that - she - she was brought up in the card room - they went in as little card - what they called them card tenters in those days and - the - they wo
r
ked up to what they called a Jack Frame Tenter and she went into the mill and of course would progress to probably being a jack frame tenter but she never went in the mill after I was born, you see, probably because she - she'd worked in between, oh yes, 
a
nd preferred it she told me to being at home. She preferred being in the mill of course to being mithered to death by father hanging around the house, you see, not working and - she used to go out to work and then come back home and do the meals and that 
k
ind of thing. Yes, the house was always kept beautifully clean. But she did go out but it was before I was born you see, I never - I never remember going in the mill after I was born. 'Cos I used to go round with her - you see, she had these places to go 
w
ashing and as a child - a tiny little one I can remember trailing round with her to these houses and sitting on the floor amongst a pile of old dirty washing playing with things while she did the washing. So - she never - she never went back into the mill
 after I was born you see. Which I can - I can remember the hardships of it because there were no day nurseries you know, nothing of that kind then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 How did the children manage while she was working at the mill?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Well, I think they all depended mo
re or less on Katherine - the eldest girl. She was the - she was a pivot - the pivot of the household when mother was away. Everybody turned to her you see. And I can remember almost as a little mother you see even - even when father was alive because - s
h
e had the job of bathing us, I can remember that, you see we'd no bath but used to bring a great mug on the hearthstone you see, fill it with hot water and the lads used to go out on a Friday night and she used to bath Emily and I and - do our hair - alwa
ys washed our hair and - looked after us you see, so that I should imagine that when mother was working the household turned on Katherine - you see, she was the pivot of the household - she was the elder girl.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did she go out to work herself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Oh, 
yes, she worked in the mill - yes. You see, that was why they were able to leave that up and down - just the back to back dwelling because she went out to work and probably would earn - well she would probably be earning at that time about twelve shilling
s
 a week which was a fairly good sum. So presumably when they got this income - this added income of her wages they would feel they could then afford a rent - a - a better rental than they were paying for this back to back dwelling, you see. Yes, she worke
d
 in the mill until the - well, probably before the - first world ward - and she hated the mill. Mother like it - she hated it. With the result that when she became more capable of sorting things out she decided to go into be trained for a nurse - she alwa
y
s wanted to be a nurse. And so - she went to a hospital - this would be about 1914 because they were then calling on girls to go to be trained for nursing - and she went to a children's hospital at Pendleton and took some training there as a nurse. And th
en I remember from that she got a post under the insurance act with {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Southport{\*\xmlclose}. I know she left {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Bolton{\*\xmlclose}, she left home and went to 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Southport{\*\xmlclose} for a few years during the early years of the war and then she went in for training midwifery and she passed her examinations and she became the first nurse at the 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Bolton{\*\xmlclose}
 - the they called it in those days the child welfare. The child welfare - it was a voluntary organisation started by Miss Reddish and a few enlightened ladies in the town - I think they were mainly Liber
als, enlightened ladies, and they started this babies welcome in a house in St George's Road, because of course the - the - the - the country was being decimated by the lads that were being killed you see and there was that urge coming forward that they s
hould look after their babies. So she then got the post and she remained in that post - she was very, very happy in it because it was the first time she'd ever really done what she wanted - until she }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13978893 Married
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 .
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 The house you lived in longest would be the one in }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Rankin}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  Street{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 That was the longest period, yes, yes, that was the longest.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did anyone else besides your parents and brothers and sisters and yourself live there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Oh no, there was no room. You see there were only two bedrooms and 
the division was mother and the girls slept in the front room and father slept in the back room with the boys and that was the arrangement and we never could have anyone staying with us because of course there was no room. We suffered - we suffered I thin
k by - we were never really hospitable because we never could afford it you see through this poverty.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Obviously your mother wouldn't be able to pay anybody to help in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Oh no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Would she have to make the family's clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 S
he mended and darned - I don't think she was very good at making things but she did mend and darn tremendously because you see she'd always the bed linen to be repairing - we never could afford new bed linen so they were always patched. And I can remember
 
when father was - these evening when father read aloud she was always sewing - sewing and patching. I remember the stocking darning that she did for the boys - it was tremendous - she never seemed to have anything in her hand but darning - darning socks y
o
u see, mending clothes. She didn't make many new ones but what - well, we never did have - I don't remember having a new frock until I was about fifteen years old. I always had to wear the other two girl's cut down. And - several times I've been accused o
f spending money on clothes but it was because I was denied so much in childhood that it made me - I thought well if ever I get enough any loose money it'll go on some nice clothes because you see I - I must have gone to school looking like }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 Josephs}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  coat of 
many colours because everything was patched, you see. I'd have the bottom part of a frock would be part of somebody else's - the sleeves would be a different colour, be out of something else, and altogether I - I must have looked a little queer - queer ch
ild you see. But that was the set-up - we'd no money - mother would never go in debt and consequently she - what she could patch up - and then Kathy - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 Katherine}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  - when she got older she did help to make pinafores and things like that you see that covered up
 this coat of many colours as it was you see, but certainly we never had any new things and if anything did come in at all it was for the boys - the boys were always kept - if there were any new clothes the boys had to have them. And I can always remember
 
the elder boy, John, you see, the eldest one - he used to have one good suit and the neighbourhood used to borrow it because they used to come knocking on the door - they were all as poor as each other you see - and he used to - to come - John came knocki
n
g on the door - can I borrow your John's suit. And if it was for a wedding or a funeral it was cheerfully handed round you see and this suit then came back you see. But that was the - that was the community life if you see. And things that did come in as 
I say - they were bought cheaply from the pawnshop - there was a pawnshop not very far away and mother went to the pawn shop every Monday morning - can remember as a small child going to the pawnshop and - if the pawnbroker had }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 anything}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  you see that had nev
er been redeemed he would sell then cheap to - to her, you see. So that new things - no, I never remember any new things coming in.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Would this apply to shoes as well as other kinds of clothing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Oh yes, we wore clogs of course, it was the age of
 clogs and - only the boys wore shoes you see and my eldest sister when, of course, she was going out anywhere. But we, Emily and I, the two younger, always wore clogs and we had a - a very cheap pair of shoes for Sunday. Either secondhand that were broug
h
t from - the secondhand dealer or perhaps a very cheap new pair that might cost about two and eleven in those days you see so that - and father - I will say that for him - he did mend shoes - if the boys shoes wanted mending he would mend them. And he had
 
a habit - a trick - we used to take the clogs to the cloggers to be ironed - you know, they had irons on the bottom, and there was a cloggers shop just near and of course it was a social event to us as children taking these clogs to the well, they were on
 
our feet. But we used to sit on a very long form in a very dark shop and watch the man - well, there'd be two men - putting the irons on the clogs. You see, they used to put the - all the nails in their mouth and - hammer them in from the mouth - it was -
 
it was a - it was a feat - I used to be fascinated with it and - but father when we'd got these new irons on he'd an irritating habit of putting leather - pieces of leather inside the - inside the frame of the iron so that they would last longer, you see 
again poverty. And I hated it because you see we used to kick our clogs against the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 sidestep}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 and sparks used to fly out and this was a real game and - but when you'd got this leather in between you couldn't - there was no spark. And I always felt a morsel o
f resentment against father for putting these leather linings in you see. Yes, it applied to shoes - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did he do anything else at all in the house to help your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 No, I don't think he did - I can never remember him doing any housework. M
other did all the housework - polishing the fire irons you know. We had - as a child we had no flooring - we only had bare flags - and mother used to keep it sanded. The floor was sanded you see, and I can't remember him doing - doing any - any housework 
- he would probably would think he was a dignified - he probably would think it was beneath his dignity, you see, that's a change. Men now do house - work and don't think anything about it but in those days it was rather }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 infra dig}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  for a man - he never even 
cleaned the windows. I can remember mother cleaning the windows and Kathy - the - the eldest girl cleaning windows - sit out on the window ledges you know, that kind of thing. No, he was a big reader and - but he spent a lot of time backing horses. And he
 
had - to this day I can remember piles and piles of sporting handicaps - that was a book you see, little book that the sporting world published with all the horses and all the races and he used to spend hours picking out what he thought were winners - he 
h
ardly ever won but - that was part of his occupation you see, until the pubs opened. But he was a solitary drinker. The worst type of drinker. I don't remember him going sitting in pubs - drinking. He used to have it all brought into the house you see, an
d I as a little girl was the constant person until the act was passed and then children }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 were not}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 allowed to go. But up 'til the act being passed I used to be the beer carrier - can always remember going with jugs for the beer you see and he would sit there 
hours with this jug of beer ruminating about horses and one thing and another. It was a tragic - a tragic man because he had the intelligence you see to have become something really. But that was it. No, I don't remember him helping in the house. No.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 He wouldn't even make the fires?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
No, no. I'll tell you what happened about the fire. In those days it was customary to - what did they used to call it now - they used to leave their fire in at night, they built it up. There was the old - they were o
ld fashioned fireplaces. And they used to rake the bottom - get the bottom red - and then they would pile coal on and then cinders right on so that it kept in, because you see, you must remember that they had to get up at five o'clock. And, I can always r
e
member this - this business - raking - they called it raking the fire - I can always remember it. So the result was that the fire kept in and mother merely raked all the dead ashes and cinders out the following morning but it was never re-set, you know ho
w
 I mean, like they do now with chips don't they - in fact I don't remember firewood at all - I don't know really how they lit - how they lit it when the fire went out, suppose they would have firewood but out fire always seemed to be in you see. And she w
o
uld rake it out in the morning and then clean all the ashes and then clean the hearthstone - polish the fire irons and then towards the weekend they were always lifted up and put onto the couch so that they had to be kept nice and clean for Saturday after
noon, you see, when they were put down again. No, and he had no hobbies which was - again - lacking no gardening you see, there was no gardens of course. Most of the - quite a number of the fellow - the parents round about had }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 pigeons}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  and kept pigeons as a 
hobby, but father didn't and no sort of keeping hens or anything of that kind. So that he'd really nothing in his life apart from just reading and - oh, I'll tell you what he did do - yes. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 
He was - he was anti-English all the time and of course, an Irishman and he got - he got somehow or other embroiled in the - round about - you know - home rule for {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}
Ireland{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} and Fenian movement and he used to spend a lot of his time with other Irishmen meeting in different houses. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Now what they were plotting or doing I - I 
was too young to know but I do remember this that we had a big - a - a huge box that was kept under the bed - under one of the beds and mother said it was full of firearms. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 
Now, that must have been about the time of the Fijian rising because he would go aw
ay for months at a time, we were always rather glad when he went, and we never knew where he was but he must have been propa - prop - doing propaganda work for the Irish because he would come back with no voice at all - lost his voice completely and - wit
h
 shouting I suppose and - so mother was so incensed about this that - because he - he used to come back in a terrible dilapidated condition and I can remember him lying on the rug so exhausted that we left him downstairs lay - lay on the rug and mother sa
id she'd got so tired of it all that - so she threatened him that if he didn't leave this Irish body whatever it was - home rulers - she would tell the police about these firearms because it was of course prohibited. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 And it frightened him, so with that - I 
don't know what happened to them, where they went to or whether - what - but it was so that the box was emptied and - but it - it prayed on his mind because I think the men who'd been associating with then thought he was a traitor to the cause because he 
became more and more silent - more and more shut in within himself - probably the one outlet that he had had gone, you see, and that - that - that arrangement whatever it was ceased and he was never quite the same man after. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 Everything seemed - his world ha
d collapsed you see, what little world he had it had collapsed to that what happened to that part of it I really don't know but he was a great believer in Ireland he always - his toast was we'll curse - we'll curse the English for the Irish Archers, I can
 always remember that before he drank his beer - that was his toast you see. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 So he was - it was a strange - a strange man and a strange father and - I've }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 tried}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  to - tried to be very just to him because I realise that probably he'd }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13978893 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  the wrong woman and she - my mother had }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13978893 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 the wrong man. Because she couldn't sympathise with the things that he sympathised with and he couldn't enter at all into her world you see. So that it had its effects I suppose on all the members of the family because we're a
ll shut up or we'll all inhibited - we lived our own little world you see. Which of course you only realize later oh - the pity of it - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did he do anything at all for you as children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Only taking us out. He - and this again was associated wi
th his drinking - I was his favourite be - being the last you see, the youngest and not knowing anything - of course I - I loved him passionately as a child. Largely because of his reading and his stories - he could tell - oh, his fairy tales were wonderf
u
l you know, the Irish fairy tales and I was thrilled to bits you see about it all, and Sunday mornings he would take - he would go out for a walk and he would take me with him but it was only later on that I realized why because he had to go the three mil
e limit to get to a pub to drink you see. So that was the only time I ever got to see the country and we would walk from {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Bolton{\*\xmlclose} to Horwich you see so he could get a - a pub you see, or 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Bolton{\*\xmlclose} to Turton you see. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 And I would sit outside in a little bowling gr
een watching the men bowl while he went inside you see and had his - had his beer. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
But that - those are the only things that I can remember him taking us to. Concerts - no, we never got any concerts. The fairground - yes. I can remember him on new year's m
orning always taking us - Emily and I - to the fairground and he would - try his luck on the stalls, you know, the three balls a penny thing and if he won - we liked coconut - there were coconuts for the prize you see - knocking the coconuts. And of cours
e
 if he won we would have these coconuts under our arm. No, I don't remember him - only those things stand out - going on the fairground you see, and if he didn't win - he was a bad loser - and he would start having an argument with the stallholder and we 
t
wo children were terrified you see because we - we felt they were creating a row you see and the police might come and I can remember struggling to pull him away from the stall you see, to take him away. Then when we got to the - shows, where the tightrop
e
 dancers where we used to be thrilled to bits watching these - these lovely girls, you see, asking you to come into the show and he would go to a pub and then meet us later and then of course take us home, you see. But we never got any social life with hi
m
. He never went to concerts, never went to church and seemed to take very little interest in our schooling apart from one thing which I was grateful for - he did not believe in the half time system and although we were wretchedly poor he would not allow m
e - allow Emily or }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 me}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 to go half time. I was grateful for that because most of the girls who lived in the same street always went half time you see in those days and - when I was at school I can remember the girls who were - who were on the half time system
 you see they would start work at six o'clock in the morning then they had to go to school in the afternoon. Well they were so tired they'd just fall asleep and the teacher being sympathetic wouldn't waken them you see so they got very little schooling. W
e
ll I will say that for father he - he definitely refused that - that either Emily or I should go half time you see so at least I left school at thirteen but it was better than going half time at twelve see. That was one of the things - his principles were
 
right - his principles were - were often very right - he was a Socialist and - but it was his inability to - to kind of put his principles into practice - he - he didn't seem to have the - either the character - they staying power to put his principles - 
i
nto practice. Now I'm not saying that was all his fault because the other members of the family were terribly opposed to him. There was always this friction, you see there was always rows going on - always. As a child I used to be terrified. In fact mothe
r
 once said that she wondered that I'd grown up without heart disease because there was these constant - see, as the boys got older they would not submit, you see, and he would be drunk and there would be terrible fights and I used to go out in the street 
s
creaming you see, I was terrified and I'd - other neighbours would take me in you see and keep me in their house until they thought this - you know the squabble had died down. And - it really - in many respects it was - it was pretty awful and yet I think
 
if there'd been somebody that could have perhaps talked to him and reasoned with him instead of the - they were - antagonistic all the time. My sister never - the elder one - never had a good word for him because one of the things he did was when he was o
n
ce hard up he stole our holiday money and she never forgave him. It was terrible thing to do because she was working very, very hard - she never had a holiday in her life - she would probably be twenty-two - twenty-two or three then and she'd made arrange
m
ents to go up to the Lake District with a - a - another friend from the mill and she'd been saving in this money box and he broke it open and stole it. She never - she never forgave him. There was a terrible bitterness about it. And this was the atmospher
e
 you see. It was - it was really a - it was a tragic - and yet mother kept calm through it all. Now when I would come back from the - wherever I'd been - finding shelter, I'd find her - he would up - father would have gone upstairs to bed and she would be
 bandaging them - the cut heads and black eyes and she would be sweeping up the debris - he'd smash everything - we had a great big poker and I know he used to go round with this poker smashing }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15204880\charrsid11536143 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 verything up and she kept calm through it all, you know, and j
ust went on with the bathing and washing of the - you know, the broken heads and whatnot that had happened. Wonderful in her way, you see, wonderful in her way, really. But - a strange - very strange household. And now - no relief you see, the no poor rel
i
ef. You see there was no poor relief - no - nothing - you couldn't turn to anything in those days for - for any relief you see and it - it was wonderful how she coped with it all - coped with it all - without - without any charity at all. There was no - n
o - she - well in fact I don't suppose she would ever have accepted it. And I never remember her turning a beggar away from the door in my life. And poor as we were if anybody }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 knocked}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  on the door - and there was plenty of beggars in those days - she would a
lways offer them either a cup of tea - a pot of tea and a piece of bread or if we had no tea she - she'd give them water. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 Brutal}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  - never, never turned anybody away. And if she had a penny she would give it to them and - very, very, - she used to say oh wel
l never mind I might be in need myself sometime and - well, you see, I didn't tell you about my birth. This was - this was what I learned years after. The father had got a job in Ashton-under-}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 Lyme}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  and he'd written to the family and - in glowing terms. They
 were foolish enough to decide to follow him. Oh he said he'd got a house for them. So they were foolish enough to follow him. And - they went to this house in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Ashton-under-Lyne{\*\xmlclose}
 - it didn't last long because they were unknown to the people who kept the sho
ps - they wouldn't let them have any credit - oh he got - he got pitched out as usual - he must have had a row or something - and he was out of work. Well, nobody would help them - the poor law said they hadn't been resident in the town long enough, you s
ee, you had to have a residential qualification. The shopkeepers didn't know them and wouldn't lend them any strap - you know what strap is don't you? }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 
So the result was that they decided they'd have a moonlight flit, you see, the arrears of rent had run on 
and so father and the boys piled the beds - they'd only beds and a few chairs and a few things they'd taken with them - onto the lorry and mother and Emily - the other girl - and I was expected - trudged to the station and got a train but unfortunately th
e train only went to Manchester, and when they got off it was midnight - past midnight and they walked to Bolton, this was the story. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Mother and Emily carrying - no, Emily was only two - it was Kathy and Emily and mother. And Kathy and Mother carried Emily 
between them to Bolton - walking twelve miles and they got to Bolton at about something early in the morning - six or seven in the morning and mother collapsed on the couch and I was born premature you see. And - mother never forgot that and so she was al
ways kind to anybody that came to the door. She would never - she knew what destitution was you see. And so she always - she never told me - I never heard anything of this until - oh my sister was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13978893 Married}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  and then she said one time, well I'll tell you about
 how you were born. So I wasn't expected to live being a premature baby. So I was - my sister - now that was - my father never came in - she carried me as a tiny baby down to St }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 Patrick's}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  church to be baptized. He insisted on baptism but didn't go. And I'd
 neither godfather, godmother nor anybody else and the priest was just finishing benedictions she said and he came down the steps and asked why this child - she was only a child herself, twelve you see - was carrying this tiny baby. And she said, well, we
l
l, the baby wasn't expected to live and so it had to be baptized and he said well, where are the - you know - the sponsors. Well, there were none. So he brought one of the choirboys - alter boys - was just putting all the lights out in the chapel and he b
r
ought the altar boy to stand as sponsor for the birth you see. So I was even born in tragic circumstances. Yes. So you - but she never - she never referred to it once in the whole of her life but it was my sister that told me that - a few years before she
 died. And I thought, well, we were a tragic group. But - but I don't remember father ever facing up - you know - to the responsibilities - as a parent - in fact I don't think he ought ever to have been }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13978893 
Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 . He would have been much better as a bachelor. Plodding his own - going his own way you see. Un-untrammeled by either wife or family.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Your mother must have been a very wonderful woman.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 She was in her way for be - you see, an unlettered woman to be able to do that kind of thing you see and 
stand up to - and she always said to me, never get }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13978893 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 . That was her advice - never get }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13978893 
Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 . And I suppose it was really what she - she'd had to go through you see. But she never grumbled, she never talked about it. Only just occasionally she would
 just say, well, you live your own life but don't get }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13978893 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
. I don't say that that's influenced me at all but it could have - it could have done - could have done. What she went through. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Was it your mother that put you to bed when you were a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 young child}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  or did one of the others?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
No, it was the elder girl, as I say, Kathy. She was the little mother. We - we had a very simple rite of going to bed when I was a child I mean. We would undress downstairs and put on our nightdress - the two of u
s went to bed together, Emily and I, you see - and my sister would generally wash us, wash our face and hands before I went to bed, comb our hair and then we'd just knelt down and said our prayers and that was - that was always insisted on - we knelt down
 
said our prayers and then we just stood on the staircase - it was a little round staircase like that that went up from the kitchen and we had a drink of water - nothing to eat - and went off to bed you see. But it was always Kathy - nearly always Kathy wh
o it did that. If Kathy wasn't in of course mother would do it, but it was a very simple going to bed - there was no fuss or that you see and we used to lie awake telling each other stories until of course we fell asleep you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did you have to go at a certain time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Oh yes, we always used to go - I can remember seven o'clock in the very - when I was very little - it was never later than seven. No, we always had to go to bed pretty early. Yes, pretty early.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 And you had the bath night?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Was Friday night - yes. That was the hot bath - we never had a hot bath only Friday night. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Obviously your mother had a struggle to make ends meet.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Would you like to tell me a bit about meals and food?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Well it was - it was 
very frugal - very frugal - because of although food was cheap in those days what happened was that father and mother - that was perhaps one of the things he might have helped with I don't know - but they used to go down town Saturday nights and they used
 
to - wait - well off - just occasionally when I was growing older I went with them because I can remember Newport Street being ablaze with the gas jets and all the shops used to keep open 'til about eleven and twelve o'clock in those days. And the butcher
s
 shops - they all had their windows open and they would be all shouting their wares the fruiters and - all vying with each other. We used to go in the wholesale market and - they used to sell meat - they used to weigh it until about eleven o'clock - they 
w
ere selling off and they would get, oh, all sorts of things for about a shilling you know. You used to get a shilling bag with all sorts of vegetables - fruit - potatoes - vegetables - all sorts of things - a rabbit included for a shilling. And they would
 
get a great big piece of meat - very, very cheap. And that nearly had to last us a week. You see, it was always boiled - a great big piece of rump steak and that was boiled in broth on a Sunday with the vegetables you see and that - then you got a little 
bit of meat and some potatoes and probably a - a vegetable - a bit of vegetable. But the meat that was about the only meat we ever had all week you see. Cut up - done in different things - eventually in a stew, you know, that kind of thing. Well ...

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Would it last the week?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Well, it didn't last all week but it lasted quite a few days - probably until Wednesday - from Saturday to Tuesday or Wednesday it had to last you see. And by the time that we were sick of it you see. But mother did it up in dif
ferent ways you see - tried to make it a little bit appetising. Well, then I don't remember meat after - that - after about Tuesday or Wednesday I don't remember meat at all because what I can remember was Fridays when we had to have fish because of - bei
n
g Catholics, you know. And I hated fish and - so, what mother did - I used to be terrified because I knew I was committing a sin - I was always terrified of the - the ideas that they put into me at - the ideology you see. And - yet she knew I hated fish a
n
d when I got to the point of refusing to have it - and it was always the cheapest fish, I can always remember, they were garnets - and she would sometimes give me a penny to go out and I would buy a cake with this penny and that was my dinner. But otherwi
s
e she would buy a little bit of meat for herself - it would be probably in a mince - the mince meat you see and she would make something out of this mincemeat and she'd put a bit on my plate and I can remember to this day looking at it and saying but mumm
y
 it - it's a fast day. And she used to say - get it down thee neck, you see she talked - she spoke broad Lancashire. Get it down the neck and give oe'r - give oe'r mathering. And so I used to eat this meat. The result was I always had to confess it. And t
h
at terrified me going into the confessional box - having to confess, you see, that I'd eaten meat on a Friday. And - tea was peculiar because I can remember coming home from school and we had to stand round the table we never had any chairs to sit on roun
d
 the table, we had to stand, and there was no talking if father was there. Mum - you'd to be mum. And whatever she cooked they shared. Now this I think must have been the Irish in him you see, because other people didn't. But they just had one plate - fat
h
er and mother - and shared it and I can remember sometimes it would be one sausage and sometimes it would be a tiny bit of meat and onions - something like that. But he got the biggest share of it because she used to cook what bits she had up and give it 
to us as a treat. Just a little bit on the end of a fork, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 So that she would go without?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
She would go without - oh yes, she did, definitely - yes. Because - there was so there was so little and - father would take the biggest share of it
 you see - he would have a knife and he would cut his share and then she would be cutting what was - what was - the remains and just handing it to us you see, a little bit at a time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did you have plates?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Just occasionally - not often 3/8 no. The
y would just give it us on the end of a fork and we'd put it in our mouth and that was that you see. We had bread - bread and margarine of course - mother baked - she baked her own bread and I can always remember baking days - they were lovely. And she us
e
d to bake a lot of what we called plain flour cakes - you know the plain flour cake - and put them against the door to cool - against the door jamb you know. And they were lovely and all fresh cakes - not often butter - just occasionally butter - but most
l
y margarine - it used to be lovely. And we had black treacle I remember and - never syrup because I often wonder - but syrup of course was dearer you see. And I used to go with a cup to the end shop for a pennyworth of black treacle and I was always fasci
n
ated because they weighted the cup, you know, they weighed the cup first - and I used to wonder why - why they put the cup - the empty cup on the scale you see. So we got this pennyworth of black treacle and then we could put that on our bread you see. Br
e
akfast time I remember nothing only porridge and just - just bread. Father was very fond of porridge and so there was always a big pan of porridge made and - we had milk - milk wasn't dear in those days. And so we had a - a - a - a - we didn't have plates
 
- we had a bowl of porridge. Basins we called them in those days, and we each had a basin and you got this porridge put in and then you got a sprinkling of sugar and then the milk on and you ate it that way and then just a - a thick slice of bread - we us
ed to call them butties. And - but no luxuries at all - can't remember any luxuries.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 You never had bacon for breakfast?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Oh no. I never remember - no, no, I never remember. Bacon must have been a real luxury because I don't even remember them havi
ng it - my father and mother - although it's possible that occasionally they did because when I was about six I used to go to a lady's house who was a little bit higher up than us and she had she had one or two babies. She was a Welsh girl and - she used 
t
o send me to this end shop - her husband was a cotton worker but only getting fourteen shillings a week - he was a little side piecer - so she had hard work with these children you see, and she used to send me for two pennyworth of bacon and cheese. And t
h
ey used to give you a little bit of bacon and a bit of cheese for the tuppence. Or twopennyworth of sausage - never had - never was more than tuppence I remember that. Twopennyworth of sausage and cheese. Perhaps one egg - something like that. And - I use
d
 to watch her cooking it and - you see, it was an open fire and they had a kind of a thing that hung on the bars and they put this - skewered the bacon on - a piece of bacon and they had a dish underneath and it caught the - we called it dip, you know, th
e
 fat dripping and it always used to smell so good and I used to think ooh I wish we could have that. We never had it you see, it must have been a bit of a luxury - but she got it for tuppence you see. And I don't remember - I don't remember much - much va
riety in our diet - jam occasionally jam - or this black treacle.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 That would be for tea?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Tea - yes. And marmalade at - at - I never tasted marmalade until I was about seven or eight and then I remember one of the neighbours sending me for a pot 
of marmalade and when I came back she said - would you like a bit on a buttie? And I said yes. And then I didn't like it because it was a bit bitter and I'd never had it before. I came of course to love marmalade later on. But those were things - bananas 
we never had - bananas were just beginning to come into the country. Bananas were strange to us - tomatoes I never had. I remember the lady next door giving me the first foreign tomato and thinking how horrible it was because }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 we were}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  never accustomed to any
thing like that. We used to have a bit of lettuce because it was very cheap - we used to go for a pennyworth to the gardens and they would give us, ooh, tons of lettuce and - stick of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 rhubarb
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  and mint and quite a lot of things for a penny, you see. We used
 to have it tied up in a - in a handkerchief. That kind of thing we had. The only time I can remember any luxury at all would be on Christmas Eve. And mother went out of her way to make a special kind of function because it was Christmas Eve. And there sh
e
 would cook some meat in the oven which was always very nice and tender and - she used to bake - in addition to just bread and cakes - she would bake currant bread and a few scones and things like that. And I always used to look forward to it because it w
as such a treat to have these extras, you see, compared to the bare diet that we had during the week you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 You didn't make a practice of having anything special on Sundays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 No, apart from mother baking - she used to bake what was called curran
t flat cake-flat cake now - well, she used to bake that at weekend and we had that for tea. But it was a long time before ever we got any tinned fruit or anything of that kind - that was sort of out - outside }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 our}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  means, you see. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 And - oh fruit pies - occas
ionally she would make an apple pie - special for Sunday or a Whinberry pie something like that you see which I can always remember that going out with all my lips blue to show the kids that we'd had whinberry pie you see.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Would that be for dinner or for tea?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Oh no, tea, that was tea - yes. Sunday dinner was always the same - always. I never remember anything only this broth. We always had this, you know, scotch broth. It 3/8 mind you it was very good because she used to put little dumplings in a
nd it made it very, very tasty - tasty meal. But I don't remember - ever having, you know, a joint or anything like chops - no, I never remember chops. And - it was very - very meager. And we didn't have cups and saucers until Kathy - that was the eldest 
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 sister}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 - decided we were going to go a bit polite. We had basins and we used to drink the tea out of these basins, you see. Well, then she decided that it was about time we had some refine - refinement - so she bought a set of cups and saucers and I know - 
I can remember how delighted it was with these cups and saucers - thought how fine we were you see. And it was the same with curtains - we never had any long curtains - we had short curtains - you know - short lace curtains. They are fashionable now but t
h
ey were for the poor in those days. And I can always remember making a promise to mother - the first wage I fetch home, mummy, I'm going to buy a pair of long curtains. And she said - are you? And I said yes. And I remember the first wage I ever got was f
o
ur and eleven and I called at a drapers shop on the way home and I bought these four and eleven - they were four and eleven - the exact wage you see - and they were long curtains. Oh, I was thrilled to bits. The idea that for first time in our lives we'd 
got a pair of long lace curtains you see. Yes. Yes. I - I remember a lot of those things - they stand out you see. But food was very, very frugal - very frugal in those days - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Apart from your special Christmas Eve food did you have a special Christmas dinner?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
I never remember any turkey or anything of that kind - no. Just occasionally mother would buy a piece of pork for new years day or Christmas Day and she would cook this pork which was, of course, we appreciated it very much because it w
as something new you see, and she would make stuffing and that kind of thing. But I never remember Christmas pudding - never remember any Christmas pudding until I got much older.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did you used to have puddings at dinner time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Well mother used to
 make some kind of a pudding - that - I know had currants and raisins in. I don't know what sort of - it was a whitish kind of a pudding that she made in a big dish. There was a lot of flour, you know, probably a lot of flour and then some fruit put in - 
c
urrants and raisins and we used to have a kind of a slice of that for a sweet sometimes you see. But that - that was - she never - I wouldn't say that she was an imaginative cook because she'd never any time you see and she'd never learned anything becaus
e
 my sister - the eldest sister - she got very finicky about food and she used to say - mother never could cook - mother never could cook. But then she'd so little to cook with. But I - I didn't really blame her, but my sister was very finicky. And I can r
e
member when I got old enough I had to take her dinner to the mill and - mother used to be at her wits end what to put up for her because she had - a bad digestion and she hated the mill and she was rather a melancholy type of person and so you - sometimes
 mother would make - she was very good on }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 potatoes}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 pies, you know, the Lancashire diet - she was good on that, And so she would make a potato pie and so she would scoop some out and put it in a basin, cover it over and tie it up to keep it warm, you see, pu
t it in a basket and I had to carry this to the mill. Well, when I got there of course the meal break was on - the hour meal break - and all the machinery would be stopped and I would have to weave my way through - through all this machinery to find her. 
A
nd by that time she would have washed herself - she was very, very particular about her appearance - she would have washed herself. And you see, there were no canteens or anything and they used to have to sit having their meals behind the machinery and so
 
she would be on a little roller sit reading a newspaper about three of them shared a newspaper - the intelligent ones - you see, shared a newspaper. And she would be reading this newspaper and she would open this potato pie and on her - the look of disdai
n
 on her face, you see, I remember it yet, and I suppose in a hot stuffy mill it would be awful, you know, eating potato - hot potato pie and I used to be anxiously watching that she would leave some in the dish because she was a poor eater and I was hungr
y
. You see, with having been at school, had nothing to eat, gone right on, and so usually she used to leave about half of it, so I could then scoff it up you see. And - she would just have a jar - oh, a can of tea I used to take - a can of tea with me and 
s
he would have a drink of this tea you see. And we would remain silent most of the time - she didn't talk much. She never told me much about the mill although I knew how intensely she hated it and then she would just say it's about time you started going b
a
ck if you're going back to school. And so then I had to pick the empty things up and then to back to school you see, for half past one. But later on when she got that she'd more control - especially after father died - of course, she did start introducing
 
things into the house you see. And - mother would never have an alarm clock you see, we had a knocker up who used to come knocking on the windows as you know at five o'clock in the morning, and he was an elderly man and Kath - Kathy wanted to buy an alarm
 
clock but mother wouldn't have it. No, she said, he - he'd been coming all those years - thirty odd years or something and he would - she would keep on with him and it was only about threepence a week, you know, that we paid him - until he died you see. W
e
ll, the alarm clocks came in and they did - did away with the old knocker ups you see. But mother was very loyal to him and never would have the alarm clock. And she was the same with an egg boiler - she wouldn't have an egg boiler. She used to boil eggs 
y
ou know, silently counting sixty - sixty seconds to the minute and we all used to laugh at her and the boys especially used to try to joke her out of it and - but she would sit there solidly you know, rocking in the rocking chair with this egg boiling you
 
know on the fire and she'd count - they would try to break her off it you know - telling her all sorts of funny things - but she used to have a face like one of the - you know pharaohs monuments and she'd count her - the egg was done to a turn. Anyway Kat
hy bought - brought home an egg boiler from one of her holidays but mother never - never had anything of it. She didn't think they were boiled as well as they were with counting sixties.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 The people who went to work would get up about five o'clock?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Would they have their breakfast on their own and then the rest of you get up later?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Yes. I used to - you see, with being in the same room as Kathy, she had to get up you see and I used to hear her of course, I used to hear the man knocki
ng on the - tapping on the windows you see, with these wires and in winter feeling how lovely it was not to have to get out of a warm bed you see. And Kathy would go down - dress herself and go downstairs you see. Well, this was a horrible custom but it w
a
s the custom. They used to put a great big - ooh, tremendous tea pot full of tea in the oven before they went to bed and that tea was warm then, you see, in the morning - it was always black. And they used to cut their own bread and - get this tea out - t
h
is teapot out of the oven you see, and have this warm tea and then off to work, you see. Well, when I had to get up, of course, I began to realise how awful it was. Getting - getting out of bed you see at five o'clock in the morning - I hated it too. And 
-
 but Kathy was - think she was singular in that she - the - they must have been having a hygiene class at the Labour church and she came home full of cold baths. Well we had no bath so it fell to my lot, being the youngest, to fill this bath tin every nig
h
t and carry - well, I used to carry the water upstairs - the bath tin was upstairs - and I would carry buckets of water and mother used to say - oh, you're too full - oh she used to say some funny things to us. Oh, she used to call me a silly bitch. She s
a
id - you're two silly bitches because she was watching all this water drip up the stairs you see, out of the bucket. And I'd fill - fill this bath tin with cold water and then I would wait and Kathy would get up and I'd hear her gasping and splashing you 
k
now, and - then rubbing herself and the bed used to shake you know, and I used to think, oh, I wonder if I - if ever I'll be able to do that, you know. And it carried on for years, this business of carting this cold water - that was well, determined us th
a
t when the boys were called up we would get to a place where there was a bath you see because it was such a lot of trouble because I had to fetch it down, empty the dirty - the water out and I'd started following her you see. After she'd gone she'd leave 
t
he water in so when I got up I used to do this cold - absolution, and it was funny. But there were - there's some queer things about it - I never liked getting up at five o'clock in the morning. I never liked this horrible black tea that came out of the o
ven, you know. And all that it was - pretty awful.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 When you were a child you got up later?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Later - yes. And we had our breakfast - yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 And who would there be there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Well, there would only be Emily and I and mother and father, you
 see. And often father wouldn't get up if - especially if he'd had a bit of a spree, you know, the night before. So usually there were just the three of us - mother and Emily and I and we had this, as I say, this porridge and this bread and marge and then
 of course, we went off to school when we'd started going to school, and if before I went to school of course I used to go with mother to all these places where she did her - did the washing you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 About what time did you get up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Well, I should
 say probably about half past seven to eight. Never later than eight - eight o'clock - no. We never were late - we were always taught to be punctual - punctuality was one of the things that father did insist on and we never went late to school and we - I 
don't think we were ever late anywhere we were going we erred on the early side, you see, we were packed off pretty early.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 At dinner times?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Yes, we came home to dinner.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Would everybody apart from Emily come home for dinner?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 No. Kathy 
stayed in the mill, you see, Kathy stayed in the mill. And - but the boys came home because they - they were working at different places apart perhaps from the elder boy, John, might not have always come home. But most of them did - the other two did. And
 - we more or less had our dinner together, you see. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did you always have the same places round the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 No, no, I wouldn't say we all - it was rather a scramble as to who got there first you see, and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 This would be standing up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Yes, to standing up - yes. Until the boys got older and they then wouldn't stand up so they used to drag a chair up to the table, you see, but I as a child I don't ever remember sitting at the table. Until I - I got much older of course. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 When you were very little would your mother take you on her knee do you think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
I don't remember a great deal of love - no. She wasn't - she wasn't demonstrative at all and I don't remember kissing her a great deal or her kissing me. I don't think she wanted
 children you see - I don't really think she wanted children and father now he was sentimental and I would kiss him and hug him and put me arms round his neck because he was - he was the emotional one but not mother. No, I don't - I don't remember a great
 deal of - patting and petting and that kind of thing you know. No, I don't - I don't really remember. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did you feel that you were close enough to be able to confide in her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 No, I was an in - I was a - I was - we were all inhibited. I don't re
member ever - ever really confiding - just occasionally I would say things but she - she - rather queer. I remember once when I'd started to go to school we all got punished for something we hadn't done. Somebody had done something in the class. I don't k
now what it was, and the teacher came round and caned us all. And I was so }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 incensed}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 about this that I couldn't give over sobbing and I came home from school almost broken hearted - not at the actual caning but at the indignity you see, it was the indignity.
 And I remember trying to tell mother about this feeling, you see, but she just simply shrugged it off and she just said - oh, well you must have deserved it. You see, must have deserved it. And I don't remember that I ever did confide a great deal in her
.
 For one thing I think she left us to make our own judgements. Occasionally, you see, I would say - well, what would you do? And she would say - now please yourself, you've had you've had - you've had the education I didn't have, you ought to know what to
 
do. That was her attitude. Rather than saying well, let's sit down and talk about it - she never seemed to have time to talk, you know, she wasn't a talker really although people liked her - they always used to say she's a good sort is your mother. And bu
t in the home no, she didn't - she didn't talk much. I only remember once, we were all reading and - I used to have to be }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 the}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 person who read to library - went down this scale see - the older ones did it then it dropped to me. And every Monday night I had t
o go take a bag of books to Bolton Library and change them, because everybody had a book out. Father would have a book, the lads would have books, Kathy, Emily and myself. And I used to go and change these books and it wasn't an easy system because you di
d
n't - you didn't have open libraries then you know you had to go to the counter and look whether it was in or out. Yes. And I used to spend a lot of time and - you were not allowed in the reading room - children weren't you know. And occasionally I would 
sneak up into the room but me clogs always gave me away on the stairs you see, and I'd just picked a nice picture book - a magazine - when the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 caretaker}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  would come in and shoo me out, you know, like a blinking animal. And I always think about it now, how lu
cky the children are to be able to go in the libraries. And anyway, I came home with all these books, well everybody started looking whether this was the book they wanted because often I'd to get other books if they weren't in and my choice would probably
 not be theirs and so everybody was - you see. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 
And they'd all started reading and mother was sitting there and then all at once - I shall never forget it - she jumped up and she says quite angrily - it was very rare she was angry - she said, I might as well
 go out - it's nought but a deaf and dumb school. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
And - I though to myself - deaf and dumb school - so I just said - you know, well would you like me read you a bit of this - my book. And she said - what is it? I says - it's Alice in Wonderland, I says let
s follow Alice in Wonderland. And do you know, she was wrapped in that - wrapped up in that book and it was the one book that she asked me to read before she died. Strange wasn't it? Yes. I said mother would you .....
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Was that the first time you had read to her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Oh no. I read to her many times but that happened to be the book you see. And says I we'll have that. No, she used to like love tales. And I used to get, ooh, quite a lot of very - you know, would we call them very }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 romantic}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  now. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 Oh she l
iked Hall Caine - I used to read Hall Caine's Eternal City and things like that to her and - but she got quite interested in this Alice in Wonderland, you know, about her going down this hole, you know, and I had to read it all through to her and - of cou
rse that was - she liked that type of imaginative - I suppose it - it did something inside her you see. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
But she would like - she would like novels and when I used to get to hard words that I couldn't say she used to get quite impatient and I used to be stru
ggling over this big long word - she used to say - call it Manchester. And so it would be Manchester, And then - you know it was rather funny, but it made me a good reader. Made me a good reader. I was best reader in the class at school - I - I was always
 
being called on to do the reading especially if the inspector was there. But - she - yes - she was strange that way. But confide in her - no, I wouldn't say - and I was a child that was very I don't remember confiding in people - even the teacher - I was 
a
lways shy, terribly shy. And we had - we had several pictures - I can remember to this day these old pictures that we had on the wall and never would ask what they meant and I used to climb - when the - when the house was quiet and empty I would climb on 
a
 - on a chair and I would be looking at these pictures trying to make out what they were - who they were, and it was years before I really tumbled to what one of the pictures was. And I used to look at this figure - these figures, you know, and I could ha
v
e asked you see but I was never encouraged to ask somehow or other and then quite suddenly at school we were given the story of the prodigal son and it flashed on me like that that this was the prodigal son. I could see these figures draped in these cloth
e
s you see and the old man coming forward and the penitent kneeling down and then - somebody that looked like an angel but it wasn't an angel it was a - bringing a cloak out to put - and it took me I don't know how long to fathom this picture - and then al
l
 at once - yes, the story of the prodigal son and I raced home that day and - oh, I thought it was wonderful - I thought I'd achieved something marvellous to have realised it on my own what it was. And I can remember a lot of that - I never did - never co
n
fided in the teachers - never told them anything and - I missed a lot through it - I missed an awful lot through it but - I suppose that was part of our inheritance. We all were the same. We never confided in each other. Emily used to say to me later on i
n life, she used to say, wasn't it funny that we never could talk to each other? And I said, yes, it was queer - no, we never could talk to each other. So there wasn't much communication - no, there wasn't much communication.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Were you allowed to talk when the grown ups were talking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Oh no. No. No, you see very early was embued the idea that you were a listener - you had to be a listener and we were all good listeners - I am today, I can listen easily. But never a very good talker especially if oth
er people were talking. And - no, we never were - never really encouraged. We were just encouraged to be listeners you see. Like the old saying you know, you have to be seen and not heard. It was very prevalent in our family. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 That's why I marvel at the chi
ldren today you know, how the parents allow them to - the - they - they interrupt on all sorts of occasions don't they and they never - hardly ever are chastised but oh, we were - very severely. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 If we spoke out of turn.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Which room did the family have their meals in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Yes, well, of course there was only one room in which you could have it - that was the living room. Because it was just a living room with a kitchen behind you see which was a very dull place compared to the living room you see, so th
at all the cooking was done on the fire - it wasn't really a - couldn't call it a kitchen range but it was just a fire with an oven - fireplace with an oven - and - and the - all the cooking was done on the open fire you see, boiling or braising or cookin
g in the oven.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 This was in the living room as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 In the living room - oh yes, it all had to be done in the living room.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 You said your mother was not an imaginative cook but she did bake her own bread?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did she do anything like making jam or preserving fruit or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
No. No, that seemed to be out of her range. What jam we had it was bought in very small quantities you see and the same with pickles and - they were just bought - pickles you see, and of cour
se she'd no knowledge whatever of wines or medicines - she had no knowledge. She didn't -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 She didn't concoct anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 No, she didn't - oh, well now, perhaps I ought to qualify that because father did brew herbs and of course mother helped him. }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 Sarsaparilla}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 herbs and dandelion wine - that was one his perhaps hobbies. At a certain part of the year he used to go out and collect dandelion roots and - make dandelion wine and also herb beer. We called it herb beer - it was really kind of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 sarsaparilla}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  
you know. And he used to make that in the kitchen - in the back kitchen, I mean, not the living room - the kitchen. And bottles - they used to bottle it you see. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 This would be a lengthy process?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Oh it was because you see it had to have balm
 in, you know, yeast and then it had to be allowed to ripen - ripen, you see, so that it was a - a rather long process yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 You said your mother allowed you to eat meat on Fridays because you didn't like fish - apart from that could you choose what yo
u wanted to eat from what was available or did you have to eat a bit of everything that was cooked?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Well, there wasn't much choice - no. It was a question of it was put before you and you either ate it or left it. There wasn't much coddling, you know
, as there is today, asking a child does it like this does it like that - it wasn't - it wasn't a problem at all. The problem only arose for me - I was the only member of the family that intensely disliked fish and mother was not bound by her religion not
 to eat meat on Friday so I shared with her whatever she managed to cook unless of course, as I told you, before she gave me a penny then I went out for a bun. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 If you did leave food uneaten on the plate - you didn't always have plates did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 No, we didn't. At dinner of course we did have because you had to eat off a plate. Dinner we did have plates. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 If you did leave something uneaten what was the attitude?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 Well, of course, you - you got scolded, you see, as to why you were w
asting good food, and usually we managed to dodge a little bit by - we always had a cat - by surreptitiously letting the cat eat at least some of it up for us you see, to avoid getting into too much hot water.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 You said meal times were something of a s
cramble but if there was something on the table that you wanted that was out of reach, like the salt, could you ask someone to pass it to you or did you have to wait until it was offered?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Well, I'm afraid our manners were not very cultivated and I'm 
afraid it was a case of stretching over and grabbing it rather than any more polite motives.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Were there such things as second helpings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Well, there were - you could have second helpings if there was anything left in the main dish, you see. Moth
er would cook whatever there was and bring the dish onto the table - give everybody a helping from the dish, you see, and there did happen to be any - anything left over, well usually the boys got it because they were the hungry section of the family you 
see, and usually the boys got it rather than the girls you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Was there any formality attached to your leaving the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 No, I'm afraid there wasn't. I'm afraid there was no such things as may I leave the table, you see, it was just kind of - 
people were coming in from the mill, coming in from the - their work and the boys were coming in you see different times - people just went - members just went to the table - got what was available and then just as hurriedly disappeared either to go and w
ash them - selves or read or something of that kind. There was no formality about - really about either coming to the table or leaving it. Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did your parents bring you up to behave towards your brothers and sisters in a particular way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Ye
s, I think mother did. I think mother was a quiet but very effective person in giving us at quiet an early age a sense of responsibility because I can remember when I was quite small having to do certain jobs in the house you see - we all had to do someth
i
ng. For instance, the boys had to chop wood and bring coal in. And my sister - the elder sister, Kathy - helped with the sewing and always with the ironing after washing. She did all the ironing you see. And I remember my first job was looking after the -
 
the W.C. - well, it wasn't a WC really - at the bottom of the yard. You see, you had to do something. And I remember how - how I put quite a lot into that - cleaning it you see, scrubbing it - and - I - I - I remember - you know, you used to have newspape
r
s in those days for toilet paper - and I remember thinking oh, how untidy that is and - I must only have been five or six - and I remember getting a lot of fathers old handicaps - you know, I told you about him having little books - and taking the pins ou
t
 and then stringing them all together, you see, as kind of toilet paper so that the place would look tidier than these bits and scraps of newspaper all over the floor, you see, and we were all more or less in our turn expected to do that kind of thing. Wh
e
n I got older we had to help with the housework you see. There was - if a floor had to be scrubbed or sanded well, we had to do it in our turns you see. The boys, of course, didn't have to do as much as the girls because in those days there were the old f
a
shioned idea that boys didn't have to do chores in the home, you see, they were rather regarded as cissies if they did. So I suppose mother con - allowed herself that because - I know we used to grumble and say why aren't the lads doing something? And she
 
used to say, oh well, you know, they're lads - they're lads, you see. And - but we girls certainly had to take our share of responsibility in running the home. And another job that was mine that I remember I did with great diligence was looking after the 
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 aspidistra}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 . We had a huge }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 aspidistra}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  and it had a quite a - a formality and I had to stick it overhead in water in the sink every week you see and I had to polish all the leaves, nip off the faded ones and then put a final }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 polish}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  on it you - then bring it b
ack in it's place of honour on the sewing machine - on the top of the sewing machine. And it - I can tell in looking back that mother had an idea you see of making us feel we were part of the home but we had responsibilities and we were not allowed to go 
running out into the street playing unless we had done our particular jobs, you see. So there was a discipline - yes, I think there was a - it was a kindly discipline - I don't think that she ever forced us but - she sort of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 maneuvered}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  you into a kind of habit as it were that these things occurred and it was your place to help you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 What kind of people do you think your parents hoped you would be when you grew up
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 How old would they be? Well, if they had any ambitions about us they never - they 
never expressed it. One of the strange things. I never remember my mother sort of quietly expressing sort of any hopes about us because she had been reared in that hard school where children were not given any choice, you see, of occupations and it was cu
s
tomary very definitely that if the mother worked in the mill, the girls followed her, you see. And consequently she assumed that there was nothing wrong about girls leaving school - my sister at twelve and I - Emily at thirteen and I at thirteen - and the
n
 going into the mill. Perhaps - I don't know whether I ought to say this now - perhaps that might come later about leaving school - does it come up later? Would you rather me talk ...? Well, I - I don't remember father ever - suggesting that we ought to s
trike out, you see, we ought to be ambitious. We were never taught to be ambitious and we were never taught to be pushing and - it was only when I came very near school }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 leaving age}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  that my sister - the elder one, Kathy - was so }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 anxious}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 that I should try to 
get a scholarship in order to do better than she had done by being pushed into the mill and the school I was attending of course was a Roman Catholic school and at that time they were very laggard at - they were behind the ordinary - they were board schoo
ls in those days you see - and they were very much behind the ordinary school in }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 offering}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 scholarships and my sister was so anxious that she tried to persuade me to leave the Catholic school when I was about ten and go to the nearby board school. But of cou
rse I was such an ardent little Catholic that I couldn't dream of it - I just thought it would be - you know - absolutely disloyal to everything that I'd been taught and - although in years - years afterwards of course I realised that her - her advice was
 
sound because they had no scholarships and they allowed me to leave, you see, at thirteen and sort of without offering anything in the way of further education which made me always a little bitter and then - then when she said - when Kathy said to mother 
- I - I don't want Alice to go in the mill and my mother seemed a bit taken a back that - anybody should suggest that I didn't you see.
\par And - so I got the first job I got after leaving school was in a shop in town and - but - I - I - I'd no training for a s
hop - for a shop assistant and - I did my best during - oh, I went on a month's trail - I did my best on this trial but it was a fancy goods shop and - rather a - I don't know whether I really ought to - to say this, but there was a lady in charge of it -
 
no, she was the owner. And her husband was a little demure man who only came in the shop now and again and who had an office upstairs where he did sight testing you see. And the little man I got on very well with - but the lady - I think she took a dislik
e
 to me because I was very timid and very shy and - although - so - she never told me that I wasn't satisfactory she - but she sent a little not to my mother and she said I was a good clean girl but I would never make a shop assistant. Probably she was rig
ht because I don't think I would ever have made a shop assistant. So that ended that. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 
And of course there was a terrible lot of unemployment at the time and I spent weeks and weeks going round - nobody ever went with you}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11536143  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 
see, and - I got very weary - of thi
s business of going to offices and shops in town and tobacco works and all sorts of things and - it was always the same reply - they would look you up and down and then say they would let you know but at the present they had no vacancies. }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 And so mother got
 a bit fed up with this business of me traipsing round and getting nowhere and so at the last she said to me, I can always remember it, I think thee'd better get thee clogs on and go in't mill. You see, that was what she knew. And so I did it - I was so w
e
ary of the rebuffs. You see, often you - you walked miles and then you'd get to an office and it would have on no hands wanted, you see, and things like that and so in sheer desperation I went into the mill. Although I felt it was a mistake because I was 
n
ever happy - never happy there. But that was how - but you see there was no guidance - there was no guidance from mother because - perhaps I ought not to blame her because she'd never known anything else, you see. Father was the one who might have taken t
h
e initiative you see, but didn't. And - so there was really - there was very little guidance in those days because there was no - no bridge whatever between leaving school and being dumped into a factory None whatever. No bridge at all and consequently no
 
training schemes - you'd no training. You were just thrown into the place amongst the deafening terrible machinery and you were put with an elder person to learn the particular process, whatever it was, you see. And I was always scared stiff - the early d
a
ys in the weaving shed because of these terrible flying shuttles and the dreadful noise you see, but - being in it was a question of staying where you were. So I couldn't say there was any - any - any real encouragement or guidance to do anything else, on
ly follow that pattern, you see, of going into the mill, you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Did your parents bring you up to consider certain things were important in life - you mentioned your father was strict about punctuality and your mother tried to encourage this sense of responsibility. Were there any other sorts of things?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Well, I should say - he was - he was exceptionally clean and he - he certainly put that standard before us. We always had to be - we hadn't to come in dirty and running to the table with dirty h
ands and things like that. He was in that sense very - he was very clean himself and punc - he liked punctuality of course. Now he did introduce the outside world which I think was - benefit to me in after years although I couldn't follow very much of wha
t
 went on in the discussions that took place between him and the older boys. But - he was, as I mentioned before, a radical at heart. He was rebellious because he felt that Ireland had suffered terrible what with - you know, the potato famine and all the p
o
verty and that kind of thing, so that he was in rebellion and he - he was a good reader and he brought the news into the home. We always had to have newspapers - however poor we were there had to be newspapers. And - he - he was a big reader of Robert Bla
t
chford who at that time was the editor of the Clarion. Clarion came out about the year that I was born and this Clarion had to be bought every week and of course it was Socialism you see and the - I forget their names now - but they might come to me - the
 
books that he wrote you see - Merrie England was one and - they - they were - all these books that were recommended and published in the Clarion father tried to get you see. And consequently there were - constant discussions going on about the injustices 
that existed you see, and what}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15204880\charrsid11536143  to do }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
about them you see. And although he called himself a Liberal and never joined the Labour party he really was at heart - if he'd lived longer he probably would have been a member of the Labour party because the other - th
e younger people - the older people in the family all became members of the Labour party you see. The Independent Labour Party as it was then you see, and Emily and I and Kathy - the girls all joined the Labour church, you see, and became more or less str
o
ng Socialists you see, and I put that down to the fact that he did bring these problems into the house - oh, he was very keen on home rule for Ireland and he used to read aloud to mother the discussions in Parliament - it would be Gladstone wouldn't it - 
about Gladstone period - and - home rule was very much in the air - home rule for Ireland I mean, and consequently these were the discussions that I began to absorb as it were.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 What did your parents think of swearing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Oh, well father was a terrib
le swearer. He couldn't hardly speak a sentence without an oath in it. And mother, I think, took it all for granted - she disliked it but - it was no use - probably she did at times say to father you }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 ought}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  to be more careful about your language in front of
 the children but it was impossible for him - it was - almost every sentence you see. And consequently I grew up with a terrible vocabulary of swear words. I didn't used them, only probably - when I grew a little older perhaps in desperation I would say o
ne or two naughty words but the vocabulary was there all the time you see and I never heard the boys swear. The boys didn't - didn't imitate him in that. He was the one heavy swearer and mother probably had }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 protested}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  time and time again but it had been no u
se so she'd simply accepted it as part of the - part of the economy. So I've never been shocked, really, by all this - as quite a lot of other people have been, you see, that came in good stead on the bench when I became a magistrate - I could see the oth
er side of so many things, you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
You said your mother had a gentle means of disciplining you and your father was rather hasher. Can you remember any particular occasion when you were punished for something in the home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Well, I can remember one
 outstanding occasion - mother never - mother never hit us - mother never was vicious at all and I don't think that she ever - if we did anything wrong she didn't punish us. I can remember on one occasion when I was only quite a tiny child and I'd gone ou
t
 with her - I told you about the homes that she went to - she went to shop - shopkeepers mainly - and I would sit amongst a whole pile of dirty clothes and she was busy washing and I came across a very lovely little pink doll's frock - a knitted doll's fr
o
ck - I'd never seen anything like it before, it was so beautiful - that I purloined it - I had a little pinny on and I put this thing - this little - and took it home. It was the first time that I ever remember stealing and - when I got home I remember dr
e
ssing this shabby little doll that I had in this lovely little pink woolen frock and standing the doll up and thinking how beautiful she looked, she was like a little princess and - eventually it was discovered, you see, mother saw the doll in this. Now I
 
can't remember her saying a word to me about it - all that she did was to take the frock off the doll, put the old one back again and return it to the - place it had been taken from. And it had a remarkable effect on me, even as a child. You see, she didn
'
t scold me, she didn't slap me but she - she did the right thing in taking it back you see, and she had a trick of saying when I wasn't naughty, and I must have been a naughty child quite often, she would say now if you don't be good I shall run away with
 a black man - that was enough. You see, there weren't many black people in Bolton at that time but we had a family of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 Ice Cream}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  people called Doriswami and immediately I thought it's one of the Doriswami's that she's going to go away with, you see, and I w
as terrified and every day I went to school I would run home as fast as my legs could carry me to see whether mother was there. If she was there I'd drop my load of grief and anxiety but if she wasn't I used to say to myself she must have gone away with t
h
at black man. And it taught me one thing - never to say things like that to young children because I can remember the terror that I was in. But that was her method. She probably didn't know how much anxiety she was causing to her little girl by her remark
 but she never - she preferred, I think, that kind of thing to hitting you or punishing you or sending you to bed without supper.
\par Occasionally we were sent upstairs after we'd been extremely naughty just with a drink of water you see, but - the only real pu
nishment was father with this strap and he would land out, you know, whoever was nearest caught it you see. And I remember on one occasion when he was recovering from a bad bout of drinking he got up very late and he was very - funny about his food and - 
I
 often remember seeing him pick a plate up off the table with the food on and throw it behind the fire, you see, and swear heavily about it and then of course stalk out. Mother would never say anything, she would never retaliate and this Saturday morning 
m
other had gone out shopping - I was at home from school - and he - he told me to go to the butchers for a pennyworth of liver and I raced off to the shop because we lived quite a distance away from the place where I was born - you know, the Milk Street su
r
roundings and Shore Street - and this butchers shop that I was sent to was in Derby Street and I went for this pennyworth of liver and I came back with it and I put it on the table. Father had got the frying pan out to fry this liver for his breakfast - l
o
oked at it and was furious because he said it was full of kernel. Now I suppose kernel was the white streaks of white that's sometimes in liver and in his anger he - he came like that with me and sent me spinning round the kitchen and I fell - from the se
v
erity of the blow. I was astounded because he - he had never hit - never hit me personally like that before - he was rather fond of me and I was staggered you see, to think this brutality should fall on me when I'd done the deed of running to the butchers
 
and fetching the - and he told me to take it back and bring the penny back. That was more humiliating than ever. So I had to race back to the butchers shop and I waited outside until everybody had come out - there's quite a lot of women in - and I waited 
u
ntil they'd all come out and then I went in timidly and I put the little parcel of liver on the counter and I said - please, daddy says that it's all kernel - can I have me penny back. And without a word the man opened the drawer pulled a penny out, took 
t
he offending liver off me and raced back home with this penny and listened whether father was about, then I crept in, put the penny on the table, then I raced out for life. And that stands always out you see. But that was the only time that I remember him
 
sort of striking me but he did strike - he did strike the lads an awful lot until he got big enough really to retaliate on him. Yes. Everything that he was angry about he lashed out, you see, at something or - or somebody. But - that was the only time I c
an remember him ever - ever being sort of cruel to me. But it stayed with me for a long time.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Would you say that you received the ideas you had about how to behave from both your parents equally or did one play a more important part than the other?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Oh well, I should say that I got most of the - the ideas of how to behave more from my mother than from my father. Yes, I should think she definitely - in a rather silent way, you see. Play had - had a big influence on us and on me especially. Yes, she
 - she was the one although I can never say we were pals, you see, I can't say we were pals. But - it was strange that I was an }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 acutely}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  sensitive child. Now, where I got that sensitivity from I don't know - it might have been part of father's Irish ancestr
y because I believe that the grandmother on his side - his mother - was - well my mother always said what a - what a lovely women she was you see, I don't know but - the - I - I remember as quite a tiny child - going with her to the pawn shop and I used t
o
 like very much going to the pawn shop and I used to watch her parceling all these things up on a Monday morning, and then we'd trop off to the little - the pawn shop. And I liked going because the man who - was in charge of the pawn shop was one of the D
a
ly's - the Daly's that have the pot shop now in the town you see, there - and he had character and he used - he never used to look at what was in the parcel - he trusted her, although there were all sorts of odds and ends that wouldn't have been any use t
o him, you see - as pledges I mean, but he used to put it up on a great }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 high}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 shelf and I used to enjoy it because he used to make her laugh and she didn't laugh often and - he used - oh, it did used to delight me to see her laugh and they would chat away ab
out different things in a different manner than I ever heard her in the home, you see. And there was a - a big notice on the grill - they had a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 girl}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  and he sat behind this grill and I never used to be interested in the small letters but they were two big t
hings in the centre of this notice that always attracted me and every week I went as I began to be a little older I used to try and pick the letter out. And finally I found that they were pledge and redeem - the two letters and do you know I always - I th
o
ught later in life I thought how lovely - what lovely letters they were - pledge and redeem, you see. They were really about the parcels you see - pledge and redeem - but I wove it into a kind of fantasy of the - the loveliness of those two words and I wa
s
 overjoyed when I - you see, I never asked anybody - I was never a questioning child but I was determined - it fascinated me you see, so much, and so that I always enjoyed going with mother although we were more or less silent you see and then after we'd 
m
oved in childhood from the house, you see, where I was born which - this house was in Milk Street. Now I think that that place I'd been a farm because there was a - a - even though I was only four when I left it I can remember distinctly - there were a lo
t
 of stables in the yard, you see, and there used to be men coming to put horses in these stables and I would be asleep in the morning probably when they came for the - for the horses but at night I used to look forward to the men coming with these horses 
to bed them in these stables and - I can - I can - think that Milk Street got it's name you see from possibly a farm - an old farm you see that had been there. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 
Well now, when we moved to Rankin Street - - mother used to shop, you know what I mean by shop - 
strap - at a - at a shop at Shore Street and she was a - an old friend of mother's - they had worked together in the mill together and this - she was called Kitty - Kitty Key - and Kitty had a - a husband who'd been a miner and he'd had an accident in the
 mine and got some compensation so she'd opened this little shop you see with this money which was very prevalent in those days - the little corner shops, you know. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
And, well, every week after she came to live in }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 Rankin}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  Street she still did her shopping at }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 Kitty\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
. And so I would toddle off with her to Kitty Keye's and I used to look forward very much to this outing because they used to plank me on a seek of potatoes while they had a good old chinwag, you see, and I can remember it was a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 higgledy-piggledy}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  sh
op like most of the corner shops were in those days and so I used to pass me time trying to make out all the adverts that were about, you know, telling you what the goods were and of course other people would come into the shop and me mother would always 
s
ay - oh, you can serve her Kitty. So - she would serve and they would go, well, I used to hear an awful lot of conversation about bad husbands - it must have been an era of bad husbands because nearly every woman that came in Kitty Kaye's shop talked abou
t bad - bad husband so I got a kind of aura in my mind that most husbands were bad knowing that my father wasn't a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 gent}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 and - but the - the joy of the visit always ended with a slice of ship canal cake - I don't know whether you've ever heard of that before
 but it was a cake that came out as - at the opening of the ship canal - the Worsley ship canal - they must have called this cake after this ship canal and it was a square piece like that and they used to cut it across like that for a penny - mother could
 
get a slice of this so she used to give it to me so I used to munch this ship canal cake in joy - sit on top of the potato sack and feeling as though life was very good. But of course later on - when we came a little bit better off, we had to transfer to 
t
he Co-op - the Co-op shops you see. But the interesting part was that neither Kitty Kaye nor my mother could read or write yet both of them knew how to reckon up and - shop was only an ordinary house, you know, two rooms like this and a back kitchen and t
h
e door leading out of the shop was all - they had all chalk marks on and they had a - a system of being able to reckon up themselves because mother never payed - she'd strap for a week and then paid the week after you see - when - when she'd got the money
 
off the boys - wages you see. And yet it was amazing how they never made any mistakes. They all knew - mother used to reckon up and she used to say I think Kitty's charged me a penny too much or a penny short for that you see and - she'd remember it in - 
i
n her head and they would settle it the next time. Well now, the transfer to the Co-op was interesting because I was only a little girl and - we were not well enough then to shop at the Co-op but other neighbours used to send me and what I used to be fasc
i
nated with in the Co-op stores was that they had about eight tubs of different brands of butter and margarine you see, and of course they were open to the customers and the women as they came in, they used to pull a little coin out of their purse - a sixp
ence or a threepenny bit and go around tasting all these butters, you know, for the flavour and I used to think - ooh wait }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 till}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 I'm grown up and I can do that. It seemed wonderful to me to be able to go and taste these - little bits - snippets that they too
k out. But of course that didn't last very long because hygiene came in and the Co-op had to put a glass case, but anyway the shop men - they were all men in those days - very obligingly - if a woman asked for half a pound or a pound of butter he would br
ing samples on his little pat - you know, pat - the - yes - and let her taste it you see. Well, I always remember they had a lot of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 oatcakes}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  on the counter - we'd never had oatcakes at home and so we kids used to go in on - they had chairs then you know, fo
r you to sit on. This was wonderful to me compared to the - the things you have nowadays where you have to walk round 'till your - your knees are giving way - and the women of course used to sit down and they used to have quite }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 leisurely}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  chats, you see, telling the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 shop man}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 all about their home and whether their husband was in work or out of work and things like that and so we used to like this with our elbows over this oat cake and when the shopkeeper turned his back we were nipping lumps off you see and k
eeping it under our pinny until we got outside and ate piece - pieces of oatcake. But those are little bits about the shopping you see and the corner shops because they were fascinating to me. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 We had a corner shop up the end of Rankin Street and we used to
 run in and out you know for penn'orths of this and penn'orths of that and I can remember the - the Irish labourers who used to come over in great numbers you know to help with the harvests and things like that and of course navies - you know, the navy - 
a
nd they - they were very, very poor and they used to come in for a penn'orth - a pennyworth of tea and sugar, and they used to give them a spoonful of sugar and a spoonful of tea in a little squirl of paper for a penny and they even used to ask for tea du
s
t - the dust that - you know, the big cans - the caddies - and when they were emptying the - when they got down to the bottom the shopkeepers would keep this dust you see in a separate container and they would sell a pennyworth to the - these navies - the
y for a penny they'd take a pennyworth of tea dust to make tea out of it you see which showed the acute poverty, you see, that there was in those days. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
And yet it was always a lively place and there was always somebody good humoured and there was an old lad
y - not an old lady - a middle aged lady used to come in and she used to sit on an upturned box and she used to say to the - Mrs Walker - who kept the shop - you can serve 'em, you can serve 'em, I've only come out o'road of yon lot - yon lot she used to 
c
all 'em - you lot - and so she would sit quite a long time while different customers came in and out and then when she'd sort of got refreshed she would say - well, I'll go back - I don't want out Mrs Walker, I've only come out of road of you lot and I'll
 
go back now. And she used to go out, you see, it had refreshed her - just sitting in this little corner shop you see and I remember this Mrs Walker when I got much older once saying - she said - she - she couldn't - she wouldn't like to think of leaving t
h
is shop because of the entertainment that she got, you know, with the different customers coming in and that so there must have been a - a charm really about those little old corner shops - there was - there was for the poor anyway. Yes. Yes, it was part 
o
f the community life you see, yes, yes. And of course you could strap you see. They liked you to pay ready money but if you couldn't or didn't they didn't bother as long as you - you paid up at weekend, you see, or something like that. Yes. I've gone off 
what you were talking about - yes, you were really talking about the influence of either punishment or how we were brought up wasn't it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did you celebrate birthdays in any way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Well if we did it was in a very, very minor - minor way - they don't
 stand out. They don't stand out at all as being a kind of festival. No, I - I - if we did get a little present it would be a very, very - very poor thing because I can't remember - I can't remember having anything that was sort of any value you see. }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 No I 
- there would probably be just that knowledge by wishing you many happy returns or something like that - I don't remember being given presents or buying presents really - until I was much older. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 I don't remember it - not in childhood - no.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 You didn't have anything special to eat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Not that I - not that I can remember. No, no, I can't remember. We missed all those little niceties I think - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 You did say that you had pork as a luxury on Christmas Day.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Oh yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Can you remember how you would spend your Christmas Day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Well, Christmas Eve stays in my mind longer than Christmas Day. Christmas Eve stood out because as I said mother made a special effort and we always had a very, very nice tablecloth on, we weren't often - we hadn't }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5603085\charrsid11536143 often}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 had tablecloths on - it was just a clean scrubbed table you see. But on Christmas Eve mother always found a very, very nice tablecloth and of course to pacify father there was always a bottle of whisky stood in the centre of the table you see. }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 
The only time that I do remember any expense - expenditure on spirits you see, but on Christmas Ever there was always a bottle of whisky and then the best pots were fetched out, whatever nice pottery we had, it was brought out on that evening you see and 
- the food was always very nice you see because she would always - cook some kind of a piece of meat - very, very slowly in the oven 'til it was very, very tender and then we all had a very nice slice of this and probably something else - pickles or some 
savory or something with it, you see, and then her own made currant cakes and that. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Well after the table was cleared away we all had to gather round the fire while we talked - they told ghost stories. Father had a - oh, a good - a good repertoire of stories
 and he would start off with some old Irish ghost stories 'til our hair was nearly standing on end and - and this would go on for quite a while then he always - it was part of Christmas Eve to read Dickens's Christmas Carol aloud - and he used to read it 
a
nd then he would ask us which part of the carol we liked best. Well always Emily - Emily and I always plumped for little Tim and the dinner - the goose you see, the goose that they had and mother, for some reason or other, her favourite was the churchyard
 
with the old tombstone of old Scrooge where he sees his name on the tombstone and the neglected and why I - I just don't know but that always appealed to her and she always insisted on that part being read and the lads liked there part where they were rev
e
ling in the warehouse, you know, where they had all the dancing and that kind of thing on. It was funny how different ones in the family chose different sections of the - of Christmas Carol and then after that the younger ones had to go to bed and we alwa
ys shouted up the chimney of course what we wanted but don't know as we ever got it.
\par And - we hung our stockings up and then the following morning of course we were up by about five o'clock, scurrying downstairs to see what we'd got in our stockings 'cos th
ere was a rail across the fireplace and they were hung on there you see. And usually it was - a sixpenny toy of some kind or other and an apple and an orange. And so Christmas morning was, as I say, they were very simple things that we got in our stocking
 
and of course practically alike because mother never liked giving one - one of us - Emily - diff - more than me because she was two years older anything like that, and they were nearly all similar things and - but always if the finances of the family were
 
fairly good they would wrap a threepennybit up in a little bit of silver paper and that was a great joy to us because we never had any spending money - at the most we got a ha'penny - a halfpenny on Saturday - that was about the limit of our pocket money 
i
n those days you see. So that when we - we squealed with delight when we found a threepenny bit at the bottom of the toe of the stocking and we were very - we were never - sort of resentful about knowing that other children had got much more than us - som
e
how or other, I don't know whether it was just quiescence or not, but I don't ever remember sort of feeling jealous about other children in the street who might show us much more expensive toys or anything of that kind. And Christmas morning was generally
 
spent with us going up around to other children in the street showing them what we had got and they showed us what they had got and - but it was always - I will say that, it was a day when the family were united because they all came home to tea - they ca
me - we had Christmas Dinner of course with this pork you see, and then everybody - wherever they went - the older ones - they did all return home to tea on Christmas Day. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 
So that those were two days - Christmas Eve and Christmas Day when the whole of the f
amily were more or less united and father was kept of course in a very good temper by having this bottle of whisky and - there was kind of peace at home as you might say for that - that those two days, you see, and that threepenny bit we reserved until Ne
w
 Years Day when father took us down on the fairground you see and we used to - we used to walk down to the fairground from Rankin Street feeling like little Rothschilds with this threepennybit screwed up in our first you see because we'd been warned not t
o
 put it in our pocket because of pickpockets and we used to plan a penny in the pea saloon - we liked peas you see - we spent a penny in the pea saloon, a penny in a showground - now what did the third penny go on - I'm not sure if it wasn't - if father d
idn't win a coconut we bought a slice of coconut with it. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
But it was so that we all had it planned, you see, what we did with this threepennybit, so - that was how our Christmas more or less linked itself with the New Years Day, you see. But it - New Years 
Day was not considered anything like as important in the family as Christmas, you see, it was Christmas Eve and Christmas Day.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did you have any musical instruments in the home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 No. Might have a penny or a mouthorgan or something like that put i
n the stocking, but I mean we were never guided or - or encouraged really to be musical. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did anybody sing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Sing? Well, father whistled a great deal and we could tell by the whistle what was going to happen you see. Mother used to say that he
 was more dangerous when he whistled - because he nearly always lost his job. He would start spouting poetry and whistling when he should have been doing his job you see, he nearly always lost his job through it and - no, that was one of the queer things 
t
hat - I - I used to sing, but I must admit I sang horribly out of tune 'cos I didn't know notes or anything and in the street, of course, there were a band of singers - we were always marching up and down you know singing some kind of song or hymns and I 
w
as never guided at all until when I was about eight - at school the - the organist in the - in the chapel was a lady - a lady teacher - and she came round to test our voices for going in the church choir you see and singularly enough I got into the church
 
choir, although I can't remember that I ever sort of knew what key I was in and - but I did develop into quite a good singer and I have gold medal that I won in my teens in - singing you see in Co-operative Choral Choir - and things - although I had no tr
a
ining until I joined the Socialist Club and that of course is another story - I won't enter into that, but - mother never sang - I never heard mother sing. Father whistled - yes, and probably one or two of the boys would sing when they were washing themse
l
ves or something like that but we were not a musical family. My sister, Kathy, joined the - Choral Union when she was in her teens and used to often sing snatches of the pieces that they were practicing you see, at this Choral Union, but - I don't - I wou
ldn't say that we were a musical family until I branched out later, you see, as a kind of a singer.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did your parents ever play any games with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 No. I played - well, shall I say - yes, probably they did but father was a big card player and the 
- the lads and he used to play a lot of - not whist - what would it be in those days - would be - it was a card game - you know doing this kind of thing. Wouldn't be - it wouldn't be bridge because - no, the draughts - yes, they always had a draught board
 
and the boys were very keen on draughts and dominoes - dominoes were often played but mother and I and Emily often played snakes and ladders in - you know the cold winter evenings when it was too dark to - do much else and of course I always wanted mother
 
to win because I never like winning myself and - I used to dodge horribly, you know how you got your counter on the top of a ladder and you had to go down to the bottom, you see, you probably don't know snakes and ladders, but it was a card game of snakes
 and a lot of ladders, and if you got on a snake - if you got on the bottom the ladder - the number - you went up to the top of it but if you got on a snakes head you went to the bottom you see. Well now, I always used to }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 maneuver}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  that when she should get h
ome, you know, the winning post was home, and - I used to look at her face you see - I don't know whether she knew that I was - I was dodging or not - but I deliberately did it because I used to love seeing her smile and it used to pain me as a little chi
ld, I was so sensitive, her sad face. That is my mother's - a painting of my mother.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
You said there were plenty of books going in and out of the house and you mentioned the Clarion newspaper - did you have any other newspapers that you can remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
I can remember the - did you ever know Alan Clarke - he had a paper in those days called Teddy Ashtons weekly - it was a very well known Lancashire paper containing all kinds of Lancashire sketches, he was a Bolton man - who eventually, of course, wen
t to live in Blackpool and I - his relative - might be one of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 his sons}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 - did quite a lot on T.V. you know, when radio first came in. Well he had a paper called - it was the Northern Weekly really but it was christened Teddy }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 Ashton\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  Weekly and that always came into the house, you see, this Teddy }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 Ashton\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 Weekly and the Cotton Factory Times - they always took the Cotton Factory Times. Which contained all sorts of articles about mill work, you know, mill conditions and everything attached to the cotton indust
ry, well, it was of course a paper that was printed in Ashton-under-}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 Lyme}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 but went on for a long, long time - I mean I think it only went out just after - about 1930 - folded up about 1930 you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 You mentioned the Sporting World that your father had?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Oh yes, well, he - he had one or two sporting papers too that used to come in, yes sporting papers - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 You spoke about going to Bolton Library for your books.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 That was in High Street - that was a branch library - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Was the Co-op Library in existence then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Yes, yes it was. Well -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did you used that at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Not until I was older because you see, we weren't members of the Co-operative Society and you were supposed to be a member of the society to used the library bu
t later on when Kathy got - taking more charge of the household she insisted, you see, that mother stopped this business of shopping with Kitty Kaye and transferred it to the Co-operative Society so then we were eligible to take books and we did - we did 
- I did go down there, yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Somebody else said how much better the Co-op library was than the Bolton library.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Yes, well - where was the Bolton Public Library? Was it where now on the town hall square? Yes, I don't - I don't remember that lib
rary very well you see because I always went to High Street library which was the branch library and then the Co-operative - yes, we had those two - those two libraries - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Do you remember a funeral in the family when you were a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Yes. I
 do. Very, very - tragic. You see, this - about the boy you see, James that was the youngest boy. He had never been very strong - he was always ailing as a boy and - I can always remember the - oh, the tedious weeks and weeks when we had to have a bed dow
n
stairs in the living room - there was now here else you see and this bed would be in a corner like that you see and this brother was nearly always ill and it would last for quite a long time - weeks and weeks and weeks you see. Now, there was no health in
s
urance then you know, we'd only sixpenny doctors and - the doctor would come and we used to pay off - he would send a bill at the end of the time and we would pay off at sixpence a week. The collector came regularly every Friday night to pick up this sixp
ence - it was always put on the end of the dresser, you see, mother }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 religiously}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 would always insist that things like that had to be paid for - no missing them whatever happened. So that - now I can remember those dreary stretches you see of - of having to b
ring the bed downstairs you know and - this boy one day came home when he was - he was sixteen - I was about ten - ten - and he came home full of trouble and must have been in terrible pain and - mother immediately lit the bedroom fire and we put the lad 
i
n the bed that we - Emily and I - slept in you see - didn't matter about use, the boy had to have this bed you see where it was warm. And she hurriedly - she asked me to sit with him whilst she went for Doctor Beesley who was on Dean Road. I can always re
m
ember it because I thought I was cheering him up by singing and we had a rocking chair and I rocked myself back and forward singing and the poor lad was groaning terribly. And then when the doctor came of course I had to go downstairs and when the doctor 
h
ad gone mother says - he - he's very, very ill and he has to have - he'll have to go the infirmary and have an operation and I say - oh, why, what is it? And she said the doctor says it's twist of the bowels - that was appendicitis - that was it's special
 
name but they called it in those days twist of the bowels, you see. Now, she couldn't decide - the doctor told her to let him know that night that it was so serious. Now, when father came in - I don't know whether father was working at that time or just c
o
me home - just came in for his tea but it would be about six o'clock I know, there was a terrible row. Father said he was a Catholic - he didn't believe in surgery - and he said under no circumstances had the boy to go to a hospital. If he had to die he d
i
ed at home. Well, Kathy was absolutely furious about this and they had a terrible row, I can remember it to this day, poor mother was in the midst of it - not able to say, well I - I'm with Kathy or I'm with father. She was with Kathy but - whether she ha
d
n't the courage to stand up to father or not I don't know - but it was so that when she had to go to tell the doctor - the doctor that - he - my father wouldn't agree to the operation. Well, the following morning the boy was very much worse. I went off - 
s
he told me to go off to school and she was left alone in the house. She suddenly realized that the boy was practically dying and so she rushed out to the - to get the doctor and of course when she came back the boy was dead, you see. Well, there was more 
f
urious rows after that, you see, because my Kathy - this sister, said straight out to father - you killed the boy. You see she jumped to the conclusion that the boy - might - he might have died - he might have been too bad at that time - but she jumped to
 the conclusion that - if - if he had agreed to the boy undergoing this operation, because you see, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 peritonitis}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 had set in, and so - ooh, it was a dread - it was a dreadful time because poor mother was worn out with grief about whether she'd made a mistake 
in not insisting on the boy being sent to the infirmary and Kathy - well, I don't think she ever afterwards spoke to father, unless she - she couldn't help it. It was a - a deadlock between them you see. The result was of course that I got a terrible shoc
k
 because I'd gone to school and I was coming home at dinnertime, coming down the - the top of the street was another little girl going up to the mill with the dinner and you know how children are, and she shouts across the road to me - Alice Foley - Alice
 
Foley, your Jim's dead. Well, the shock - I can - I stood frozen - almost frozen to the ground you see - didn't know - didn't speak - just took to me heels and ran home. When I got to the door Kathy had been sent for from the mill and she was outside weep
ing }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 uncontrollably}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 and - well, it was an awful household you see and consequently I have never forgotten what death can mean you see. And the worst feature of it was the after - the after feature was terrible because when I went back to school - mother insi
sted on me going back - she said you can't do anything - and I went back to school in the afternoon and of course I was crying bitterly and the nuns came to ask what was the matter. They were very kind but this stood out. They said had he been to church -
 
to mass the previous Sunday? And I had to say no. And they just shook their heads and they said oh, well, I'm afraid that he's either gone to hell or he's in purgatory. And that finished me with the Catholics. I never after had any faith you see. And it w
a
s terrible and I began to be ill - the pain of it all and - oh, it was dreadful - and I must have been ill for probably six months and I can remember the doctor said he couldn't understand what was wrong with me and I used to get suddenly attacks of viole
nt pains and the family didn't understand what it was but I suppose it was this inward grief, you see, a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 psychologist}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 now would know what it was but they didn't, you see, but - that part made a - a great - a terrible impression on me you see and of course i
t helped to shake my faith in - in father you see. I had been able to appreciate his good points but after that of course I - I began to doubt very, very much you see, whether he was as good as I - I had kind of painted him you see. But - I mean after all
 
- I realized afterwards that perhaps it had gone too far - perhaps the boy - you see hadn't the strength to fight against it - this twist of the bowels - on the other hand of course they might have saved him but - we always look back on it as a - as a ter
rible grief, because it was the first experience we'd had of death and to children it's - it's very deep - very deep. And you only realise what death means when it comes inside your own family. Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Do you remember anything about the actual funeral?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Yes, I can remember the actual funeral. Father insisted of course on a grave being bought on the Catholic ground - on their number three ground which was the cheapest you see. And he was buried of course by the Catholic priest and - I can remember it
 - it was all in Latin you see, it was in Latin. And mother - mother couldn't understand a word of it of course, we, Emily and I, who had listened so much to services in Latin at the church on Sunday could follow - follow quite a lot of it you see but - w
e
 were too - too sort of dumbfounded with grief to - to really think much about you see - much about the service - although years after I did of course have a good chat with one of the Catholic Priests in Bolton because I was then helping to bury an old la
d
y who had taken in tow, and - they were gabbling away in this Latin you see and I said to the Priest - isn't it about time - I said - you got permission from the Pope or whoever's permission you ought to have to say these funeral services in English so th
a
t people can follow you. And he agreed, he said, yes it was high time that - and so a few years after they did because now they do give the funeral service in English you see. But that stands out to me and the - the money that had to be spent on black. Yo
u
 see, we were so poor and yet it - we should have been picked out in the street if we hadn't all have been dressed in black you see and I can remember taking us to a cheap shop on Dean Road to have us black frocks made or bought you see for this special o
c
casion you see, first time in my life I'd ever had a new frock and it had to be the occasion of a funeral you see and I - I can remember all that very vividly and very clearly and I can remember my eldest sister getting a dress made by her friend who - wh
o
 was a milliner and a dressmaker on Dean Road and she insisted on having a velvet - a black velvet band let into the skirt and this friend was shocked and she said - Oh Katie - they called her Katie - now we called her Cissie in the home until later we ch
anged it to Kathy - and she said - oh, but Katie, we never put velvet on funeral attire. Kathy says well I'm having it and she always - and I can always remember this black dress with this velvet let in because later on I had to wear all her }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 hand-me-downs}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  y
ou see and I loved it - I loved this black with black velvet being let into the skirt, you see. And - and I used - I used to have to shove my feet into her shoes and she was very small and I had big feet and - you know I almost ruined my feet in childhood
 
by having to - you know - they were nice shoes - well, they were small you see and it attracted me small feet and so everything that Kathy had eventually came down to me you see so her shoes did and I used to crunch my feet into them - they were probably 
t
wo sizes too small. Anyway that - that's arising out of the tragedy of death. Anything else about the funeral because you know they always had a feed hadn't they? Yes, it was the practice. And I remember the - the relatives - we hadn't many relatives but 
what few came to the funeral. I remember they came to the house you see and had a tea and it rather shocked me you see to hear people laughing because I - I felt it was so tragic an event that I couldn't understand people }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 laughing}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  and chatting at a funeral you see. And I can remember that part of it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 You would have other relatives apart from your own family circle?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Yes, but we - we didn't visit them very much. We had an uncle - mother's brother who lived at Farnworth - and I remember a cousin or t
wo that I remember being taken to as a little girl up Halliwell Road, but we were never - kind of hospitable family you see, we never had - many friends or relatives visiting us. Just occasionally - just occasionally. Father had a brother who lived in Sco
t
land and I think we only saw him once or twice because he used to come - he was - he must have been in a show business - and he used to come with the fair on Bolton Market - so at Christmas time and New Year he generally popped up and - a queer oddity - w
e were always glad when he went back because he used to do juggling tricks and all that kind of thing and used to perform on the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 sidestep}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  outside the house and get a crowd round which was rather embarrassing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Do you remember having any outings with your parents at all - at Bank Holiday time or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
No, I don't remember any Bank Holidays. I do remember we had one holiday a year. What was a day at New Brighton - that was only holiday we ever had. As children. And it was very cheap you
 see, used to go on a day trip. It was two and nine at that time for a ticket return to New Brighton and we all used to get up very early in the morning about six o'clock and mother used to cut up all the sandwiches you see, we had to take all the food wi
t
h us, and - I remember - I could remember it was always boiled ham, you know, and either home made flour cakes or homemade bread and then her currant cakes. And father of course would be fuming and cursing all over the place because the lads were getting 
i
n his way. He didn't used to help much but - supposed to be superintending everybody and this was one of the things I do remember which always embarrassed me - in the early days when I was quite small - they didn't used to pay for me, you see, children co
u
ld go half price, and children under a certain age were free, and so for quite a long time they used to push me in between father and mother when they were going through the booking office, you know these stiles, and I used to have to crouch down and be c
o
vered by them you see until we got in the compartment and then you see, I was always warned that if the inspector came along or anybody to look at the tickets I'd to dart under the seat and they would cover me up you see with their knees which was very em
b
arrassing to me and - I was very glad when later on I sprouted up into a rather tall girl - they couldn't do it any longer. But anyway we used to go along to New Brighton and we used to think it was wonderful. I was always sick crossing the Mersey. The id
e
a that it was part of the sea I was sick you see and - but we used to have a - a very, very good time with - used to get a pennyworth of shrimps you know and you had a pin to pick them out - I - I never - I never liked them but the others used to have the
m
 and we used to - you know, dig sand pies and collect shells on the sea shore and we had pints and pints of hot tea - hot sweet tea - jugs - they used to sell - send you for jugs of tea you see, and then we came home in the evening very, very tired but ve
r
y happy that we'd had this day. But I never got another holiday to go away and stay 'til I was sixteen so that was that. But - not many outings - no. Occasionally mother would come to a field day with us - the Sunday school you see had field days and we u
s
ed to take our own cups you know tied - knotted in a handkerchief you see, swinging these cups along and the field days were usually held somewhere now which is Great Lever. We called it Green Lane and Georges Lane - somewhere about where Green Lane is no
w
 and - we used to go there and mother would accompany us but never father and - mother used to quite enjoy sitting about you see and having coffee and buns and watching us play games. She never - she never joined in anything and - then once - oh well, whe
n
 I was a child we - the people next door to use - that lived next door to us were members of the gospel hall, this was a little mission that was in Mare Street which is now leads down to Bolton Park you see, and nearly all the children in the street used 
to go to this - this gospel hall because every so often they had a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 tea party}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 - a free tea party, so we pestered mother so much that she would only agree on condition that we didn't let on to father, you see, that we were going to a gospel hall. And so we st
arted to go to this gospel hall and to learn their little hymns and prayers which were quite different from the Catholics and they used to give us a little ticket like that for all our }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 
at tendencies}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 . And then when you'd made about twenty }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 attendance}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  you wer
e entitled to go to a free tea party, you see. We did that for quite a bit until I think father somehow or other discovered what was happening and so the whole thing had to be stopped immediately you see. But I don't remember many outings because they had
 
no - they hadn't much money, you see, and the only outing we ever got was just to be taken what we called down - down town you know or - looking at the shops in the market hall and perhaps having a - a glass of ice cream, you see, sitting at a stall, you 
see, perhaps a penny - a penny cornet or something like that, but I don't remember ever being taken anywhere, you know, either to concerts or - anything that was - that might have been elevating, you see. No, I don't remember.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 You told me that sometimes you went into town Saturday nights for shopping.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Oh yes, in town.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 How did you normally spend your Saturdays when you were a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Well, I don't really think it was very much different than an ordinary day apart from going to school. Us
ually - we did part - little bits of errands and things a bit of cleaning up on Saturday morning while mother was out and - we were given our - you know, - our little jobs of cleaning up so that Saturday morning whilst mother was out mainly doing the shop
p
ing we would do the tidying up you see, cleaning the kitchen - we had - it was a whitewashed place, it was always to me a very dark disagreeable kitchen and we used to have to take the dishes and pots off these shelves and wash them and put them back you 
s
ee, and we'd always a dark rather miserable slop stone, you know, the stone slop stone which we used to try to stone, you know, with a rubbing stone in order to make it look a little bit cleaner and do the doorsteps - polish the door latch, you see, we ha
d
 a - we had a brass latch, which I was very proud of and we used to do all little jobs like that. Now in the afternoon we were more or less left to our own devices. And we either played in the streets some games or other or else we went to Queen's park - 
that was a - a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 favorite}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  place for us to go to. And we had another play ground - where - it was of course the ruins of the }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 old}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 Chamber Hall owned by some big Bolton family and they had had this hall knocked down - it's now where the new Pipes Lane - well wha
t was a new Pipes Lane infant's school was built and there is a housing estate there which of course was considered very modern in those days and we used to play amongst the rubble because it was a very, very good playground because there was a lot of san
d
 - it must have been a sandy foundation - there was a tremendous amount of sand to play amongst and there was a lot of different stones that we used to break up - we used to have pepper you know, and mustard and salt out these stones, we would smash them 
u
p you know and - make them very fine then we'd set out a little stall and with a sixpenny pair of scales what somebody would bring along we used to play shop you see, with these different commodities that were found amongst this rubble and then of course 
a
fter they started building there - our main recreation ground was of course going to the park and swinging - we were passionately fond of swinging and roly-polying you know down the - down the green. And then on a Friday night - if we - this was after whe
n
 we got a bit bigger and could do our own bathing - Friday night when we were children was always the bath night as I told you. But when we got a little older and we could do our own washing we used to go off to a spare ground off - on Dean Road which is 
n
ow of course built on, but it was the auctioneer ground for Balleys the pot people, you see, and he was a character and he - they used to have - put all the crockery all in a great huge circle on this open ground and they had those flares, you know, the -
 
the gas - gas flares all round you see and of course on dark nights it was very attractive so every Friday night we always trotted up there because there was always a lot of fun going on and we, the kids, used to be running round the edge of the crowd you
 see, there was always a lot of elderly people coming and he always used to tell - tell such funny stories, you know, that he used to have the crowd in roars of laughter and of course he sold anything from little chamber pots to nearly - }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 Venetian}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  vases, you
 know, his range of pottery was tremendous and he had an art of holding it up you know, so you could see the light through the china you know, and he would tell you all sorts of fantastic stories - he was a real character. Well, we used to go there - that
 
was one of our regular haunts - was going to Baileys pot - we used to call it Baileys pot stall, you see. Things like that we passed our time with. We were - a small community pretty closely knit you see and we used to go about in groups - not spending an
y
 money because we never had any to spend but - we used to have a ha'penny and of course there was a little - little toffee shop on Dean Road that we liked going to but was down steps, it probably had been a little old cottage at one time and we used to sp
e
nd an awful lot of time gazing in at the window deciding what the ha'penny had to be spent on - it was a very, very serious affair and then of course when we'd decided we all trouped in the shop, you see, and she was a very religious woman and she went to
 
Noble Street Methodist and - but she was very near with her - what we call near with her ways, you know, and the - we always wished she'd leave the extra toffee on but she used to pull it off you see, if it just - and then she would - before we left the s
h
op she would give us a tract you see - anyway - but we always felt that in spite of her piety she was a little bit sharp on her ways. Yes, it was a community - it was a kind of close knit community and we had to make our own - our own amusements by having
 
little - pin shows in the back yard, you know, and little magic lantern things, you know, and pay a button or a pin to come in you know, that kind of thing - yes. Oh yes, that was where we got our - more of our relaxation and amusement from rather than be
ing taken out anywhere.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 You played together with the neighbours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Oh yes. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 What about other members of your own family - was the age range too wide?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Well, the - at first when I was very small I can remember they boys congregat
ing in groups - particularly playing football and we - the younger elements - had to be on guard for the bobby coming because, you see, you were liable to be fined for playing football in a street in those days, you know. And so we were placed at differen
t corners to watch out for the bobby and we used to have to give the call you see if we saw a bobby approaching and then of course the lads all skittered in all directions you see. And Sunday they used to play }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 pitch and}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  toss at the corner of the back street, you see, groups of them - tossing a penny or - into the - into the - circle, and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 against}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 that was supposed to be our job - we - they called it nicksing - nicksing for the police you see. And I remember, they were often were fined and - but I do remember 
once - on one occasion they had to go to court - my brothers were in it - and they were fined five shillings each and you know the whole neighbourhood clubbed to pay the fines and they - they went and took it all down in ha'pennys. I can remember that. So
 }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 that}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 they - the boys did club together until they got older and of course then the war - the war came in and of course they groups were broken up you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 How did you get on with your brothers and sisters - was there one that you felt particularly close to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
The one that died. I was particularly close to him because he was the nearest you see, he was sixteen. But the other two were more or less remote - remote from us you see, the - they - as again - as I said before we were never a very loquacio
us group you see, we were nearly always either reading or the boys would be discussing football - football matches you see, with father, but - I never - I can't really say I ever got close to them. Possibly closer to them when they both left to go in the 
Army because then we began corresponding with them, you see, we had to write letters, so I was nearer I think to them then than I had been when I was a child.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Were you free to play with any children that you pleased?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did your parents discourage you from playing with some children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
No, no, there was no discouragement. No. It was a kind of open house, if you wanted to play with these children next door or if you wanted to play with somebody higher up or - it - it didn't matter - they
 just - all that they chastised us about was if we played ball against somebody's gable end - there was an elderly lady lived in one of these houses - she was a bit nanky - and of course when we played ball she used to say that we shook the pots in her cu
pboard you see. She would come out and complain to mother and we would be told, you see, that we had to stop playing ball there, you see, so then we used to have to seek another gable end where they didn't complain you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did you play games on a Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Not to the same extent as we did during the week. Sunday was rather regarded as a - a different day, you see, although - I - I - for a short time we were made to go to Sunday school - Emily and I went to Sunday - they had a Sunday school then at 
the Catholics - they don't have now. And we were told that we had to go off to Sunday school. Well, I found it was a child rather boring because it was just chapters of the Bible, you know, and this kind of thing and - but later on we gave over going - I'
m
 not sure whether the Sunday school was not discontinued. But anyway we - we ceased to go but we were a bit bored on Sunday afternoons and that was why we nearly always decided that we would go to the park. We nearly always went in a small group, either o
t
her children joined us or we went with Kathy and as a rule, sometimes they had a band in, but not often on a Sunday - mostly on Wednesday evenings, but we did often go to the park to listen to the band you see. But Sunday - in the main we - we rather cons
i
dered it a dull boring day, you see, it wasn't as interesting as the other evenings because you see we all played the - the old fashioned games in the street you know, ring-a-ring-a-roses and here comes the robbers. We'd a lot of street games in those - a
 
lot - and we were very, very happy especially the girls doing these singing games, you see, they were singing games and of course when it got a bit too dark to go in - before we had go in - we had a time that we had to be in you see, and that was strictly
 enforced.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Was this while you were still at school?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Oh yes, no still at school - we were at school then. And I was of course the champion fairy tale teller so after the game - when it got too dark to continue the games we used to crowd on an - t
here was an empty house - nearly always empty - plenty empty houses in those days - and we used to crowd on a doorstep and gather round in a circle and of course I would start telling them fairy tales because I knew so many and the other children didn't k
n
ow them and we used to stay there until we'd hear the doors opening and somebody would shout - Mary, you know, Alice come in, you see, and then we - disbanded and of course went inside. But - on the whole we were happy group of children, you see, fitted i
n very well in those days because you hadn't the traffic you know, you weren't always being interfered with - the streets were very quiet and we could play our street games, you see - different street games.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did you have special clothes for Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Well, yes, they - they were better than the things I went to school in - yes. Probably a more decent coat, you see - but still a }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15204880\charrsid11536143 hand-me-downs.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  not new. Probably my sister - the elder sister, you see - and mother would, or she would shorten it - alter t
he sleeves and that kind of thing, but it would be much better than how I went to school because often I went to school in mother's old cape, you know, the - the woman used to wear those beaded black capes, you see, and I must have looked like little Moll
y Rooney - with this little black cape on you see and - anything really - anything patched and darned and that but on Sunday - yes, we were - we were dressed a little better, you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Were you allowed to play in these better clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Oh no. Oh no
, no. No, if you used them for going to church you see, you had to take them off when you got home if you were going to go out, but if you were going to the park, anywhere like that you were allowed to - you weren't - you weren't being rough and you could
 keep the sort of coat on - the coat and dress. Oh yes, they were better on a Sunday but you only wore them that one day.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 You belonged to the Sunday school for a while?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Were there any Sunday School outings apart from the field days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
No, no. That of course was I think one of the - one of the things that the Catholic churches at that period were lacking in. It was all religion, you see, and the other the human side of appealing to children, you see, apart from the one outing - the fi
eld day - they didn't - there didn't seem to be anything - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did they have any other social activities at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Well, of course, the - the church that we went to - had an - what was called an assembly hall and - and of course it was rather a - 
a very good building - the top floor had a stage and it was used for plays and dancing - oh no, the dancing was down at the - on the bottom floor, because I remember it was a beautiful black floor - later on it was turned into a boys}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15204880\charrsid11536143 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  school and of course all got pot }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15204880\charrsid11536143 marks}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 and spoiled really. But it was a very big building that was built presumably for social purposes and I remember one or two plays that I happened to be in as a little girl being played there you see, in the top - top floor. And I can remem
ber bazaars - the - they ran quite a lot of bazaars you see. Things of that kind to get - make money - they were money making affairs you see. And then late on they did start - dances in the - in the - on the bottom floor but not very long after and befor
e
 I left school - the education authorities came and said that this assembly hall would have to be turned into a school or - they would have to build a new one. You see, the school was overcrowded. The girls school was separate from the boys and it - the s
c
hool that most of my - schooling was at was really very, very poor. We were all in one building you see - one class - standard three would be here, standard four, standard five and so on, you see, all - so the we all impinged on one another - you could he
ar what was going on in each others classes, you see. And I think the authorities must have come along and seen the state of the building and how old fashioned it was with no equipment - we had no equipment really.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid11536143  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15204880\charrsid11536143 Not r}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 eally. And they then insisted on this
 assembly hall being turned into the boys school and the boys school being extended for the girls. So instead of this one building that we were all in downstairs they built an outside staircase and we had then more classrooms above you see which was bette
r
. But the biggest share of my education was in this long, terribly bad - bad building you see. So that with using that assembly hall we lost a great deal of the social activities. They went, you see, there was no more plays could be produced there and the
 dancing went you see. Only in - in Sunday - at Sunday evenings - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 strangely}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 enough, they started to open the bottom floor again as a kind of social - club later on for younger people you see on a Sunday evening. But there was no - no other social activities that I can remember apart from money making affairs.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did you belong to the social club at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 No, there was no social club. You just went when there was some }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 event on
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 . No, they had no organized social club - none at all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did they have a temperance club?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
No, I never remember temperance being - being discussed or talked about. Don't think the Catholics ever - ever were a temperance body you know. They had people who were heavy drinkers you know. The Irish - especially the Irish part o
f the congregation and - they used to have an awful lot of raffles, you know, tables - tables - and I can remember to this day the amount of whisky and wine and rum and that - bottles - that were always exhibited as prizes so they mustn't - I don't rememb
er any temperance at all - any temperance instruction - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 That was quite different from the Church of England at that time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Yes, yes. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Was grace said at meal times ever in your family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 No. No. It was never said in the home. 
As I say we - we hadn't many niceties you see. Never said in the - in the home and I never remember it being said at any tea parties. It was never part and parcel of the kind of Catholic set up. Now, it was in the Church of England and the Methodist wasn'
t it? But never in - I never remember it - not in the Catholics. Assembly - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did you ever have family prayers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 No. No. I only remember Emily and I had to until we were quite big - to say our evening prayers before we went to bed. We knelt down
 at our either mothers knee or fathers knee, whoever was there and said these simple prayers but I never remember the family joining in at all - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 These were Catholic prayers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Well, I presume they were although I - I can't remember any of them
 now but they were only simple little things about bless father bless mother you see, thank God for a happy day or something like that. But I - I wouldn't say that they were Catholic prayers - I should rather think they were just bits and pieces that were
 strung together more or less ourselves you see. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 I wondered if it would be make any difference your father and mother being of different religions?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Well, that was perhaps why there was no kind of - as you say - family prayer. Because you see
, father being a Catholic - I don't know what arrangement they had made but I do know that mother had said when she agreed to marry him that if there were any children in the marriage they would be brought up Catholics and that was why she always insisted
 
- she used to say to us - now I'm having no bother - your father's a Catholic - you've been christened there and you must go there, you see. And so I should think it was that that mother not being deeply religious herself in the - in the sense of going to
 places of religion and father being a Catholic they had never more or less discussed any kind of family prayers or anything of that kind.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 You say your father was a Liberal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Yes. Rebellious one of course - not a conformist at all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Do you know why he was a Liberal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Well, I should think it grew out of his rebelliousness about Ireland, you see, and about things that were going on in the industrial world and - he was a socialist without really knowing it, you see, but if - if he voted at a
ll he voted liberal - largely because at that time there were no socialists being put up you see, or Labour people - not when I - I was quite tiny so that his vote always went to the Liberals, you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Was your mother interested in politics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 She
 wasn't interested in politics - no. She - she knew right from wrong and she knew what - what things needed attention, you see, she was - she was alert enough on that but of course her life was so taken up with - fending for the children and darning and m
e
nding and cooking and cleaning that she'd very, very little time to - become orientated as we say to politics at all, you see. But she would have been I - I think, very definitely if she'd had a vote - she would have voted Labour. Her sympathies were in t
h
at direction, you see. And of course Kathy had a big influence on her by telling her about the lectures and the discussions that went on at the Labour church, you see, she used to - she used to tell her things that were going on and mother had a profound 
f
aith that we were always right. She - she used to think that - well if they say so and they say that this ought to be done and that ought to be done - you see, Kathy used to say one of the things that ought to be done was the lengthening of the school lea
v
ing age - children ought to be allowed to stay at school long, you see. And mother used to say, yes, yes, that's right, but you know, after all you want their wages. You see, mother knew the economic difficulty you see. So I - I should say had women had t
he vote she would probably have voted Liberal or Labour, you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Do you know whether she would vote in the first election?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Oh no, there was no votes you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 1918 was the first one.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Oh well, but she died - she died before then - yes. 
Yes. Wait a minute - no, she didn't. Oh no, no. Oh yes, of course - it's coming back to me now - 'course she did - she voted all the time because I used to take her and - you see, I - I had the difficulty in telling her who - who she must vote for because
 
she couldn't read, you see, and there would be three or four names on the ballot paper. So I used to say, now mother, can you remember that it's the third down - the third name down? And she would say, yes. Now you know his name, it's so-and-so. And nearl
y
 always when she went into the booth she'd forgotten and she would call out in a loud voice when she got it - Alice, who did say I'd vote for? So the policeman used to come and I used to whisper to him and I used to say - it's the third on the list. And s
o he used to - point a pencil - she could make a cross you see - point to the third name, but oh yes - yes, she used to - yes, she voted all the time - I used to insist on her voting. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did you ever feel that there was any pressure brought to bear o
n your parents or on any member of the family to vote for a particular party by employers or the landlord or anybody like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 No, I can't remember any pressure because the landlord who owned the house in which we lived - we never saw him - he had a
n agent, you see, who picked up the rents, you see, so there was nothing at all ever came from there. Now, there might have been occasions when the priest in - in the service would rather lean towards suggesting that you might vote - they never told you s
t
raight out that you must - but - there were several people that they might favour - particularly if they were Catholics, you see, were in the - in the voting list. They - you were expected, you see, expected to vote for them although there was no pressure
 
- I don't remember any pressure being - being brought to bear on them about - father who would be voting then you see - any pressure being brought to bear on him to do that. There, could have been and probably was quite a - quite a lot of it going on but 
I didn't experience it - not inside our household - no.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Apart from your father's activities in the Irish home rule affairs was he active as a member of the political party?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Not - not - no, he wasn't active at all. As I say he was only active in 
the home rule controversy - and - to what extent - as I say - it was a largely secret, you see, his activities were largely secret but for - he wasn't a man who joined - who joined anything, really. No. He was a - to some extent - an isolationist. But he 
would discuss, of course, discuss and argue intensely about things but he never joined that I remember any organization.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did your mother have any interests at all outside the home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Not until she became much older. Not until she became much older 
because she was really weighed down, you see, and - and wasn't of course given a lot of encouragement., I think by any of us, to take an active part but after father's death and she began to take - she was of course a great one for helping other people an
d
 - of course in those days you see there was a lot of communal help. I mean if any of the neighbours were having babies or anything like that everybody shared in doing the work, you see. Mother would take the washing and she would go and help to clean the
 house, you see. She was always very good at taking a share of whatever was happening in the little community, you see. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 
But, of course later on when she was more free and we were able to move into a better house and that kind of thing, we did get her intere
sted in - one or two groups of people, particularly women - who, you know, had little outings - little picnics amongst themselves and that kind of thing attached to a - when we moved into Fern Street we were next door to a little Wesleyan chapel and there
 
was a group of women, you see, and mother joined them and was able to get a little bit of pleasure out of these outings, although she herself was conscious that she'd missed so much in her early life that she wasn't an easy mixer - wasn't - but still she 
did - she did try anyway to - to get interested in - in other groups.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 This question says when did your father get home from work in the evenings - that would be rather a difficult one to answer wouldn't it?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 When did your father? Well, if - if he 
was working his day would finish about half past five or six. He generally got in about six o'clock you see, but of course he was so seldom working that - that hardly - hardly fit - fitted him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 How many evenings a week would he spend at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 He
 was - he was in most evenings and that was always a big trouble to us because - we were happier when he was out of the house, you see, because then the - the boys were freer to do what they wanted and we were freer but as the years went on he seemed to g
e
t more and more - isolated, you know, and just wanting to sit - sit by the fireside, either reading or - always drinking and - he used to recite an awful lot and - I can remember the agony of having to be Desdemona. You see, he knew all the tragedies of S
h
akespeare and he would - he would enact them, you see, half drunk he would enact them. And he used to go stalking round the house, you know, he had a - he was a majestic man and - stalking round the house, you know, giving us Hamlet's - soliloquies and al
l
 these long speeches and if he took - Othello he would fling me suddenly into an - either an armchair or on the old horse - horsehair sofa and smother me with a - with a cushion, you know. I can remember to this day the stuffy old cushion that he used to 
put over my mouth. And then just as suddenly he would fall back in his chair and he would say - the pity of it Iago, the pity of it. And it was his own soliloquy. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 
It was the pity of it you see, that he could do that kind of thing so magnificently, and yet you see, and consequently everybody went out and left me with him - that was the - the bitterest part. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 See, the lads were so fed up with this, you see, that they cleared off out to their own particular - mates homes or wherever they went. Mother used to sne
ak out to go and sit with one of the neighbours and Kathy would be at some meeting or other because by that time she'd joined the trade union, well, she joined - she had to join the trade union the first day she went to work. Father was an ardent trade un
ionist and made us join the trade union, you see. And she was always out at trade union meetings because she was the first woman to ever get on a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 card room}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  committee - they'd always been men 'til she invaded them, you see, so she was always out of the way a
nd I was left with father and consequently I always had to be some character in - in these plays you see, either Ophelia or Desdemona or somebody else and - and I would be }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 persuading}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  him the whole of the time to go to bed - I knew he wouldn't go out - and 
I used to sit on his knee and try to persuade him ardently - well, come to bed dad - come to bed, dad. All to get him out of the place so that when the others came home they'd have a little bit of peace you see. But - I was a kind of little }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 heroic}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  martyr. 
I look back on it now and realize you see. But - that - that was largely how - how the evenings were spent. If they were nice evenings and I could of course escape out into the street to play with the other children, well, we did that, you see, and left h
im in more or less alone, you see, then.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did he ever take part in any sport himself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
No, I don't - he wasn't a sporting man - no. No, I don't ever remember him either joining a bowling club or anything of that kind. The only thing I - I do know 
him was he was a good card player and of course at dominoes and draughts, you see, but I don't remember him having any hobby at all - or any other outside interest apart from this period when he was in the home rule movement, you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Apart from his actual betting on the horses did he ever go to the races?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Occasionally when he was in fund. If he'd won any money he would probably go perhaps to Liverpool or somewhere near where there was a racecourse - Manchester or Liverpool you see, but I don't r
eally think he was interested so much in watching the horses as he was in the hope of winning something, you see, and there is this about him that if he did win everybody in the street knew about it and everybody more or less had to share in it. He was ve
r
y generous when he won, but not very generous to his family - he would just occasionally buy the boys - one of the boys - a suit, you know, a decent suit out of his winnings but I don't remember anything ever coming much into the house, you see, and - but
 everybody outside had to have drinks with him, you see. But I don't - I don't think really he was interested in watching - watching the game - as he was in the - this hope that he was - he was going to be lucky, you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 You mentioned saving for burial and such like - I gather that your father and mother belonged to a club for this sort of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Yes, they - they had pennies and tuppences you know - a penny a week on the children and probably, I don't know, it was the custom of course to have you
r relatives insured, you know, but I - I don't think they - I never remember them saying or hearing anything about if any relative died they'd come into anything so I can only think that it was just the - the home - the home where it - where they were ins
ured you see. People in the home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Was there any savings scheme for sickness?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
None at all - no. No, you had to depend, as I say, on either the sixpenny doctor or the - the other doctor that you paid off at so much a week and - no, I don't remember
 - I don't even remember them having any saving clubs at school. You, know, like they have - they do have now - I don't remember. Of course it was a - a - we were a terribly poor family and you see, one of the things about - our poverty was that at that -
 
I think - I think it probably still is in being in the Catholics - you had to contribute - every family had to contribute what they called Peter's pence. You'd to pay a certain sum each week. Well now, mother wouldn't pay. I - I can remember the collector
 coming on a Saturday afternoon and arguing with her and trying to persuade her and I can remember now hearing her say she says - Peter's pence?, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15204880\charrsid11536143 Takes}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  me all me time }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15204880\charrsid11536143 t\rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
keep kids in food and, you know, never mind about Peter's pence. And we were in the blac
k books through that, and I felt I suffered at school a great deal because, see we were one of the families who'd opted out of Peter's pence, you see, and it - I think it did - it did have an affect on my schooling. Whereas if we'd have been one of the fa
milies who'd contributed they would have taken more interest, you see in both Emily and I and - but I don't remember that}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11536143  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
there was any margin - ever any margin for saving up. I don't really. In fact they were once or twice in the hands of the money lenders
. I - I can remember that because - I - I more or less let the cat out of the bag one morning by - you see, father - I don't know whether they were father's debts or what - that they were trying to clear, but he persuaded mother to sign a form saying that
 
they wanted a loan and they would repay it back, you know, at so much a week, that kind of thing, and I noticed that every morning everything was all spruced and cleaned and mother did special things about the house, you see, then that a man came and - of
 
course, unconsciously I mentioned something about this to Kathy - when Kathy was in the house - and of course she knew then what was happening so there was a furious - furious row about that, you see, she strongly objected to - borrowing money from money 
l
enders and having to pay back at exorbitant rates of interest and I know she lent mother money - pretty often out of her savings to - settle this thing - this debt or whatever it was, you see. So there was no margin for saving up clubs at all - no. Not in
 our family anyway.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Apart from the church organizations that you belonged to were there any youth organisations that you could belong to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Well, I don't know that I knew of any. Because, you see, our activities, as I say, were in the streets and 
we had every year a court and alley concert. There was a choir - a town's choir who called themselves the court and ally concert society and they used to go round to the poorer streets giving concerts in the summer and that was an event that we always loo
k
ed forward to because they used to bring a piano on a truck and - pushed by boys you see - and - it created quite a commotion you see, this piano coming in the street on a truck and being unloaded against a gable end, you see, then the conductor would sta
n
d on a borrowed chair and the choir would sing away, you see, and - we kids thought it was wonderful. Everybody came and stood - the older people came and stood at their doors, you see, there was nowhere to sit and - until the concert finished, you see, a
n
d then of course, we hurrahed them and cheered them and - followed the - the little truck that was taking the piano away, you know - great glee. And it was that kind of thing that we spent our time on, we - I - I don't remember any clubs. I might have bee
n you see, if I'd been attached to either Church of England or the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 Wesleyans}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 but we weren't you see - we were in a sense isolated there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did you have any hobbies like collecting anything or keeping pets?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 No, I don't - I don't remember - I was - I
 used to play an awful lot at being teacher of a class and I used - I had a lot of books, old books, story books and things, and I used to paste - names on of the - the scholars that I knew - in - in school you see. And I used to set this school out on th
e
 stairs, you see, the stairs and every evening I was teaching these and of course whacking those who I didn't particularly like at school. And I used to do an awful lot of that and of course talk to myself a tremendous amount - used to talk to myself trem
e
ndous and occasionally we went to the park to go to the museum - there was a museum - Chadwicks museum was there then - and we used to do that kind of thing, but - not a lot of jollity - not like you would - you would expect from a boys or girls club, you
 see, I - I don't remember anything of that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did you go for walks at all apart from going with your father for his drink?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 No, no, I didn't know the country until I was - probably fourteen. Our walks were mainly looking at shop windows, you see, w
andering up and down Dean Road or Derby Street, you see, or going into town looking at shops. It was only - that father did of course introduce me to the country by the Sunday morning walks but we hadn't - you see, there wasn't an age of coaches, we'd onl
y
 the horse trams and then the electric trams came, you see, but they only ran a short distance up Dean Road, you see, you couldn't get very far only by walking and walking was never sort of considered by us as a kind of pursuit, you know, if you know what
 I mean.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 You wouldn't have such a thing as a bicycle?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
I got one later on - but I had to buy it myself. I remember spending twenty - five shillings on it I - that was when I was working - I saved up sixpence a week until I got this twenty-five shi
llings and then I bought this secondhand bicycle and then began of course the outings. I joined a club, the Clarions Cycle Club and those were glorious days because for the first time I came to know the moorlands and the beautiful country and - until I ce
a
sed cycling they were great days and that was how I really became to know more about the countryside - it was just kind of mystery to us as children, you see. We could only - we walked to Barrowbridge we thought we'd gone to world's end, you see, it used 
to seem so far away, you see, and in the heart of the country and it was only by bicycle - getting a bicycle that I learned - that - how lovely the country was, you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did you ever go on the lake at Barrowbridge?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Oh yes, they had a great big -
 they had great big clumsy wooden boats, you know, penny around - penny round the lake. I never enjoyed it because I never was fond of boats being near the water but we did go on and of course they'd a lot of roundabouts there as well - swings you know, a
n
d different things and we used to like going to Barrowbridge because of that. And then the cottages - used to brew tea - jugs of tea, you see, so that was - those were kind of gala days when we had a penny or tuppence for tram fares you know, bus fares wh
en the buses started running - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Would that be at weekends or holidays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Oh yes, mainly - mainly weekends. They were kind of special occasions really. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did you ever take part in any sport yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Well, again I was rather wooden
 as sports because you see we never had any at school - we'd no - we'd only a very - confined playground and we were never taught anything like baseball or tennis or any of that and we had - I can only remember later on when I - probably nine - they intro
duced - physical }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 instructor}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 - a young man - we'd never had a man teacher - we'd always been taught by the nuns you see, and they were very gentle and didn't encourage sports you see, didn't encourage you rushing around you know - you could play demure games
 in the - in the yard but not - not sporty and I remember this young man, we had to - he insisted on having the lessons outside. Well the schoolyard - it was used by both infants and the older girls so to our surprise they took us into a spare ground that
 
lay on one side of the church and there was a big stone monument - with steps up it and this was the memorial to a - a bygone dead priest you see and I was terribly shocked to see this young man mount these steps and use it as a platform, you see, to give
 
his talks. And of course he - he tried to - well, there were graves all about - little bits of lumpy bits of ground - it was very awkward if we stood on these little lumps and 'course he showed us these exercises you see and - I was - as a child I was awf
u
lly shocked to think - again you see I had curious ideas about the dead and - I - I'd thought about this dead priest you see lying under this monument and I thought it was awful bad behaviour to be doing physical jerks in this little cemetery. Of course i
t
 isn't there now - it's probably been built over but - that was how I felt about it. We were never encouraged you see to - have sports and - I tried to learn tennis later on and when I joined this - we joined a club at Tottington - we had a camp there - t
h
e cycle club I mean - mainly cyclists - and we spent hours and hours panting forth and getting all hot and bothered about learning tennis but it - I used to get an awful lot of colds because I perspired so strenuously that immediately afterwards I seemed 
t
o go cold and then I got bad colds so I had to give that up. Swimming - yes. I - the - they did - they did once institute - a swimming group at the school but - I - I developed something, I think it was a bad ear, I know my ear was very bad for a long tim
e
 and I was withdrawn from the group there, but I took it up at High Street baths and of course became a fairly - a fairly good swimmer. But - I think those were about the only sports my - my - the one I loved best was walking. I learned to enjoy walking v
ery, very much.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 When you were a member of the cycling club was that as you were getting into adult life?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 I was sixteen when I joined - yes, sixteen - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 When you were a child did you ever go to a theatre or a cinema?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 We went to the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 pantomime}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 . My sister - the eldest sister again - was responsible for taking us to the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 pantomime}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
. which we used - we used to go in the gods of course, it was the old theatre and it was sixpence to go up in the gods and of course there was no backs to the se
ats - it was just a gallery. You were all crowded in you see and I can remember they used to sell hot pot cakes and oranges you know, lads with trays you know, and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 every time}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  they stepped down these steps these hot - these cakes and pies used to bob up and
 was all sorts of funny things went on before the curtain went up. But we always - we loved that - we loved going to the panto. That was a treat that my sister saw - saw that we had later on, you see. Now, the first time that I remember that I ever saw an
 
opera was when I'd started to work and I used to get a shilling in the pound pocket money, you see, and - which was what - a penny in the shilling - a penny in the shilling of pocket money. Well, I would probably be earning perhaps about fourteen shilling
s - something like that - so I was allowed to keep a penny in a shilling fourteenpence out of the wage I turned up so I began to save some of this and I remember going to Gilbert and Sullivan and I didn't know who }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 Gilbert}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  and Sullivan was but I remember goi
ng down to a matinee at Bolton theatre and queuing up - I would be fourteen - and queueing up in this long dark alleyway and then climbing all these steps, you see, and sitting down and - what - what annoyed me was that you'd all - you'd go early because 
y
ou paid early door price, you see, you got - you paid an extra tuppence to go in early doors - and - you'd go and pay this extra tuppence and get - sit down - and then right on the last minute a lot of people would come crowding in and there would be an u
sher who would come down - shove up there, shove up there, shove up, and we had to shove up and make way for people who'd come in at the last minute and hadn't paid this tuppence and I used to be very }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 incensed}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  about this injustice, you see, and you nearly a
lways got fleas on you because you were so near to everybody else, you know, everybody's elbows were poking into you and you had fleas on you but I was absolutely enthralled with this opera - it was the Yeoman of the Guard - and I couldn't take my eyes of
f
 it and - oh, the lilting tunes and the dresses, you see, it was just a new world to me. I raced home and - they were all having tea - or were getting round the table and I announced that I didn't want any tea - only a drink of tea. I was running back - I
 
was going to the night - the night performance - the evening performance. They all thought I'd gone potty and - but anyway I rushed back and I queued up again for this evening performance and it was that funny one - what is it that they - the - they - it'
s
 a Japanesey thing you know - Mikado. And oh, I thought it was wonderful - I never really, you know, had experienced anything like it - I was in a new world entirely. Well, of course, whenever the op - they came to Bolton I was there, you see, I never mis
s
ed any of them. And then - then from that I graduate to opera - grand opera. My sister was interested in opera because she'd then joined the choral society and so Rudy Manners used to come, you know, Rudy Manners and the old - what's that big company they
 have now in London - not the Covent Garden - the other - they used to come an awful lot. Oh, I used to be there every night. I used to spend all me money - spare money that I had on - on - on the operas you see. And that of course - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 Sadler\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  Wells, yes, th
ey used to come to Bolton quite a lot in those days. And, again I used to just go in the gods and then as we - got in when I got in this cycling club, you see, we got interested in the Manchester theatre because Miss Horniman had opened, you know, the Pri
n
ces Theatre, Manchester and she was showing a lot of Galsworthy's plays you see and of course a group of us on a Saturday afternoon then used to - we used to save up and then we used to go to Manchester - it was only a shilling the bus - the fares in thos
e
 days - and we'd either go up in the gods or stand up - you see, standing room only and we saw most of Shaw's plays produced there. Well, that again, Shaw and Galsworthy and these early playwrights - it was just wonderful and of course that made me a conv
i
nced socialist you see - especially Shaw's play you see. And that again was - a - a great source of happiness. Well, it probably was the only relief that I got from the - monotonous job of working in a factory you see. But none of that came in early - in 
early childhood, you see, that all came more or less after I'd started working you see from fourteen to about sixteen or seventeen. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 
And I came in touch with the Halle Orchestra through that - started to be a member of the Halle Orchestra and used to book th
e seasons concerts, you know, and - oh that was - it was wonderful, you know, under the different conductors, you know, Rich - Richter and oh, there was a lot of wonderful conductors and so I got introduced to very fine music through that, you see.}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Can you tell me how old you were when you first went to school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Oh well, compulsory five, you see. You couldn't go before because they had no - nursery classes or any of that kind and I remember Emily taking me, you see, I was five - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 You didn't have any tuition before you went to school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
None. Apart from - probably - I would probably be trying to read I should think because I was interested in trying to make out letterings you know in shop windows and that kind of thing. Probably I knew
 a bit of reading but very little of course. No, I hadn't had any tuition.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 What were the school hours when you went?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Well, nine to twelve and then, I think it was half past one to about four for the infants, you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 And it was the Catholic school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 A day school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 It was mixed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Mixed - yes. But we were in separate buildings - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 How far away was the school - how long did it take you to get there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Well it was very near where we had lived when w
e were in Milk Street, you see, it was - it was that neighbourhood, you see, and so we had to go from }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 Rankin}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 Street up Noble Street onto Derby Street and then cross the road to where the school was near Pilkington Street. Pilkington Street and - and near w
here we had originally lived, you see. The school was in Pilkington Street and Fletcher Street sort of - it was - part in Pilkington Street, part in Fletcher Street.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 About how long did it take you to get there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Well, of course, if you ran which 
- which we usually did it wouldn't take more than probably ten minutes or quarter - quarter of an hour. If you walked and loitered looking at things of course it could take you a good twenty minutes, you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Who went with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Well, at first wh
en my sister was at the school we went together, you see. Emily, yes, yes. We went together because there weren't many Catholics who lived in the Street. Most of the other children went of course to the board school you know on Dean Road, you see, their w
ay diverted from ours - we had to go up to Derby Street whereas they went Elean Road, you see, went to the board - the board - what was board school in those - the state school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Apart from the school being a dingy building what did you think about going to school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Well, I always liked it. I can give you my first impressions of going at five because - it was a big - a gallery. Again there were no forms - no seats - it was just a high gallery like that and these steps were far too high for our littl
e baby legs - I can remember so - you know - having to scramble. There was one teacher who was only a pupil teacher - probably sixteen, a girl sixteen or seventeen - in charge and it was a huge class and - I can remember feeling very strange and very lone
l
y. Sit on this - rather high up from where the teacher was down there and there were all little tots besides myself and we were all very quiet and very strange and the only thing I can remember being taught was the coloured ball frame. They had one of the
s
e old fashioned coloured ball frames and in order to teach us to count she shot the yellow ball and the red ball, the blue ball, you see, and of course I was fascinated - I always was fascinated with colours and that's the one thing that I remember most v
i
vidly about the first day at school and - then Emily called for me, you see, at the end of the school day - to pick me up - I had to wait for her coming out of the bigger school and she would bring me home. The only thing I can remember is the chanting, y
ou see, twice one or two, twice two are four, twice three are six - we all had to learn that way - chanting, you see. Now when - after I'd been in the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 gallery}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  - in the infants gallery for twelve months we were moved then into the infants school proper and a
gain that was a long room with three or four classes in it you see, not separated in any way. And - this was a rather strange thing. Now this infants school was mixed - it was little boys and little girls, you see, we weren't separated - the sexes weren't
 separated in the infants. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 
But one of the things that - that struck me as being odd was - occasionally we had a young curate came who, presumably, were in training to be priests, you see, and I remember distinctly when I was in this infant group one young m
an coming and he always looked like a farmer. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
He was always red faced and very jolly and he used to come to test us on our - catechism, you see. And then after he'd tested us, on - we had to be very, very quiet and very good when he was there and after he'
d tested on this catechism he would then say - now, all come out and kick the teacher. And she was only a young girl about - as I say - about sixteen or seventeen - and there would be a mad rush from the benches - there were benches then you see, not this
 
gallery thing, and particularly the boys and they would come and that teacher had a hell of a time. And I used to sit cowering wondering what on earth was going to happen next because I hated rows - I'd been brought up with so many rows at home that I was
 
terrified of - people shouting and these lads used to kick this - kick her shins terribly - and she used to suffer it with a kind of sickly smile and there would be just a few of us who would never get up - never get up out of our places and - and then af
t
er about ten minutes of this hurly-burly, he would say, clap his hands, yes, yes, that's enough, that's enough. And he would just go out laughing like a great big schoolboy and leave the teacher then to restore the class to order and I used to feel terrib
l
y sorry for this poor girl you see. And I - I couldn't see why it was done and up to this day can I unless it was a sadistic trait that was in him. And I remember her once coming round and she said you were one of the little girls that don't come out and 
kick me. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 
And I thought, isn't it awful - to think that that has stayed with - stayed with me all this time and that was the only thing that I didn't like about that school - I was glad when I was old enough to move into the - you know, the more adult - adul
t part because there we were under}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11536143  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 the nuns. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
They were very gentle you see and we had none of that - that kind - but, oh, it used to be - it used to be awful - all these lads yelling and - and pulling at her skirt and - oh, it was dreadful - and I couldn't
, in my childish mind, you know, understand why, you see, why it was done, you see. So I don't really say I enjoyed the infant part of the education but when I got into the bigger school, yes, I - I - I felt more at home, you see, and although the - the t
h
ings that - oh we were taught were pretty much the three R's you see, we never got much beyond the three R's. And religion was of course very, very strongly emphasised you see, very, very strongly emphasised. But perhaps that was - perhaps that was a good
 thing really in it's way.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did the nuns emphasise any other things as being important - things like manners or tidiness?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Tidiness - yes, because I can remember very much the teacher telling us that we had to come with clean hands and we had to h
ave our clogs polished you see. And occasionally unbeknownst to us she would make an examination. And what a to-do there was - spitting on our hands - and we used to spit on our clogs then polish them on the back of our - you know - we had - wore thick st
o
ckings - we'd polish. We just managed to scrape through - I - I never got - I never got either punished or a note given to me to tell me mother to send me but some of it was more luck than good management, you see, but she did stress very strongly coming 
w
ith clean hands and trying to keep ourselves clean you see and - and she was very particular about us coming in clean clogs, you see. What was the other thing that you mentioned? Manners. Well, she - they were very, very - quiet nuns and of course perhaps
 
they expected their manners to be imitated - I don't remember them telling us very much about we ought to be mannerly. They did of course reach. We ought to love one another, you know, and not - not fall out with each other and not be unkind and not to co
py and things like that. But - I don't think that they ever gave us any set lessons, you know, in kind of being mannerly.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 You were of course always a punctual attender?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Was punctuality important?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Yes, yes, it was - it was co
nsidered important in school. I remember that - there used to be a few late-comers come panting, you know, up on the last minute and of course occasionally the nun - the teacher would take them on - on one side you see and speak to them about it. But on t
he whole it was - it was emphasised punctuality.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Ways of speaking - did they concern themselves with the way you spoke?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 No. That was one of the things they did not attend to. If you spoke badly, which a great many of us did, you see, dropped our 
h's, we never knew why we had to sound the h's - there wasn't much notice taken of it. No. No, they didn't - they didn't bother about that kind of thing which another - another school probably would, you see. They were more really concerned with trying to
 
keep us quiet and getting the - the curriculum, you see, the lessons in the curriculum done and that seemed about the total - total output. I don't remember any very illuminating - things - I mean that when I - later when I began to study - literature, I 
r
ealised what glorious opportunities there had been for giving us some good English lessons but we hardly ever had it. Grammar - yes, a bit of grammar at the beginning but then I skipped standard three - they jumped me from standard two into standard four 
a
nd possibly I missed quite a lot of grammar through that you see, through that jump. We had a lot of composition, you know, dictation - writing from dictation and that kind of thing but they never really stirred your imagination as they - they might - I t
h
ink they might have done, you see. But you were always being questioned on religion - why you had - in fact the priest used to come in nearly every Monday morning and ask - and this was when they had a Sunday school - because of course you were expected t
o
 go to Mass because that was a mortal sin you see, if you missed Mass and - but when they had the Sunday school, he once came in the priest, unexpectedly, and went round the class asking us all individually why we hadn't been to Sunday school. Well, it wa
s
 amazing all the excuses - there'd been very few gone to Sunday school - and when it came to me I was stumped for an excuse and for once in a while I told the truth - and said it was my fault that I didn't go. And he said well, for telling the truth I sha
l
l excuse you the punishment. I always remember that. And it was only because I was stumped - there - there'd been so many before me - made all sorts of excuses about their mother being ill or somebody else or something else that when it got to me I just d
i
dn't know what to say and so I just blurted out, well, Father, it was - I - I could have gone - it was my own fault, you see, so I got let off because I'd been honest for once. But the emphasis was rather on that - on goodness and gentleness, you see, and
 
- on the whole I can't say that - that the discipline wasn't good. I can't remember - we - of course we did get caned and we had one teacher - a - a nun who was called Sister Sebastian, I always remember her, and she had a face full of sorrow, lined with 
a
 - sorrow that used to fascinate me and often instead of thinking about what we were doing I would be gazing at her trying to understand why she had all these lines, you see, on her face. She had a dreadful temper and she used to say to us when we were na
ughty and troublesome, she used to get her }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 fist}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  clenched like that and she used to say come out you so-and-so, I'll an - I'll 
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 annihilate}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  you. That was it - I'll }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 annihilate}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  you - oh, she'd a furious passion. And she'd a bunch of ironmongery hanging from her 
- from her dress, you know, keys and scissors and button hooks, all sorts of things, ooh, and you used to get such a clout on your knuckles with it. It - it told you know. But almost in a few minutes the passion would die down and she'd just have this fac
e
 like a - a dying Christ almost. She used to fascinate me. And she was - she was a terrible - disciplinarian - you'd not hardly to move you know, or - or whisper at all but she had you out you see. And the boys - oh, they did used to - don't - didn't half
 used to get their knuckles - crashed. With this bunch of ironmongery.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Were there any other sorts of punishment?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 I - I didn't see a lot of physical punishment. No, they used to rely more on - sending - sending you up to the - headmistress, you s
ee, the head nun, and she more or less would have a talk with you - very quiet talk, and - say that they would - if your conduct didn't improve they would report you to your parents and things like that you see. No, I didn't see a lot of - of physical pun
i
shment - even from other teachers - not when we were in the big room because otherwise we would have seen it you see because we - our eyes were always straying to other classes - what other classes were doing, you see, rather than attending to what we wer
e
 doing ourselves. And I know they used to let the boys - up to that standard - learn drawing but the girls had to take sewing and I rather resented that because I always had a longing to draw, you see, and I never got any tuition in it and I used to have 
t
o do this sewing, which I did and which - the - the teacher used to say was very neat but it was done against the grain - I would have preferred - I would preferred the drawing lesson, you see, than having to do the sewing. But I was pretty submissive - I
 was a passive child really, and - but I - I enjoyed school on the whole - I enjoyed school and was rather sorry when I had to leave.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 How did you feel about the teachers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Well, I accepted them fully, you see, I'd no resentment at all against any 
of them. And rather liked the gentleness you see, and of course the piety because I was very - pious little Catholic at that time because I - I used to have an altar at home on the bedroom - cornice and - used to spend what little money I had on candles a
n
d - flowers and things like that and I had a statue on and - it was a very, very - in my childish way - a very devoted little Catholic you see, so I accepted them fully, you see, I didn't question - didn't question their ability to teach or whether they w
e
re going the right way or the wrong way about it, you see, I just sort of accepted it. The only thing I didn't like was, of course, the - awful pictures that we had on the wall you know of Christ with the dagger through his heart, you know, and blood drop
ping it - I - I used to be fascinated with these terrible pictures but wondered why on earth they were in a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 children\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 school, you see, because there was nothing pleasant about them to look at you see. I don't suppose they're there now - but they were really - you know - all to do with the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 crucifixion}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 and that kind of thing and it used to depress me terribly, you see, I wanted to see a smiling Christ not - not this agonizing figure, you see, that was - seemed to be everywhere - everywhere about the school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did your parents show an interest in your schoolwork?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
No, I'm afraid they didn't. Mind you we rarely ever had homework until I got into the last standard. And then when I was about twelve we got a new - headmistress - a new nun and she seemed to 
have come from a much better school and she then - made the lessons very, very interesting - she was a very good drawer and I can remember she used to take our copy books and draw something - it might be an animal, it might be an object - and then she wou
l
d ask us to write on the opposite side of the page what we thought about this object, you see. And I was very interested in that, you see, and - occasionally she would give us homework to do - and - when I got home I used to show it to my eldest sister yo
u
 see and of course she used to say little things about either this little animal or whatever the object was and of course I think the headmistress gave me praise really for having had the advice of an older sister, you see, and she used to say that my ess
ays on these things were very - very good and very interesting. And she did - she did bring a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 liveliness}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 about teaching that we hadn't had previously and I remember she introduced the Mill on the Floss as a book we should read, you see, of George Elliott's,
 and quite a number of very interesting things. It seemed to me as though in the earlier stages they were so afraid of giving us anything to read that wasn't partly religious you see, that we never seemed to get into a wider field at all and she did and i
t was a pity really that I hadn't - I hadn't opened out to her when I was leaving school because when I went to ask for my school leaving papers, you see, we all - always had to get our }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 
attendances}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  you know - she said, I'm very disappointed that you are lea
ving school. And I just said, yes I'm sorry too, you see. But nothing no more and possibly if I'd had the courage to have opened out and said to her, well, are there any means by which I could be helped, you know, to stay on at school because there were n
o scholarships, it might have made a difference but she didn't open out and I didn't you see and so I just left, see, just like that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did the other children come from similar types of home to your own?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 A lot of them did but on the other hand the
y had a sprinkling of girls from much better homes. And - they were very well dressed you see and they were teachers favourites - teachers pets, you see, and I used to feel that somewhat because - the singular thing was that I never got a prize and - they
 
often had books to give out as prizes and - I used to notice that the prizes went to the well dressed girls, you see, and then they would apologise and say they'd forgotten me and so they would give me an old dog-eared, you know, book and - and I would be
 
so disgusted I wouldn't take it home and I used to give it to one of the other children on the way home, you see, I used to be so sort of disgusted to think that they'd measured what I could do by this dog-eared book when they'd given these beautiful new 
books to other girls who were nowhere near as accomplished but of course, as I say, probably paid generously to Peter's pence.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Were there any gangs or groups in the school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Oh yes, there were gangs. Yes. Yes, because these better girls ganged tog
ether you see. They scarcely ever played with us and one incident that stands out very clearly is that, as I told you before I used to go to school looking like Joseph's coat of many colours, but my sister always saw to it that I had a big white pinafore 
c
overing it all. Well one day we were in the playground and I must have been feeling very happy and there were a few of us pirouetting round you see, dancing - like ballet dancers - and this pinafore was lifted up, you see, floating round like that and all
 at once I became conscious of some girls shouting one, two, three and when I turned round I realized they were counting the different colours in me frock you see - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 patches}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  here, sleeves different colour, you see, and I just dropped - I can remember just dr
opping this pinafore and slinking away feeling very hurt and bewildered you see, that they could do that because it was rather cruel to me, you see, and - but they did - they were always in a gang these - these very well dressed girls and - I could only t
h
ink - some of their parents of course were business people with businesses you see and consequently they had a fairly high standard of living and they - they could always take part in everything, you see, there were collections for any charity or anything
 they could always - pay up you see, and then they were always being chosen either for May Queens or carrying banners, you know, in the Whitsuntide }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 procession}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  and I never could - they shut - they asked me but of course it was always too much money to dress 
up you see, and so I never got to - string a banner, you see, as they said - I was always in the - and there were other groups you see - groups that were poor like - like me and we probably ganged up together you see. And - it was kind of an economic - gr
o
uping rather than a - a - a grouping of people with the same interests, you see, it was rather on an economic basis I should think our - our ganging up as it were. And yet, you see, the - the odd thing was that on one occasion they had a - a vote - a ball
o
t vote for the most popular girl in the school and this - girl was explained by the nuns had - well, they were - they'd been collecting and we'd been paying a penny a week or something like that - for some fund in - that the Bishop of Salford had - introd
u
ced. It was the building of a new church somewhere and so the - this new teacher that had come - this headmistress, you see, said - oh we shall do it the democratic way - every child, every girl in the school will have a vote and you must nominate who you
 
want to be the - popular girl in the school and then you vote. Well to my great surprise I was moved as the most popular girl in the school - I wasn't not by any means - not popular and - I won it. There was about ten nominated but I got the highest numbe
r
 of votes which staggered me completely because it was something I'd never expected and I don't even think that the nuns were too pleased about that - they would rather have had a very pious Catholic, you see, and - but anyway I went to Salford to some hi
g
h Mass. I can remember going and I can remember kneeling at the Bishops feet and kissing his ring and he thanked me for what the school had done although I hadn't contributed very much I must confess, but you see, that was the strange thing, that the scho
o
l must have been - had a big proportion of poor children who would nominated me and voted for me than the - the richer girls you see. They were in the list of course - they were nominated but you see they weren't - and I can only think that I was popular 
t
hrough the fact that I - I was a good story teller you see, and when we had any odd moment I used to be telling them stories, you see and possibly it was that that brought the popularity. But strange all the same. I often wonder about it. It was the only 
- the only prize that I ever got - if you can call it a prize.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Do you have any regrets about your education?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Oh yes. Yes, very many regrets. Yes, I should have loved to have been a teacher - loved to have been a teacher and you see, when I'd got
 into the mill - and I must have been probably sixteen I - I - well of course after I started - after I left school I went to night school, you see, they had a night school and it was in this same assembly hall that they later had to turn - and this - per
s
on who was in charge of the class was the same person who had the organ - who was the organist, you see, she wasn't a nun, she was the organist for the church and she was the teacher. And she was interested in me and she said it was a shame that they let 
y
ou leave the school, I'll lend you a book on grammar. Well, you see, I had nobody to help me - it was just a book on grammar and nobody seemed willing to help me with it - you see, I read some of it and tried to master some of it and then years after - pr
o
bably when I was about sixteen or seventeen somebody came from the church and said they'd now built - the Catholics had now built a secondary school and would I like to go and have tuition there. But you see, I - I'd broken - I'd broken my student days an
d
 - I felt that I should have to, you know, it would be too hard for me to catch up and then we were still poor and - I - I really felt that I could hardly ask the family to let me leave the mill and go to school for the length of time I would have liked t
o
 have gone to this secondary school, you see, to - to have caught up. And so it was turned down but - I guess I have many regrets about - about not having had an adequate education. That's why I'm so very, very interested in education for other people. Ve
ry interested. 'Cos I think it's such a training ground you know. Training ground not only for jobs but for character and personality.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Do you think you benefited from attending school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Oh yes. Yes, I did. Because - of course, I mean to say, histo
ry had been more or less a closed book to me, you see. And so I got very, very interested in history. Geography, not so much but literature - yes, and we used to have poetry - poetry sessions and of course, well, I was O.K. with that because I'd had done 
s
uch - I had heard such a lot of it at home, you see. Yes, there were certain subjects that I was very interested in - would have loved to have gone further with them you see. And that was why later on I came to regret that I hadn't taken my sister's advic
e and left that school and gone to one where they had - scholarships because I did feel I had the capacity to - win a scholarship you see, but it - the - the chance had gone by you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 What }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 night school}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  classes did you attend?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 Night school}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 ? Well
, really when I first went it was the - it was more or less English you see - grammar and writing essays and then they added onto it shorthand and I was interested in shorthand so I began to take the commercial courses, you see, then I got a free scholars
hip from the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 night school}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 to go to the central school which was in Great Moore Street - you know, it was the kind of central - higher grade they called it - higher grade school. Well, there it was rather funny because - they sent - they give - they sent me 
a form to fill in, you see, with the subjects I would like to take and they sent a syllabus and strangely enough - 'course I suppose I was always an oddity - I put down economics - economics - what was the other? Something else. Forget what the other subj
e
ct was but - it was akin to economics. And I got a letter asking me to go down to the education office that the Chairman of the Education Committee wished to have an interview with me and so I - I went down there and - I remember he was - the Chairman of 
t
hat - the Education Committee was a Mr Horrocks. He had a - a train of tripe shops in Bolton, you see, and the Education Officer was with him, Mr Longworth, and they both looked at me rather queerly and they said we're - questioning the subjects that you 
w
ant to take with this kind of free scholarship that I'd got and he said what does a girl like you want he said with economics. And for a minute or two I was nonplussed and then I said, well, I know a lot about economics - I've read part of Marx's Das Kapi
t
al. Worst thing I could have said. Father had a copy of Marx's Das Kapital in - on our selves you see, and I'd delved into it from time to time - I didn't understand it. And there was something else and they queried this and - he said - oh, logic and eloc
u
tion. And they queried this and so when I said that I knew so - well, if you'd seen their faces and they must have thought this is a budding revolutionist we'd better chop her wings off so they said, no, now going to put you in the millinery class - the w
orst thing they could have put me down for - and it - sort of be a good girl and good night that's it. So I went quite dutifully the following Monday night to this class in - millinery and I always remember it - was the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 women\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  institute you know. And there
 was a very nice lady taking it and I remember her giving us all a piece of velvet and we had to learn to him it without the stitches coming through, and I was bored stiff 'cos I wasn't interested in hats at all - or clothes and - anyway I stuck it, I tho
u
gh well I - I'd better they said I have to - have to accept it so I'd better and so I went to the elocution and logic class and I didn't understand a word of the logic - he was drawing diagrams on the board you know, proposition one, two, three and I didn
'
t follow it or understand it but I liked the elocution. The elocutionist was a lady and so she was teaching us how to project our voice and she gave us a poem, Mary, call the cattle home across the sands at Dee, to learn. Oh I was thrilled with this. I mu
s
t have said that poem hundreds of times at home - I'm sure they must have gotten absolutely sick to death of Mary, call the cattle home but I was trying to get it perfect for this person, oh, I thought it was wonderful. Anyway it so happened that this log
i
c and elocution class had to be changed to the same night as the millinery class - something went wrong - I don't know what it was - but we had to change it. Oh, this was a glorious opportunity. So I wrote a very nice letter to the Director of Education p
o
inting out that I had attended the millinery class but now it was clashing with the one literature - why, elocution and logic and as I was very happy in that class I hoped they would leave me where I was, yours truly. I never heard a word. So after that I
 
did join the commercial course at the higher grade - all sorts of things - shorthand typing, banking, commercial subjects you see and that enabled me of course later on to get the office job you see, although I wasn't sort of working for it - I was just -
 it was just because it was an interest and it was something to do at night you see. And that was the end of me learn - taking economics - they weren't for letting me have economics. Eeh it's funny isn't it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did you have any part time job at all to earn a little money while you were still at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
No. I - I'm afraid that we were a family that didn't - didn't put much - emphasise on earning money. We did a lot of voluntary jobs but we did it in such a way we never thought we were doing it really
. For example, mother always insisted that we did errands for people - elderly people or sick people, you see, and I used to run errands day in day out for people you see and scarcely even dreamed that I should ever have anything for it, you see, occasion
a
lly you got a penny or something like that but in the sense of earning money - no. There were boys who went round with the newspapers, you see, and they would probably receive something but - that never came into sort of our discussions at all and we - I 
u
sed to do quite a lot of baby sitting, you see, if people who had numerous babies and wanted to go out either shopping or visiting then mother would send us to sit with the younger children, you see, and so that I never really got - got any money. I can o
nly remember one old lady at the bottom of the street who used to send me for an awful lot of - of errands and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 every time}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 she would say - I'll bay thee a gold watch at Christmas - and I really believed her you see, that at Christmas there would be a gold wa
tch you see, and it never came and - but it never brought any - any sort of regrets or anything - it was just a promise that had been broken, you see, I just looked at it as a promise that had been broken - but it was that kind of thing that we filled in 
our spare time with - it was - we never - I never had a - an }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 instinct}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 for earning money really - not really - no. Never bothered me very much about it if I'd just enough to live on that was - that was enough you see, so I didn't do any part time jobs for money.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Your first job was in the fancy goods shop?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Yes, that was after leaving school 3/8 yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 How did you get it?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Well, there was an advertisement in the Evening News. And also I happened to know that the girl who previously had worke
d there who was now of course an adult had and was a member of the church that we attended, you see, she was a Catholic, and I knew that she had worked at this particular shop, you see, so that when my sister saw the advert in the Evening News she said, w
hy not put in for it, you see, so I wrote and was interviewed and given the job you see. But of course it only lasted one month. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 
'Course the funny part about that was that the man - the owner of the shop - used to - dodge in and out you see and strangely en
ough, in the afternoons he would just come in - just look probably at a poster or some of the invoice and then he would dash off and then the lady who kept the shop used to tell me to run after him and follow him and find out where he was going. }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Well, I wa
s anything but a detective and I used to loss him in the crowd - you see he was only a little chap and I never - I never succeeded in finding out where he went - probably he went to a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 men
\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  club I should think by his - his speech and attitude. But when I c
ame back I used to get scolded terribly because I'd failed, you see, and - I think that was really what ended the job - not so much about my being too quiet and inoffensive but rather that I was a failure in being a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 sleuth}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  hound you see, so I always remember that little funny bit.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 During the short time that you were there what hours did you work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Well, we started at eight in the morning and most evenings it was eight in the evening before the shop closed, you see, longer even on a Friday night or
 Saturday night. They were long hours for shops in those days. Yes. I should say from eight to eight o'clock or nine at night, you see. Eight o'clock usually but - longer on Friday and Saturday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did you have a half day at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Wednesday afternoo
n - yes. Yes, Wednesday afternoon - which was not much good to me because I didn't know any other shop girls you see and consequently it was not - it was an afternoon that I sort of didn't go anywhere, you see, just sort of lounged about more or less at h
ome, you see. It wasn't a day of - that I would have called recreation - you see, not for me, you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 You said that your first wage was four and eleven.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 That was in the mill. This - this wage was four shillings. Four shillings per week.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did you feel that that was a fair wage or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Well, I thought it was a poor one but you had to make a beginning you see so that the four shillings was accepted without any protest, you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did you give the money to your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Oh yes, yes, all of it - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Would she put this into the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Yes, it went into the family pool - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did you get any of it back as pocket money?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Well, we - we - we used to get - supposed to get a penny in the shilling so probably I would ge
t threepence or fourpence, you see, out of it - yes, That was a standard - a penny in a shilling in those days for most working class homes. Was a kind of a standard that most people accepted without question, you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 How did the employer treat you on the whole?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
You mean in the shop? Oh well, I couldn't really complain - the - there was a lady of course in charge. This was not the - the proprietors wife - a - a lady in charge of you - she was very nice and very quiet and - seemed to know - she w
as very efficient and she gave me what orders there were to be given in the morning, dusting and emptying boxes and - you know, keeping check on stock coming in and going out and - re-ticketing prices on goods that kind of thing - she was very efficient a
n
d very nice - I had no - no call to - to query anything about her. The lady - the manageress, she was very dictatorial and - I never - I hardly ever spoke to her and she hardly ever spoke to me apart from just being angry and saying I was stupid when I ca
m
e back and said that I had not succeeded in finding out where Mr so-and-so had gone, you see, and she thought I was stupid really. But we didn't have much conversation so I can't say that there was any sort of cruelty or anything of that kind - oh no. It 
w
as just, I think, that they decided I was a failure almost from the first week and it was just a case of putting up with it until the months was over you see, I - I - you felt that - there was no encouragement I mean to say, now if you want to be a succes
s for - there was no training - if you want to be a successful shop assistant you must try to do this that and the other you see. They didn't. And one of the things that seemed to annoy or perhaps not }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15204880\charrsid11536143 anger them}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  is the right word - puzzle them was that I us
ed to take cocoa - we had to take our own afternoon tea because the hours were so long you see, you went back about two o'clock and you had an hour for lunch and then you see it was from two 'til eight or later, so they instructed me to take some tea and 
y
ou used to brew it down in a cellar base - in a basement of the shop. But I used to take cocoa and I think they thought I was odd - odd in that - drinking cocoa at teatime you see. Why I just - I just don't know why it was cocoa but mother put it up you s
ee and that was that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 How did you feel about the work yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 
Well, it was hum-drum - I felt that I - I was doing a lot of - dirty work that I hadn't anticipated, you see, because I'd always thought that shop assistants were always dressed up, 
you see, and very clean but they gave me an awful lot of clean - in fact I really felt that the month had been spent more in cleaning the shop out than in learning anything because they'd a tremendous amount of stock - boxes and boxes and boxes stacked up
 
you see which were covered with the dust of - oh, it must have been a long, long time since they were ever dusted and I had to climb this ladder you see and clean all these boxes and I was always more or less covered with dust, you see, and then they used
 to ask me to scrub the floor behind the counter - behind the counter it was bare boards. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 The counter that the customer saw of course was quite nice }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 linoleum}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  you see. But I had to scrub this floor and I do remember her saying I was a good scrubber and I sup
pose that was why the lady when she wrote said she's a good girl and a clean girl, you see, but will never make a shop assistant - I was clean because I'd been taught to clean at home, you see, scrub and do. But that wasn't being a shop assistant, you see
,
 and that in a sense rather disappointed me but I was quite prepared to stay on if it led to training you see but there didn't seem to be any training in the offing it was just you were a kind of errand girl and clean - cleaning up you see. I was never al
lowed to serve anybody or - tell then the price of things you see, I was just sort of in the background.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 And after your months trial you tried to find a job in suitable places and failed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 And eventually your mother told you try at the mill didn't she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 To get the job in the mill did you go to the mill?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Oh yes, you had - no they, of course in those - at that particular period the mills we not busy, you see, either. Trade was very, very bad that was why I got so d
ownhearted going round day after day, you see, because mother insisted that I went every day you see, somewhere and the result was that when I went to the mill there was quite a lot of girls the same age - all school leavers you see all more or less being
 interviewed together and - what I rather resented in my childish mind was the way they - they eyed you over almost like an animal, you see, and I wasn't }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 loquacious}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  at all - I just could answer yes and no and often I fell by the way because some of the girl
s you see were very sharp very quick and they were chosen you see for jobs and I began to think I was a failure - was a - beginning to think I was a failure and then this - manager, whoever he was, was inter - interviewing us said, you can - you can start
 
here and you, you see, and he picked a few of us out. And - but we didn't know what we were starting at or anything - we only knew the wage which was five shillings per week - it was given to me as five shillings per week and we had to - start, I think it
 
was about the week following, and - I can just remember being examined by a doctor - they had a doctor who came to the mill to examine you for cleanliness and - you were only in a few minutes. He just looked at your hair to see if your hair was clean and 
a
sked if you'd had any serious illnesses and just looked you up and down sort of thing and asked you a few questions and you were passed, you see, you were - you'd passed the doctor. So then you were taken into the mill and - well, I had several jobs befor
e
 I got into the weaving shed - they tried - whether it was a came of trying you or whether it was that adults were away sick or something of that kind but I did get several jobs. Well, the first - the first job that I had was - it was in a weaving mill th
a
t it was knotting - they put all the school leavers more or less together in one room and they were long table in this room and you knotted quilts - it was what was called a quilt mill - that was bedspreads they wove bedspreads you see, and these bedsprea
d
s in those days had fringes, you know, short fringes, and you had to knot these fringes - take each alternate bunch of ends as it were and knot them and you used to put - have a - put a little ticket in to say that you had knotted that - that quilt and yo
u
 were paid piecework and they were frightfully badly paid. In fact I never knew what a bordall was 'til I went to this mill and a bordall was a half a farthing and some of the quilts were - you were just paid a half a farthing - some was a farthing - a bo
r
dall and then a farthing and then you might get a half - threefarthings and a ha'penny but never a penny. Ha'penny was the highest rate you were paid, you see, according to the size of the bedspread - for a double bed you would get a ha'penny - for a sing
l
e bed you would get half you see, and a farthing and so on, and then all this was totaled up at the weekend and then you got your wage. Well it was a frightful wage - I could - some girls could make five shillings but I never could. Presumably because I h
a
d a very tender skin and in those days the quilts were - we - what we called very low picked, you may not know what that means, but that means that there were so few picks put in the weaving of the cloth that there were tiny little holes left you see, so 
t
o fill these holes up so that they would become more sellable in the shops they used to stick these quilts in a bath of size and the size - the sizing of them filled most of these little holes up so that you - you - you didn't detect them you see. But it 
a
lso made the fringe very, very stiff, you see, because it was a kind of starch and - the friction, you see, of constantly knotting these used to fray the skin off your fingers and - the - the most cruel part was that if you got a drop of blood on the frin
g
e you didn't get paid - you were fined for faulty material you see. And this made me very, very bitter. And so after some weeks I asked my mother could I leave - that I both detested the job and hated really having to go because they were very unkind to u
s
. They had a woman who was in charge, a rather short tempered angry woman and often I saw her deliberately, when you'd put your ticket your little ticket in this quilt she would do that like that and the ticket would fly out and you never got that registe
r
ed as being part of your earnings you see. And I resented it very, very much, you see. So I asked my mother could I leave. And she said yes, if I could find another job. So from there I went to another mill and I was happier there and as I say I did one o
r
 two - this was a mill that had both spinning and weaving - the two separate, you see, functions. So they put me in the spinning part for a beginning and I had a - a little job there which I quite liked and - I was in a - a small room with about probably 
e
ight or nine other women and I got - I seemed to get on very well with them and I worked pretty hard and as - I was always punctual and they liked me and I rather liked them but then after a time there the manager came and asked would I transfer to the we
a
ving side and I had no objections - I didn't know what the new job was going to be or anything about it and that was a fixed wage as I say of five shillings you see. So I went across from this spinning side to the weaving side and for sometime I used to s
i
t on the floor in the warehouse merely nicking blankets that had to be - they were weaving blankets and they head a little threat, you see, the whole length of the blanket was woven in the loom and then to separate it they put a threat in it and went on w
e
aving, you see, and all the sheets and blankets went on a roller. Well, my job was to have a pair of scissors and every time the blankets came over the roller you had to nick this little bit so that other people tore it across later on you see. Well, it w
a
s very, very monotonous but there was nothing to it and - I - I wasn't unhappy there It was monotonous and you often got very sleepy, you see, doing nothing but these coming over and just doing this, you see. But anyway that seemed to fade out the - the m
i
ll became slacker as it were and so they asked me then to transfer into the weaving shed. And there I was - rather terrified - the noise was dreadful because these other previous jobs had been rather quiet ones, you see, not much machinery. And I had to g
o
 round more or less collecting what they call bobbin heads and these were little bobbins that - the - the - weft was wound on and which the weaver put into the shuttle and when the yarn had woven off these - these things dropped more or less on the floor.
 The - the weaver should have picked them up and put them into a utensil but I suppose they were so busy they never bothered. So these little - they were little }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 pearls}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  like that - little bobbin heads - they were needed by the winders in the winding room to 
rewind the weft on them and when they got short they hadn't - a great supply of them, I had to go round the shed picking these little bobbin heads up - putting them in a basket and carrying them back, you see. Well, I - I can't say that I liked that reall
y
 because it was work that entailed going all over the shed in between the machines and I was terrified of these flying shuttles and there was very little protection of machinery in those days - they have to be protected now by the factory act - but in tho
s
e days it - most of it was unfenced and I used to see some shocking accidents. The weavers would have their - their aprons torn off them you see caught in some wheel or something and sometimes they had head - head injuries and arm injuries and I - I reall
y
 was scared - I was a scared child and - I used to have to grope under the looms you see to find these little bobbin heads because they - they used to roll. And then I realised that - that when I got my wages I'd only got four and eleven and I couldn't un
d
erstand why a penny had been deducted and I asked several of the - of my mates but they didn't seem to know anything about it. I asked the manager - the man who was over us - the overseer and he said he knew nothing about it and he said if you're dissatis
f
ied you'd better go to the office. And so I found my way in fear and trembling to the office and timidly asked why - why I was supposed to get five shillings a week and I was only getting four and eleven and I was growled at and informed that the penny wa
s
 deducted by the British Empire Cotton Growing Association - that they were growing cotton to compete with the Egyptian cotton etcetera and all the mills had to contribute something towards this Empire Cotton Association which I resented very, very much. 
I
 had to accept it because the reply was you see, if you don't like it you know what to do - get out - you see, that was always the thing that was held over your head. So I never got any satisfaction there and - then later on they asked me to go into the w
i
nding room and - which I liked better than being in the weaving shed because, of course, it was quieter - there wasn't as much noise - but we were in a basement, it was a very depressing room, there was no direct light - we had artificial light on all day
, but - the work was better than going round this terrible weaving shed and I stayed there for quite a number of years - 'til -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did you only spend a very short time in these previous?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Yes, a very short time really - yes. And the majority of my w
orking life in the mill was between the weaving shed - I went back into the weaving shed, you see, after I'd learned this winding, I - I was in the winding for quite a long time and then went into the weaving shed more or less to learn to weave with a - a
n elderly person, you see. And then I -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 About how old would you be then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Well, I came out at twenty-one, you see. I went in at thirteen and came out at twenty-one. And probably would be doing these odd jobs for about - 'til I was about sixteen I 
should thing and then I - I got the settled job you see, winding and then from winding to the weaving you see. Yes. But there were a lot of things that - were very, very unpleasant in the mill in those days - I don't say it is now because of course some o
f
 the modern mills are very, very up to date, you see. But we had no canteen of any kind - you just had to go in the morning at six - six - you'd start at six o'clock and then the engine stopped at eight o'clock - you hurried home, if you could get home - 
y
ou nearly had to run all the way because you'd only half an hour, and this mill that I was at was about quarter of an hours distance from home, so that you'd to run all the way. Mother would just have the tea out and the bread and butter, whatever you wer
e
 having - you didn't have very - very much more than bread and butter and jam or marmalade - and then you'd to rush back again because you'd to be in at half past eight for the engine starting again, and if you did happen to be late you had to go through 
w
hat we called a watch house - there was a - a very angry old man in - and you were fined - you were what we called bated, you see, if you came late - they bated you, they'd take - they took a penny - or more out of your wage for the minute or two you were
 late, you see, which again I - I very much resented.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Were you on piece work at the time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Yes, when I was in the winding room I was on piece work and when I was in the weaving shed - first we had just a small wage as a little tenter, you see, te
nting with a woman, but when you came to weave you were on piece work. So what I resented was that you were losing money by being late yourself you see, and then in addition the - the - they fined you, you see, which again was something that I resented ve
r
y much. And then there was no red cross - there was no first aid at all and if you got injured or if anybody was sick it depended on the other people who were working round about to take the person home - they'd no ambulances or anything - and - often - I
 
was supposed to be quite good natured - if anybody got hurt or they were sick, then I would volunteer to go home with them, you see, to take them home. So that I used to take the sick person home and then go back to the mill and I'd lost my wage - my earn
i
ng capacity, you see. And they never gave you anything - they never compensated you in any way, you see for these little jobs that you did - the little human jobs, and I used to be very disgus - disgusted with the - arrangements for washing. We had no hot
 
water, only cold water and the sinks were filthy. They were always full of tea leaves and old wet newspapers, you see, a lot of them stayed in the mill both for breakfast and dinner and they brought jugs of tea with all the leaves - tea leaves at the bott
o
m, well then it was just poured into the sink and they were really filthy. I hated having to go even for a drink of cold water because they were so filthy and the toilets were inadequate and in a very dark part of the mill and you avoided as much as possi
b
le going to the toilets, you see. There were no facilities and much of it was dirty work because you had to clean your own machinery, Saturday morning you see the engine stopped at eleven o'clock and - or half past eleven in that - in some cases, and you 
h
ad to do all the dirty oily cleaning on your hands and knees under the looms and you'd nowhere then - no hot water to wash your hands you see, and we used to have to go to the mill lodge - mills were then run by steam you see - and the water was dirty but
 
steamy, and you used to kneel down by the mill lodge and clean yourself before you went home on a Saturday. And as I say again I - I resented that kind of thing, you see. We had - when we were on piece - when we were on day wage we were given a little che
c
k with your number on - we were known by numbers not by names - and when you were enter the mill you used to put this little check on a board to say that you'd arrived and then at night you took it off to say - more or less say you were departing - and dr
o
pped it in another box you see. But of course, when you were on piece work that didn't apply, see. But - there were a lot of things - they - they were a harsh uncouth crowd, the people who were more or less over you and - hardly knew how to talk - how to 
s
peak to you and again - that always irritated me you see. But - I liked - I liked the work people - I liked the people that I worked with and always - always did because although they many of them were rough and uncouth they were very, very kind and they 
h
ad a - a very strong sense of humour you see. 'Course it probably was a good job that - it enabled them to stick to the job, you see. But I was one of the rebels - very quickly, and - of course that was probably why I got the trade union job later on you 
s
ee, because when there was anything wrong they used to come to me and say what did I think about it and if things got so very bad about bad yarns and - things like that, well, we - we used to form a kind of small deputation you see. And - I can remember t
h
e very first deputation I went on - we'd been bothering about whatever it was for weeks and weeks to have it put right and nothing ever happened so then in desperation we decided that we would go up to the management. Well, of course, in those early days 
I
 hadn't learned the art of negotiating and of course afterwards I could see what ought to have been done but we went in a body, you see, and the office was at the end of a very, very long - the managers office was at the end of a very long passage - and I
 
can remember us tramping down this passage like an army, you know, our clogs sounding and we got to this door and we knocked very timidly and a great voice shouted, come in, you know. Well, could hardly all get in we were - were so many of us, you see, an
d
 he turned round, you know, and he said, shut that door. Shut that door, and then, you know, what did we want. Well, the abuse we got was terrible - he wouldn't even listen and - he just absolutely brow beat us and I - I was supposed to be the spokeswoman
 
and I was stammering - you know - about these things and he just turned round to me - I can - I can always remember it - and he said, next thing, he said, you'll - you'll be asking me to provide sofas for you sit down on, and he bad us all get back to our
 work under the pain of being dismissed you see. Well, we all fell out of this room in disorder, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 you see}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
, and went back. But we christened him old sofa - he never got any name - any name after that, out sofa - he were out sofa. And we never had }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 any respect}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  
for him - he lost all the respect - and - he reigned for years with this kind of bullying - bullying attitude because the - the trade was so bad you daren't say anything, you see, you just had to put up with it. And it was that that got me going to the tr
a
de union, you see. The men were very well organized - the men weavers because they were an old association you see and trade unionism seems to come naturally to men and they - they always used to say to you, you don't want put up with it - get down to off
i
ce, you know, that sort of thing. So then we shifted our tactics from - bearding the manager in his den and going down to the office - they called it club then - go down t'club - going down to the club and reporting these things that were wrong and lettin
g the trade union secretary deal with them, you see, to see if he could negotiate between us and the management, you see. And of course, under that system we fared much better because we were not brow beaten the same, you see, as we had been previously.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 When did you actually join the trade union?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Oh, well, I had to join almost the first week I went in the mill. Father was a strong trade unionist, you see, and he insisted on any - any of the lads or the - Emily and I when we went in the mill had t
o join straight away. So the - the - it was a little collector that used to come round and it was funny that later on I found that this little collector had worked in the mill and they had called him hell-for-leather, or something, he had a nick - they al
l had nick - nick-names. And it was because he was a weaver and he used to go pushing through the shed, you know, through the broad }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 alleys}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  and that with all this cloth on his shoulder - in those days they'd to carry all the woven cloth, you see - and he'd h
ave great huge packs of - of a - of sheetings or quilts on his shoulder - get out of road - get out of road, you know, he was so keen on earning money you see. And so he started coming to our house collecting and - sometimes mother would say, Alice is not
 very satisfied, there's a lot of things going wrong at the mill. Tell her to go down club - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 tell her}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 go down club - you see, that attitude. And it - they were - a form - all the collectors that they had in the trade union at that time were former cotton op
eratives, they got the jobs by virtue of being cotton workers, you see. So that - I got very familiar with going down t'club, as we say, you see, and reporting things and - getting the women, of course, to join the trade union and that wasn't easy in thos
e
 days, you see. There were quite a lot of the - the operatives did join but we always had a bunch of - non-members, you know, who would - who would say, oh, unions no good to me, you see, sort of thing but that was how I got interested and I was only - I 
w
ould only be thirteen when I joined you see, because I had to join almost immediately - and remained, of course, and am still a member of the weavers association. I still pay my trade union money, you see. There was always a strong loyalty in our family t
o
 the trade union, you see, Kathy was on the committee of the cardroom association and she was very, very keen, you see, on women trying to get better conditions and better wages for the women in the cardroom so that we were all - always I think rather str
ong on the trade union side.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Was there any sort of feeling between the people who belonged to the trade union and those who didn't?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Yes. Sometimes they did. For instance, if we managed to get a little bit of a wage increase, you see, or if we man
aged to get - better - a few better facilities we would then go round and use it as a kind of argument, you see, and say well, now look you're benefiting by what the trade unions and don't you think you ought to join. Quite a lot of them did. They would s
a
y, oh yes, yes, I agree they've done something for us. But there was - there was always a hard headedness, you know, about Lancashire people - they must see something for their money. They never like paying money and not seeing anything tangible and it wa
s
 only at - at points like that - and there were not many of them until the - the first world war, because things were very static - very static, you see. And - but some of them would join and round about me in - where I worked we were very solid but - you
 
see, you couldn't go all over the mill, you hadn't the time, you see, or the facilities either, because, you see, if they saw you prowling round any - any - where else you - you were severely ticked off, you see, for not being in your own alley - you had 
t
o be, you see, in your own alley attending to your own looms or machines. So - and some of them, of course, were - reluctant to join because - it was only fourpence, it was fourpence a week then - and they were rather reluctant because of course fourpence
 
was fourpence in those days, you see, and often they would only join on the promise of bad trade benefit. You see, we had a bad trade benefit, so that when you were - you were stopped, out of work, they would pay - we used to get about six shillings a wee
k
, you see. And we cheerfully came on strike, you see, for - for six shillings a week - in those days, yes. If we felt that it was justified, you see, and it might not have been our place that was out on strike - it might have been somewhere else - but - s
omehow or other there was a loyalty - a basic loyalty - and we came out.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Was there any distinction felt between the trained craftspeople and the untrained?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Yes - I should say there was - there was a bit of aloofness. Yes, there was a bit of a - 
for instance, the overlookers in the weaving shed were considered the aristocrats, you see, and - they had a - a fairly good wage as compared, of course, to the weavers although there was in those days what we called a driving system which again the - the
 
trade unions had to fight years and years to get rid of - whereby the overlooker had a basic wage. But then on top of it he got a percentage of the weavers earnings - so it always made him that he was always bullying the weavers, you see, to keep their ea
r
nings up because his bonus depended on it you see. And they used to have a slate system which would - was very - very much resented - and he used to put slates up on the walls giving the earnings of all the weavers in the shed and, of course, the bottom p
e
ople were always told about the top notchers, you see. Mary so-and-so, well, she made so-and-so and if Mary so-and-so could do it you could do it, you see, irrespective of what sort of work you had in or your capabilities, you see. And we resented that ve
r
y much, you see, because some of them, of course, hadn't - well, they weren't - they weren't educated, you see, and they used to go in the mill before the engine started, doing jobs - we called it knob-sticking - and working during the dinner hour which w
as again you see breaking the rules and the regulations - but it gave them the chance of earning better money, you see. And it was those kinds of things that we resented about the slate system. And that was done }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 away }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 with afterwards and the overlookers more
 or less put on a kind of standing wage, you see. But they were always considered the aristocrats, you see, of the industry - foremen and that kind of thing and consequently there was a feeling that - we were two classes as it were. The people down below 
and - the people - people at the top, as it were.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 How did your wage alter during the time you were there between the ages of thirteen and twenty-one, you said?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Yes. Well, when I went in of course, as I said, I was getting four and eleven - five s
hillings with a penny deducted - and by the time I left I was averaging eighteen shillings a week, you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Were you then a skilled weaver?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Averaging eighteen or twenty. Occasionally I got a pound but it - it had to be some good work, you know, 
something that wove pretty well. Yes, I should say it was average because I was a hard worker - I mean, I was conscientious, you see, and always at the back of my mind was not the ability to make profits for the employer or anything of that kind - rather 
t
he home conditions, you see, always had at the back of my mind that sad face of my mother and I always wanted to earn as much as I could in order to bring something into the home to give us a little - a little more - you know, a little more culture, and -
 and more - a few luxuries, you see, we hadn't many, but - that was what I worked for really. So that I should say it was pretty average - pretty average.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did you have any training period for any of the jobs?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 No. Oh - no, you were put with someb
ody else and the first jobs that I had well it was only an hour - probably an hour or so because they were simple jobs, you see, and then you were left on your own. But of course when it became more skilled like the winding and the warping - the - that wa
s
 more skilled you see and you had to be more careful about it, well, there you would be put with another woman - to learn. But it wouldn't be more than a day or two, you see, at the most. And then you were given a set of what we call ends in the winding o
r
 warping room or you were placed with a woman in the weaving shed. But in the weaving shed it was much longer because it was more skilled - more highly skilled you see. And they only moved you to do - to go on a loom yourself providing the missus - we cal
l
 them missus that we're under - said she was fit to be moved. She had to say whether the girl under her - the little tender - was fit to be - and then she wasn't altogether left on her own because if they gave her loom somebody else was supposed to kind o
f
 keep an eye on her. But you hadn't any training as they have today, you see, the girls in the weave - now - go in a special room and they're trained away from the shed altogether, you see, but there was nothing of that you know. You'd no - no set trainin
g.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 Would you say that anybody who described themselves as a mistress - as duffing mistress or such - was inevitably a skilled worker?}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 The doffing mistress? Oh I should say that she'd worked there quite a while and was - was very capable of doing 
the job herself but I wouldn't say that she'd ever been trained in - human relationships or anything of that kind. They never knew how to speak to you, scarcely ever, you see all that was in the background - it wasn't considered part of the - of the job. 
I
t was only the mechanical process that really mattered - not the way you encouraged them or handled them or anything of that kind, you see. It was a - a - it was a - oh, I used to think brutal rather because the human element scarcely ever came in - scarc
e
ly ever came in. And nowadays of course they do train the - the doffing mistress or the - the - they call them supervisors in the sheds now - to know how to talk to the operative you see and not to - expect too much or - try to encourage them to do the th
ings that you think is best for that particular job - but there was no - nothing of that, you see. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 
No welfare and no - no welfare officers or anything that were really trained, you see, it was just the operative that worked there and either got - got on wit
h the foreman - there was a lot of favouritism of course - certain people pushing their own relatives in and that kind of thing which of course is inevitable, but that was how it came about we - we - there was really no training. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 I asked that question because of this business of classifying people into skilled semi-skilled and unskilled workers.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
I'm a little doubtful as to just which jobs would come into which categories at that time. The term semi-skilled was really hardly in use was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
No, not really. No, it wasn't. That only came later you see. Because there was such a lot of odd labouring jobs that were - you - you couldn't say they were skilled - they were odd labouring jobs. You know, for instance, if - if there were a s
lack period and they had - hadn't any orders for certain types you were asked to sweep the floors and the sheds and things like that, you see. Any odd job that came available you were more or less expected to do it, you see, without any resentment at all 
-
 merely to keep you in a job so you'd have a wage you see. But there was no grading really, the two jobs of course in the factories at that time were spinners - spinners were the aristocrats, you see, in the spinning side, because they employed the little
 
piecer and the side piecer who worked with them, you understand that. So they were the aristocrats and of course they wouldn't - they would have women - girls - in the - in the spinning room more or less doffing and doing odd jobs like that but they never
 
would allow them to become a spinner, you see, they could never rise to the top job. And it was - it was like that in the shed - weaving was classed as more highly skilled than - any other job in the weaving side, you see. Warping was - was supposed to be
 
more highly skilled than winding, you see. But that - there wasn't a great deal of - of kind of rigid class - by job - qualifications or anything - you more or less were expected - and yet on of the biggest grievances that I met later on, as a trade union
 
official, was the narrowness in which they kept - kept you, you know. You were - if you were a weaver you were a weaver for life, you see. If you were a winder you were a winder for life and so on through all the jobs. You were never encouraged or expecte
d
 to do anything else only that one particular job. Consequently you developed a closed mind on anything else and you were simply not interested in all the other processes, you see. Well, then later oh, you see, when automatic machinery became - introduced
 
into the mills you'd got to get people to change their minds on these kind of things, you see, and oh, it was - it was dreadful. In fact there is still a lot of opposition, even yet I understand, in the mills towards - modern machinery, you see, like the 
-
 water loom - where - where the yarns go through water - the shuttleless looms and things like that, you see, because they've been brought up in such a - in their early days I mean - in such a rigid narrow circle that mobility doesn't mean anything. It di
d
n't in those days of course we are becoming more mobile now. But that was one of the things that you felt frustrated with - that there was no offer of promotion - you could only see yourself, and most of the people that used to come in the office would sa
y
 to me, Miss Foley, I'm now nearly sixty and I'm doing the job - the same job that I went into the mill at fourteen. You see, there was no - no sort of higher reaches that they could - so consequently we nearly always lost to our trade union movement the 
m
ost intelligent people. I used to look round my committee and used to think, yes, that's a bright girl but I shall lose her soon. And inevitably when there were other opportunities they went, you see, and we were left with the rather hard core of - well, 
w
hy bother - you see, why bother about anything, you see. It's yielding us a wage and that's all that matters, you see. No, there were no avenues of promotion - especially for women. The men, now they - the lads who came in, they could - they could with a 
g
reat deal of struggle of course, get into the hut to be an overlooker apprenticed - they had an apprenticeship and there were certain jobs in the mills like the mechanics and that who had apprenticeships. Well, they could hope - the bright boys - for some
thing better but not the girls - no, there was nothing for the girls.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Was it when you were twenty-one that you went into the office?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Well, how that came about was - I don't suppose ever I would have got out of the mill but for the fact that it w
as Lloyd George's insurance act, you know. And in 1914 - well, it was brought in - talked about in 1912 - then it became bill in 1913 and became operative early 1914 and it was agreed, you see, in the interests of democracy at that time that the trade uni
o
ns could become approved societies - approved societies where the trade union could administer the national insurance health act, you see. And consequently they had to have sick visitors to go round - looking at the sick people - mainly because they thoug
h of malingering, you see, and paying out the sick - the sickness benefits, the maternity benefits and disablement benefits etcetera. Well, they had to have two each - each association with so many members had to have two women sick visitors - we were a }
{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 women\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 organization largely in those days, you see, the men - there were a few men weavers but not a great lot because slowly as they died out or the war came and they - they enlisted there was very, very few men left, you see. So the soc - the association -
 weavers association advertised for two sick visitors - women sick visitors of course. Now, again, I wasn't applying - I just felt I hadn't the education, I hadn't the personality and it was only this little collector - the trade union collector that came
 in and he says - hey, what about one of these jobs 3/8 - he says - that's going for a sick visitor. So he says, are you not going to apply? And I said oh no, I don't think I would get it, I said, I don't really know anything. But I was going then to the 
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 night schools}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 learning shorthand and typing, you see, commercial subject. And he says, take a tip from me, put in for it. So with that I did. But if he hadn't have spoken I shouldn't have applied, I was - you know, I - I mean I always have been never pushing
 - never pushing. And I applied and to my great surprise they sent for me for an interview and then I got a letter to say I'd been appointed - I wasn't really of age, you had to be twenty-one but I wasn't twenty-one I was twenty and so then I asked the se
c
retary afterwards when he'd written to say I was - I'd been appointed and he wished me well, I said, do you know I put the wrong age on I said I was twenty-one but I wasn't. And he said, oh that doesn't matter, he said, its only a few months and - you - b
e
fore you - you start working you'll have turned twenty-one, you see. So with - that was, how I got it. Well, it was - it was a delight to leave the mill, oh yes, didn't I feel glad and - but one of the things that hurt me was that it was only the woman I 
w
orked with wished me well. And they were - they were thrilled to bits with it and they thought - they said some very nice things to me but the manager and the people who you would have expected - they never said one word. I just went in and handed me noti
c
e in and they just took it like a scrap of paper, never said, well, we're sorry to lose you, sort of thing or any - perhaps - perhaps some of them were glad to get rid of me - and when I came out for the last time through that watch house I could have wep
t
 to think that I'd worked for them seven years, you see, and there was not one word of goodbye hope you're - hope you're happy in your new job or any - not a word and that was the atmosphere, you see, that atmosphere that there was. But anyway I settled d
o
wn and I was very happy. I used to - I had to get a bicycle and ran - well, it was - oh, I'd started to learn riding a bicycle and they'd asked me had I a bicycle and I said yes, so I had to go round because it was a very, very big district and it was Wes
t
 Horton and Horwich and Astley and Farnworth and Walkden and all - oh all over the place. And - but I was free, you see, I was free. And we used to have to take the money out and carry a great big bag of money - you couldn't do it today, you'd get cashed 
you see - and take the forms with you and - get them to fill them in and when they started to be ill and what - what it was all about. And then you used to have to visit those that you felt were dodging a bit, you see, because the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13978893 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  women - they had t
he tendency of course to want to stay at home and do some of the housework. Well, it was prohibited you see, was doing house chores whilst, you were sick you were supposed to be sick you see. So that part of it I didn't like - I didn't like the rather - t
h
e atmosphere of doing a bit of spying but it had to be done. And then you see, the war broke out and the assistant secretary was called up for service so the secretary, Mr Speke, suggested that - if I would learn more about calculations - arithmetic and c
a
lculating the sorts he would like to transfer me from that side - the insurance side - to the office. I probably would be about sixteen or seventeen then and - oh no, I was twenty-one of course, I'd - he was - I'd turned twenty-one then, but I had - I was
 
still going as - at twenty-one to the night schools doing - doing different things. So with that I tackled arithmetic and I went to have some private lessons in decimals and calculations and things and then moved over to the office side and of course did 
t
he office work - did the typewriting and the shorthand, the letters and - that was different than being outside - I missed the outside because I missed meeting people, you see, meeting people in their homes because I got into a lot of miner's homes - coal
 
and cotton have always been very, very close you see and the mines, of course, were then in existence then in West Horton and Astley, all round there. Consequently I got very, very friendly with the miners and their wives and - you see. So I missed that p
a
rt of it because I was indoors then more or less all the time. They'd a male committee which did not like women and didn't encourage women and I was a long, long time before I ever got any outside facilities you see, talking to the women. Then we got more
 
into the technique of shop meetings, you see, the employers were not anxious that you - the trade union people should be on the premises and - so we used to take schools pretty near the mill or pubs and meet the operatives there you see. So then I got mor
e outlet in being able to talk - talk to them and help them from my past experience in the mill, you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 About when would that be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Well, I should think a lot of that would be during the war period - from about 1914 to about 1924 or five. Well, 
the man came back, of course, after the war, the man, the assistant secretary, you see, came back about - probably 1919, I think, and so then I didn't get out again as much as I had been doing during the war because he - he started, you see, to take on th
e outside work so again I was more or less in the office just doing the - office routine work.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 That meant that there were sort of two assistants?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 There were three - yes, there were two of us then - he was the assistant secretary and I was just de
signated the clerk at that time - yes. And then - later on, of course, he - he decided that there wasn't much opportunity for him there because Mr Speke was relatively young - young you see and he couldn't see any sign of promotion so he went over to the 
e
mployers side - he got an offer from the employers association and to our - we were rather shocked because in those days you looked upon it as a desertion you see, but anyway he went over to the - to the employers. Well then they decided to advertise for 
a
 - an assistant secretary and to my chagrin they limited it to males - only men members must apply. And we'd not a great many - we'd probably about two hundred men out of about - oh well, at that time we must have had eighteen thousand members - and I was
 
very, very annoyed and often wished that at that point I had left the trade union and offered me services to something else you see because I felt very hurt to think that I'd done such a lot of work for them and then just because you were a woman you hadn
'
t to have your chance. Anyway, I suppose my loyalty kept me there and - they didn't appoint anybody. The applicant - applicants were so poor, from the men, they failed in the examination. So we went on without an assistant secretary for quite a while and 
t
hen they decided to advertise again and this time they dropped the word male out. So I put in again and went to sit for the examination - there were just two women with about might men putting in - and - Mr Speke afterwards told me that I'd come out with 
t
op marks and that I was thirty or forty marks in advance of the highest man, but they wouldn't appoint me. Again the - an - animosity towards women, you see. So I had to wait until Mr Speke himself decided to retire. Oh, they did make me as a kind of - co
n
solation prize - they said oh well we'll raise Miss Foley's salary and we'll call her the woman officer. So instead of being the clerk I was designated the woman officer and more or less took on the work of the assistant secretaryship then, had more scope
. But - I didn't get to be the Secretary until Mr Speke resigned and then of course I was called the secretary. But it was a long - it was a long uphill struggle, you see, and - much of it I enjoyed.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 So that being a welfare officer would have appealed to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
It would have appealed to me on the - on the side of the operatives. I don't know of course how I should have got on altogether with the - managerial side, you see. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 
There was one firm, a very big firm in Bolton, the director did write to me 
and invite me to call round and see him and he offered me the post of his welfare officer and - he asked me what salary I was getting and he said he would double it and I could make my own - give me carte blanche to make my own arrangements and all the re
st of it but I shook my head and I said no, I've been at the trade union last so long I'll keep - I'll stick to it now. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Because I just felt that - well, I was probably getting older too - and - he was very surprised - very surprised, because you see, he had
 the idea that money would buy you see, the doubling of the salary, and you will have a very good pension and - this that and the other you see. And I said well let me think it over and - but I knew when I was coming out of the office I wouldn't take it a
nd then so I wrote a very nice letter to him and said I was grateful for the offer he'd made but - I just felt that I was in the right - the right place and I would rather - rather go on with it. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 We all - we always got on - this director - he was of course 
very,very nice - I always got on with them and - although I'd fought his firm years ago because he - they used to have some dreadful managers and he used to say to me, leave me alone, leave me alone, give me twelve months of this place and I'll have it th
e happiest factory in Bolton - I used to say. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
O.K. but you know I don't believe you. I says how will you do it? And it was always oh we'll offer higher wages - we - it was always wages - wages - money - it was only the money. And I said, you won't do it you
 know. But - anyway he - this particular director once wrote to me and he says I know there's something wrong with this place, Miss Foley, and I think you're about the only one who can tell me what wants doing. And so I said, oh yes, I can - I can soon te
l
l you what's doing but I don't think you'll do it. And so we had quite a chat and I said you know that idea that you have that you're going to buy everybody with a bit more money and you - I said - how are you going to get your operatives, I said, you are
 
the highest labour turn-over than any mill in Bolton. They had - they were always coming - going, coming - going, and it never dawned on them there was something wrong you see and he says, that's what I'm alarmed about, he said, the change over is terribl
e
 you know, he said, we're training and training and then they're leaving and - and I said, well, it's this obsession, I said, that you have that there's only this - this link between you - this money business and I said, it's all wrong - all wrong. And se
v
eral of them did get rid of their managers because they said well, well, we'll just have to have fresh start Miss Foley and see where we - where we can go from there. But they did really - in the early days of cotton - there was a lack of imagination - oh
,
 a lack of imagination. And the understanding of people. And you must understand people, you know, if you got to get the best out of them, you've to understand them. And that was what - no they - they used to have charts on the office walls, you know, pro
d
uction this production that and I used to say, oh get rid of them, get rid of them and use a little bit of commonsense about it all and you'll get there. They used to employ clerks galore working out, you know, all these averages and showing where the lin
e had dropped and the line was going up and I used to think - eeh, what a lot of nonsense it is, you know, instead of really getting at the heart of the loyalty of the -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Was there any sort of enlightened firm at all in Bolton?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Well, the most enl
ightened at my - my time was Tootle Broadhurst Lees. And they were enlightened because they - they started a - a cont - a day }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 continuation}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  school, you see, that all girls and boys going into the mill at fourteen had to have certain half days off and attend their school - there - there, you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 And about when would that be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Oh well, I think it was on during the war. They were pioneers in that, you see, and I know I went once or twice to look at the school and they had a - a very nice person in ch
arge of the - some of the girls, teaching them cooking and shopping and what foods to buy and all that kind of thing. They also had English and the - they had arithmetic and they had a very, very fine amateur dramatic society, you see, made up of most of 
these young - young people that went in and they had quite a lot of outdoor recreation - tennis and bowls for the men and football and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 clubrooms}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  - it was very, very advanced was that - and I was very sorry when they discontinued it but they discontinued it 
I think, after the school leaving age was raised and - they said it - the youngsters were more or less getting bored with it. You know, they didn't like the idea of going back to school again and it was - it was - eventually they wound up. But that was an
 
enlightened firm and - they had - they had - the welfare - the welfare arrangements were, compared to the other places, were very, very good indeed. And they knew how to treat people and they got a better class - a better type of operative through it. I u
s
ed to be amazed how well dressed the - girls were and the women and how nicely they spoke as compared to some of the other mills, you see, because there was this kind of element of culture there, you see, and - of course their - they - they're not Tootal 
B
roadhurst Lees now - they're in a big merger you know and - but they still continue I think with the - with the welfare facilities, you see, they always have spent a good proportion of the profits on welfare and they also have a very, very good pension sc
h
eme you see and they - also allow the operatives to join in the other profit sharing scheme you see and at the end of every year, if there are profits, the - they have a share, they have a proportion of it - they share it out you see. So they were - they 
were advanced.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Were there sufficient then abouts to have pensions and profit sharing schemes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Fairly early - fairly early, yes. Before ever Courtaulds came in. Courtaulds is the best now for their schemes because they have three pension schemes. 
One is absolutely free - the operatives don't pay anything at all. There's another one that they pay a proportion and then there's another one that they can join so that quite a lot of them have a very, very good pension when they leave - very good indeed
. And they have, of course, very, very good - welfare facilities. But not - there weren't many of them in those days - they were the pioneers. They were the pioneers.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did they have these schemes before the war ended?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Oh yes, I should think - prob
ably not as well developed as they were between - probably twenty and thirty - 1920's and 1930's - because you see, there was a terrible slump in cotton after the war because, you see, we'd lost most of the markets, you see, by not being able to get the r
aw cotton to England, you see, all the - the boats were }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 being}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 sunk, you know, you remember that time. Well, you won't remember, you're much younger - but the Germans of course were sinking most of the cargo boats coming across so that we got no raw cotton t
he result was we lost most of the markets that we'd previously had, you see. So after the war there was a short fierce boom 'til about 1922 and then there was a col - oh a colossal slump which lasted into the thirties you see. And so these schemes for wel
f
are and that kind - and pensions - well, they were just nowhere and it was only after the revival - after the nineteen thirties and leading up to the second world war that - they were taken up again you see, being able to spend money on them. Then of cour
s
e, you see, during the war we got provision, you see, for compulsory - for canteens, canteens had to be provided you see, where there were so many work people so that - it - it almost came all these things in a rush - kind of a - a rush period you see. Th
e
y've become now accepted. Nobody would ever dream, you see, of - of saying you mustn't have canteens but - they can't do without them now because of the shift system because you see, you've no time to go home to meals where there's only half an hour for t
he meal break in shift working so that they have to have something on the premises.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 There wouldn't be any shift working before?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Not - oh, no. No, shift work only came in - there was overtime work during the war but it was for war purposes - aero
plane cloths and things like that, you know, in the first world war now I'm talking about. So that we had to agree to overtime although the cotton industry's always been opposed fundamentally to overtime. And - but we had to agree to it because of the urg
e
ncy of war orders, you see, and but there were no shift working like this - double shift - six to two, two 'til ten and now of course we're on - there is a three shift system, you see. But we fought very strongly, did the trade unions, against a shift sys
t
em, you see. We had a lot of struggle with Tootal Broadhurst because they went on a - this Tootal Broadhurst Lees which was the good firm - the went on it in opposition to the trade union and for a number of years we had to communication with them - only 
b
y the operatives coming down to the office to have a - to ask for advice because they didn't approve of the system, you see, and Mr Speke would not negotiate. So the mem - there was a strong membership but we could only do it through advising them you see
.
 This was after the war, yes. And between 1930 and probably 1935 there was, of course, a lot of trouble and disputes about the shift system coming in, you see. Then of course after the - with the second world war it - it just became almost inevitable. The
 competition you see and that kind of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 The mill hours would be pretty much the same would they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Well, when I first started in the mill it was fifty-four hour week, you see, fifty-four. Well, then - we never got any reductions - tremendous l
ong time - 'til 19 - 1918 - at the end of the first world war. And then it - it was reduced to forty-eight, you see. That stayed a long time and then it was reduced to forty-five in order to get Saturday morning for the women, I fought very, very hard for
 
that because the women always used to want Saturday morning off for shopping and cleaning, you see. So we got forty-five. Then it got to forty-three, this is out of my time now, forty-three they have and they've now forty and forty-one-and - a - half. But
 that was a long, long time to wait from 19 - from when - when it was fifty-four hours to come down to forty-eight, you see. But that the ward did - did enable us to do that, you see, to enforce - a shortening of the working day.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Would you say that your full time work changed your attitude to life?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Well, I wouldn't say it changed it fundamentally. It strengthened it. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 
The attitude was already decided, you see, and - consequently I always felt - strongly about the inequalities in life - inequalities
 of opportunity, you see, and it never - no, I wouldn't say it changed it at all in fact - in fact I should think it rather strengthened it you see, than weakened it at all and - my only probably, feeling is that we worked so hard to do so much for the pe
ople that we represented and that now so many of those ideals have gone by the board, you see, you - you look back and you think to yourself, oh dear - you see, I fought so hard for Saturday morning because I wanted the women to have Saturday morning. }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 I fou
ght so hard when the shift system came in - about having to work through the meal break, you see, it was established that the meal break should be one - half hour, you see, wherever they had it was half hour. Well, I fought very, very hard - even went dow
n
 to London to a special tribunal that was set up about - Tootal Broadhurst and Courtaulds wanting the weavers to work through that meal break. That was, they had to look after, before they went to their meal, you see and of course automatic machinery had 
c
ome in then and the weavers were running twenty-four looms each - when I went in the shed it was two and three, you see, and they were - they were running twenty-four and the employer wanted them to double - before they went to the meal the - one person w
e
nt off here so she doubled her load from a twenty-four to forty-eight and went round just supervising them. If looms were weaving badly she could stop them you see, but it still in - in my opinion of course - gave her that added load - it was an added loa
d
 before she went to have - have her meal. Then when she came back into the shed she had all the other stopped looms to attend to - that had been stopped during her absence you see. And I said it was bad and I argued with Lord somebody in London that it wa
s
 very, very bad for the digestion to be worrying - taking another load on just before you went to your meal and then coming straight off your meal not having no sit down or anything then to start - and he agreed with me. And he gave the verdict in our fav
o
ur and for some - for quite a number of years we got away with that - that the weaver had to have the half hour break. Well now all that's gone by the board and they're nearly all running through the meal break. And you - if you go in a shed you'll often 
s
ee the weaver with sandwiches on the top of her looms working and eating her sandwiches as she's working. And to my mind it's very, very bad and I often think when they're groaning about all the cost of the health service that a lot of it is due to that k
i
nd of thing. You see, you get all sorts of stomach complaints and that and - that - that's what rather grieves me that you got certain things that I know are fundamentally right - fundamentally right - and yet the - they give way on it. And you see, when 
I
 got them Saturday morning - quite a - well, it was the men who were the worst sinners on this - I had to fight the men weavers very - very strongly on it - but they wanted Saturday morning for the extra money, you see, it was a - you see, we got time and
 a half Saturday morning and they would fight to go }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568115\charrsid11536143 on }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
on a Saturday morning and the women at first refused, you see, and there were all this struggle and now quite a lot of the women have given way on it. Not all of them - a lot don't go in - it has to be 
on a voluntary basis for the women and - but you see, they feel - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15297942\charrsid11536143 pressurized}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 towards it. You see, if some women go in they feel, well, I ought to go in. and I feel that's a mistake, you see, that having got the free Saturday morning they should have kept 
it, you see, and things like that you see. But, no, it didn't alter my fundamental beliefs - my fundamental beliefs are as strong as they were when I - I went in as a girl, you see. This hatred of tyranny and - a senselessness of trying to drive people, y
ou know, instead of trying to encourage them, you see, and I - I believe in co-operation not }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15297942\charrsid11536143 competition}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
. I would much rather people co-operated in an undertaking rather than you - you got one}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15297942\charrsid11536143  a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
gainst another fighting all the time - she's getting a bit more than me and there's something wrong because she's getting a bit more, you see. No. No, I rather fancy it - it strengthened - it strengthened the fundamental principles that I had.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did starting work change your relationship with your parents - I know you said as you grew older your mother left you to make your own }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15297942\charrsid11536143 decisions}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  and so on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Yes. Yes, I should say it did a little because as you're growing up you criticize your parents much more. Use your ability to - now in my childhood I never critici
zed you see. I used to pray for father, - oh yes, pray, pray, pray I prayed every night - hours - that he would give over drinking and that there would be some kind of happiness and harmony in the home for the sake of mother, you see. But when I - came ho
m
e from the mill - I began to realize that there were perhaps faults on both sides, you see, and - mother couldn't talk, she couldn't discuss, she couldn't enter into things that he was interested in and I noticed that you see, I noticed it then. And, more
o
ver I didn't think she was - she had sufficient sympathy - with me especially, because, Kathy she didn't bother with, you see, Kathy had more or less happed out a line of her own you see, by going into nursing. Emily had accepted mill life and never grumb
l
ed at it and I was always grumbling. You see, I was always finding faults with something or other - a bit rebellious like father, you see, wanting to do things and yet not really knowing how - how to do them. So that I should think that it rather did, and
 
of course I realised then, the older I got, how - rather ashamed I was becoming of father - I hadn't been ashamed as a child but - and yet I must have been because one of the things that I - I remember now when I used to go to school if there was any - an
y
 nice house that we passed with nice curtains and nice clean doorstep and that I used to say to the other kids that were with me going to school - my auntie lives there and I always used to pick the nice houses out, you see, and say I had a relative. I ha
d
n't but - and one little Irish girl got fed up with this one time and I remember her challenging me and she said, well go on up - up those steps and knock on the door. Your auntie might give you some toffees. Well I couldn't for shame to say no and so I u
s
ed - and this - this happened often and I used to go up and knock at the door and if nobody came, of course, I was relieved and I used to come back and I used to say - oh, me auntie must have gone out shopping - there's nobody in. But if a lady came to th
e
 door I used to say, oh, oh, could you tell me please if Mrs so-and-so lives here, you know, her name and she'd look and she'd say - eeh, I don't know - no, I don't think there's any person of that name in this row, but if I were you love I'd try that one
,
 you see, I think she might - she might live up there, you see. And I used to come bouncing back and I used to say - oh me aunties gone to Blackpool, you see, and it must - and I - in fact, I used to tell the kids at school that he wasn't my father - that
 he was my step-father. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15297942\charrsid11536143 
And then there was ever such a bloo - no, not a step - he - well, yes, I'd probably say a step-father then - and there was such a blooming row at home when it got back you see that I'd been telling everybody that he wasn't my father. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
So that it - I must have had this idea that - I wanted to forget him, sort of thing and so I was more Critical you see as I got older I became more Critical of him. And when, of course, I was only sixteen when he died - he - he was removed as it were from
 that circle and I could then turn most of my attention onto mother and so for - well, until I joined the Clarion cycle club and we got going off on our bicycles which I often think mother resented because she - she'd really nobody then, you see, we were 
off on these bicycles and often }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15297942\charrsid11536143 went}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 for weekends - we had a camp in - at Rivington - and I dare - I looked back after it and I used to think perhaps it was a bit cruel, you know, this break that we made, but - I do think you do criticize your parents after
 you've started working more than you did before. You - you're getting a bit }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15297942\charrsid11536143 independent}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 , you see, aren't you.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did your relationship with your brothers and sisters alter?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Well, I don't think it altered with Kathy. In fact - Kathy took us about.
 She took me about anyway more - particularly after father died because we were able to leave the church and were able to join the Labour church you see and became interested in the socialist movement and then they started a socialist Sunday school which 
w
as held in what was a sales room but which is now the headquarters of the Conservative party in - somewhere round Mosely Street there, you know, I forget the name of the street but it - we used to go every Sunday to the Sunday school and, probably, in it'
s heyday there might have been a hundred and fifty members and children and - adults as well, oh yes, quite a lot of adults - and we used to - open with a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15297942\charrsid11536143 hymn}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  and we had a chairman who was very, very good and then my sister - the elder sister - became the 
chairlady and we used to have different lecturers - different people who came we - we separated into groups, you know, like - the youngsters and the middle group and then the - the juveniles and then the adults you see. And we used to have some very good 
p
eople who came and talked to us on various problems and - and things that were going on at the time and I owe a lot to that socialist Sunday school because - only last night when I was watching the - Apollo - I just thought oh if only George Grundy could 
b
e alive today. George Grundy was a remarkable chap who'd worked in the mill and he turned to botany and astronomy and he - he had at that time an allotment - a large allotment - up - up - the top of Charhill Road - it was - Markland Hill - Markland Hill, 
and - he had left the mill then, he'd got very disgusted with the mill and somebody I suppose who owned this - this allotment - had put up an - a telescope. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15297942\charrsid11536143 
It was - it was rather on a hill and George went to look after this allotment after he left the mill
 and he used to invite us - we were only youngsters - to come up from the socialist Sunday school on dark nights in the winter we used to go up there and do you know he - he showed us the whole of the moon as clearly as the - the whatshisname did last nig
h
t and he knew all the names of the craters, you know, and the sea of tranquility and all that and he used to - he used to be absolutely absorbed you see, letting us look at these - the - he would put it on Saturn and show us the rings round Saturn and all
 sorts of marvelous thins and he was an uneducated man. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
He had left school, you know, thirteen and botany - he - he was very, very good at. But I thought about him, I thought - eeh, wouldn't he think something about this you know, he used to say - eeh - he 
used to talk very broad, you know, he used to say - se thee, see thee, see thee how beautiful it is and we no more sense than go fighting one another. You know, the war. He was a conscientious objector and he spent about three years in Wormwood Scrubs for
 
his opinions you see, but he was a remarkable man and we'd a number like that with a little chap who was - what did they used to call it - reading your - reading your bumps - phrenology - phrenology - he was a very, very clever phrenologist and almost as 
g
ood as a doctor and he used to - to read our bumps and tell us our aptitudes and what we ought to try to do and what we ought to try to avoid, you see, and he was very, very good and used to give us the best sex lectures - and we were only probably fiftee
n
 or sixteen at that time - that I've ever heard in my life - and there was no embarrassment - he was just like a doctor and he used to bring us pictures of - of syphilis, you know, showing us the - the terrible things that it did, you know, and I thought 
how wonderful to think that they'd got all that in that uneducated age, you know, really. It - it really was a marvelous - marvelous little Sunday school. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15297942\charrsid11536143 
And if it was fine on the Sundays when it was in summer they used to tell us to bring some bread and b
utter with us - sandwiches - and instead of coming home afterwards we used to go on the buses out into the country and I knew quite a lot of Rivington - Rivington Pike that I would never have seen but for those little rambles that we used to take - they w
ere - oh, it was an interesting place - very interesting. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 And we'd a little chap who was a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15297942\charrsid11536143 genius}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  for music and he was a joiner at Dobsons and Barlows and he used to come and give us lessons on music and honestly the people that he trained to sing - he trai
ned me - I hadn't really no voice but he used to say oh yes, you have, you've a - you've a good voice, and he used to come down and you - we had - we had no sense of notes - we only knew we were going up and going down you see, but my word he trained quit
e
 a lot of good singers and he - he had a choir - he started a choir. And this choir - we used to go to the - temperance hall - we'd a temperance hall then in - in St George's Road where they started the films - the early films were there and we used to go
 
about all over Lancashire singing at Socialist meetings, you know, Victor Grayson, Kier Hardy and all the old stalwarts It was a - it was a - a really good period, that, in my life, very good period. And it - so that I - I really in a sense drifted away f
r
om mother - those - that period - but came back - after - in the second world war because one of the brothers never came back from the first war - he was killed out in France and the second - Tom went out and he was fond of horses and he went in the vetin
a
ry corps and he was away years after the war because they went to Palestine - he crossed the desert with - what was it - General - General - I forget - a famous general - and he used to write the most marvelous letters about crossing the desert and he was
 
fascinated with the stars and the moon and he used to say you want to come out here, Alice, in the desert and then you'll see the moon and the stars and - well, he came back and died - didn't live very long after he came back from Palestine, but - prophes
i
ed this would happen - the war between Israel and the Arabs. He said he liked the Jews very, very much - he thought they were an exceptionally nice race of people but he had no - no - no truck at all with the Arabs - they were sneaky. He said they used to
 
hide everything in the sand but they always knew where they'd hidden it, you know, and they were always stealing and pinching but anyway he - he came back and came back very religious. He had lost his religion before he went but he came back because he'd 
b
een interested in the Padre that was with the troop you see and I think if he'd lived he would have drifted back to the Catholic religion. And we used to have a lot of arguments about socialism and he used to say, yes Alice, I was a Socialist but it doesn
'
t answer everything, it doesn't answer everything. And - but anyway he died so mother was left alone then so that brought us closer - closer together and all the years that I was at the office I devoted most of my - I had very little leisure, but I devote
d
 most of my leisure to try to make up to her for what she had missed, you see, and I used to take her on holidays and take her away for weekends and all sorts of things to bring you know, some - some compensation into her life, you see. So I think she was
 very happy at the end of her life you see. Very happy.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 You spoke about joining the Labour Church.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 That would be different from this Sunday school?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Well, that was the - that was the forerunner the Labour Church because the Labour
 church went out later on and there was just the Labour party and this Socialist Sunday school but most of the people who were - who had supported the Labour party joined the Socialist Sunday School, see what I mean - the Labour church I mean, because the
 
room was taken off them. Their rooms that they were having were taken off them or it was that the rent increased enormously and they couldn't afford to continue or it might have been that they were unable to get the speakers and pay the expenses because t
h
ey used - they used to have their meetings on a Sunday evening - the Labour church, and they used to bring most of the outstanding politicians and Labour people - Snowdon - Lord Snowdon - well, not this Lord Snowdon but Philip Snowdon he used to come and 
h
is wife - who became Lady Snowdon afterwards - and all the outstanding people they used to bring up from London, you see, for these meetings. Well, I suppose it must have been costly bringing them up, you see, and having to put them up and that kind of th
i
ng. But for some reason that I never quite understood why the Labour church did go out of existence but this Sunday school emerged from its ashes as it were and went on for quite a long - many, many years, did the socialist Sunday school. And it was a goo
d training ground.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Were you active in politics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Well, active in this sense that I always belonged - I always paid - you know, a donation to be a member - I was always a member - and - at election times always we threw ourselves into it - used to 
go down writing poll cards and canvassing and - all - always supported candidates that were put up in the interests of the party. And also when we were cyclists we belonged to the Clarion Club and we used to go on our bicycles anywhere where there were op
e
n air meetings to swell the throng, you know what I mean, and we used to deliver literature and - do all sorts of odd jobs even when they had meetings in the - in the - temperance hall - or the Grand Theatre in Bolton we used to act as ushers, and you kno
w, giving pamphlets out and all that kind of thing. Yes, we were - we were very embroiled in it - in the early days I mean. I started the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15297942\charrsid11536143 women\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  Labour group in Bolton you see, that was during the first world war. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15297942\charrsid11536143 We got a number of women together and of c
ourse there was a lot of grievances from soldiers wives you know about not receiving their pen - their payments at the right time and all that kind of thing so we - we had a mass meeting in a spinners hall - I remember it very vividly - and quite a lot of
 the women joined and we started a - a Women's Labour group which went on for years which I think in fact it's still in being but I don't go now but - we were really very active and we did a lot of voluntary work - yes.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 You mentioned the Socialist club.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Is this what you mean or was this something else?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Well, the Socialist club is - is still in number nineteen Wood Street, you know. That was - I suppose really out of that and the demise of the Labour church was born the Sunday schoo
l, but I should imagine that the Socialist club had a lot to do with it because it more or less financed it you see. They were they group that could make money because they had a bar and all this - the drink brought - brought the money in. The Labour chur
c
h didn't - didn't agree you see - they were more - more a temperance group than - and they didn't believe in clubs at all because they thought it lowered the intellectual tone and they didn't of course believe in drinking you see, so they had to close dow
n because they hadn't a bar and they - they were short }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15297942\charrsid11536143 of funds}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 but the socialist club prospered because it had this bar upstairs, you see, and they - they financed the socialist Sunday school. Paid the rent of the room you see and that kind of thing. And t
hey were the ones who had the choir - we practiced in the socialist club, you see, they lent us a room for practicing - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 What sort of religious element was there in the Labour Church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Well, it was a very strong ethical - ethical influence. T
hey didn't talk so much about God as they talked about man and - their hymns and that were all centred round more or less the wonder of the universe - they believed very strongly in evolution you see, Charles Darwin's evolution and we had any amount of ta
l
ks and lectures on that and - illustrated films, you see, and things of that kind. But they - they didn't - they didn't press - the idea of God so much as they did the fellowship of man - that was the - the main theme that they - they talked about. We had
 
ten socialist commandments and all of them were positive as against the Biblical negativeness, thou shalt not, thou shalt not - you see. They - they were - a very good set and we always opened with reciting the ten commandments you see - the socialist ten
 
commandments I mean and they were all positive you see - love your father and your mother, you see, for what they were doing for you, you see, and it - every one of them began with you know, do or believe or something positive - not thou shalt not, you se
e
, of the - of the Biblical ten commandments. And there were some very, very good brains no doubt amongst the people that came - very tolerant. There was no - no felling of - people might be superior in the sense that they had money and a big house and the
y
'd had education but fundamentally you were all human beings, you see, and if given your chance to bring out the potentials then we would have a better race of men and women, you see, with the emphasis on the potentialities, not on a rather crushing side 
of the logical beliefs you see - believe this because it's tradition - believe that, you see, because it's tradition. No, there was none of that. There was a very open fellowship - very open.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Would this be a sort of humanitarian equivalent?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Yes.
 I should think that in those days it was the equivalent of the humanitarians because when - when I read about them or listen to anybody I think, eeh, shades of the Labour }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4265682\charrsid11536143 Church and}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  the Socialist - Socialist Sunday School - yes, it was on a humanitarian principle.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 After you left school and were working obviously your interests broadened out tremendously and you met a very much wider range of people.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Did you make any special friends - personal friends about that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 No. I don't 
think I did. Not - not very close personal friends. That's been one, of course, of the things that I've regretted and largely I blamed that on our early childhood. Never being able to invite anybody in the house because we were always afraid father would 
b
e drunk, you see, and Kathy - was the one who - brought - introduced us to very nice people and she always had to run the risk and she used to say to mother - I'm going to bring so-and-so and so to tea this afternoon and think on father and the lads keep 
i
n the back kitchen - they don't come in - don't come in this room, you see. Mother would be very worried about it all because she never knew when there would be an outburst you see, and - mother of course was always nervous and apprehensive - she used to 
say to me, it's now but long curtain talk. See, when they were talking about politics and - and a lot about culture and that you see, now but long curtain talk. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4265682\charrsid11536143 
And - but she was the one who had that capacity to make friends like that and I couldn't - even 
when I was - when I was older and was supposed to have a rather - well, a better post than in the mill - I never was a great conversationalist and - I remember meeting Ghandi - I liked him very much - you know, the - as - he came over in - what time would
 
it be - it was - oh, I was only - probably about twenty-three - and he came to the office - the - the - Indians had put on the tariff for cotton goods you see, and of course it was - it was hurting the Lancashire cotton industry and Ghandi was coming over
 
to this country for some special purposes and he was staying with a family near Egerton - the Barlows - I think it was the Barlows - who owned Barlow and Jones - and he was staying at their big house up there and so the cotton people persuaded Ghandi to c
ome down to our office and see some of the Lancashire textile people - the trade union side, you see. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
And he came and he brought his little spinning wheel with him and he was spinning all the time he was talking, you see, and I always remember it - I wasn't
 supposed to be there but I was in and out you know and - on - on one occasion when I had to go in for something I heard him say they'd all been lamenting you see about how it was hurting the Lancashire cotton people and how the wages were down to an aver
a
ge of twenty-five shillings a week and this, that and the other and he listened quite calmly and then he says, yes, yes, I understand - but do you realize that my people are working for nine pound a month. You see. And, then in the evening they invited hi
m
 to a - a dinner at the Swan Hotel at which I was invited. And I remember the - they were all tucking in to roast duckling and goodness knows what and poor Ghandi had just dry bread and water and they thought it was just - rubbish you see, and Mr Speke wo
uld say to me, you know, he's a hypocrite. I said, oh no, oh no, no, he isn't hypocrite. I said, he's a saint and you can't appreciate it. And he was really, he was - Ghandi was a saint, you see. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid4265682\charrsid11536143 I met certain people like that you see but never sort of neve
r made friends with them and I always remember - you - do you know anything about Jomo Kenyatta - the man who is at the head of - isn't it Gambia that's - the - is - Mboya has just been assassinated - do you remember that? }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Well, I took the chair for that Jomo }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4265682\charrsid11536143 Kenyatta}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 years and - only very young. Hes was in England and he was doing a little bit of studying at Manchester University and to find him a bit of work so he wouldn't have to go back so early the W.E.A. took him on as a kind of tutor in foreign affai
rs, you see, and he came to Bolton to lecture on the - the kind of life they had to live you see, in Gambia and I took the chair for him and so when he became Premier of - of Gambia - the place he is at - Gambia is it - we sent him a letter of congratulat
i
ons from the W.E.A. and reminding him that he'd had early associations with us, you see, and he wrote a very, very nice letter back. We asked him whilst he was in England - he was in England at the time - could he come and speak for us, you see, in the Bo
l
ton branch, but anyway he said he was - he was far too busy - he was tied up, you know, with all the - leading people. But, I never really in a sense made - made many friends - Mr Speke had a - had a technique that he never agreed with inviting people who
 
were on his committee close to the work to his home. He said it was dangerous - there was always such a lot of catty gossip going on. And so he never did and I never did - I suppose I followed in his footsteps and I never closely associated myself with th
e
 committee. And it perhaps was a mistake - probably was because I know quite a lot of people who used to say, yes, she's all right but she's very stand-offish. Oh, she's a snob. The Labour party once said, we could - we'd like you to stand as a candidate,
 
you know, but you - you're a bit of a snob. Well I never was a snob - never. But I - I had this aloofness that had grown up with me and I never really got very close to people. Only just to - to a few people will I ever open out, you see, because we'd nev
e
r been accustomed to it in the home - it - it was a mistake but it grew up with us and I'm still - the same - rather aloof - rather aloof out - more outside people I think. And even, as I say, getting in touch with a wider circle of trade unionists and th
a
t kind of thing - to some extent I wasn't always in tune with them because one of the things that I always said was I would never force any of my members or even persuade them to do something that I didn't want to do myself or couldn't do myself, you see.
 
And when we got the shift systems coming in the employers secretary of course used to abuse me quite a lot about it and used to say it's your business to tell them what they've got to do, you see that kind of - I said, no, no, I said, I - I can't do that.
 I said, I'll put both sides to them very, very fairly, I'll tell them for and against and I said then they must make -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4265682\charrsid11536143 At the beginning of this tape Miss Foley started to tell me about the open air meetings which used to be held on the Town Hall ste
ps where there was a wide variety of different speakers representing various religions and political opinion who were received with good natured heckling but without any kind of rowdyism at that time. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 These meetings were held on Sundays.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Would have s
o long, perhaps half an hour, and then he would step down and somebody else would - hold forth - it might have been an atheist used to have a lot of atheists come along and they would hold forth. Again the crowd would - some would leave, some would - }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4265682\charrsid11536143 others}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 would join it and again there would be good natured heckling and people quoting Bible - things - things in the Bible that they didn't think was true and all that kind of thing. Then there would probably be a - a - one or two politicians. There would be, 
perhaps, a Conservative come along, but they all honoured that idea that everybody had to be given a turn you see, what - what - was a thing I liked about it. And the Conservative would hold forth about politics and about the town council - there would al
w
ays be a lot of things about the town council which was a good thing because now I feel that local government its always more or less forgotten - its pushed in the background. And then the Socialists were always there. There was always a - a Socialist spe
a
ker and it would go on 'til very dark, you see, the evenings would grow dark and that went on for a long, long time. And then, you see, one of the councilors suddenly moved that the Town Hall steps would look very much nicer if they had lawns at the side.
 
It was a good idea yet it was a bad one because it broke up the open forum and we never had it again. And they - the - they laid the lawns and the flowers but it put a stop to - these speakers on the steps and people standing round because in those days t
h
ey had no mikes you see just speak and you'd to be rather near so that you heard everything. And I always remember I heard the first - time I ever heard about the prison system in this country from a man who'd been jailed for something he'd either done an
d
 he gave a very, very vivid description of the prisons you see and the routine that went on in them and there was always strange people coming along, you know, with their strange experiences you see. Well, that went you see. Well now its rather interestin
g
 to see that with the precinct they are going to start something again aren't they on the Town Hall step, yes. And I thought they might well say there's nothing new under the sun. There isn't really. But somehow or other - the classes seemed to get more t
o
gether didn't they. They seemed to me anyway, to get more together in those days than they do now and - I hope something comes out of the precinct along that line if only to compare it - compare it with the old days, you see. 'Course there weren't as many
 
newspapers - people didn't read the same and of course there was no radio or television so that open air gatherings were one source of gathering information, you see, which of course we don't need now because of the telly and the - the radio, that kind of
 thing.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Would you say that all classes of society were represented amongst the throng at these meetings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Well, I wouldn't say they all were because, of course, the - the better educated and the - the - the aristocratic side would - would think i
t a bit low to go standing on the Town Hall square listening to an orator, you see. No, I don't think they would be there at all. Because I - I can remember when we used to go round with the Clarion we used to have meetings - at some - usually at Rivingto
n
 - we had it on the Rivington Green, you see, and whilst people came out from the cottages and people who were rambling and that came we used to see the disdain written on the faces of some of the people to think that we were desecrating the village air, 
y
ou know, with talking like Socialism and the outcasts and all the rest of it so that I shouldn't think that it did represent the aristocratic circle - they - they would never dream of doing anything so vulgar, you see, as standing at street corners - eith
e
r shouting or - or giving out literature, you see. No, I don't think they did really. But, they were a help to people who were seeking information, you see, on topics of local government and things because you see you used to get all sorts of people compl
a
ining about the state of the streets - the rents of houses being too high and all sorts of things that otherwise you wouldn't have got to know, you see, they came out in those - if they had a grievance, you see, they - they up and told the speaker about i
t
, and then he would say - he might - he might have been a councilor himself - there used to be quite a number of councilors speak - and he would say oh well, the next council meeting I'll raise that point, you see. Whether he did and there was anything de
v
eloped from it of course I wouldn't know, but it was an opportunity. No, I think the classes were separate. Even thought today they're separate aren't they to some extent. But not - not so much - not so much divided as they were then - sharply divided I m
ean.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Was there any social mobility at all in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Movements, you mean? Not a lot. You see, when you moved into a house, our neighbourhood, in my circle I mean, you stayed there until you died really, you very rarely moved. Well, now of cou
rse there's much more mobility you see. You'd never dream of - well, I don't think we should ever have dreamed of moving from the town until it came that they were building council houses and then you see we applied for one and got one on the outskirts of
 
the town and it was the first time we'd ever had any fresh air or a garden, you see. And - I know I can remember as a child my three ambitions were to - one, to have a bicycle, two to have a piano and three to have a garden and I was twenty-one before I g
o
t any of them. But - you see, you didn't move around - you stayed in this - in the same circle really and - now you see they're really having to demolish the slums almost against the wishes of quite a lot of the tenants you see, because of course it break
s
 - it breaks the community to some extent. My mother, when we moved to - from Fern Street up to this corporation house - council house - she looked forlornly out of the window and I thought it was wonderful because there was a lark singing and I'd never h
eard a lark sing and it was trilling away in the sky and she was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4265682\charrsid11536143 gazing}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 out and she turned to me and she says - what's bought me up here fore, there's now but cocks and hens? You see, the difference, you see, the kind of separation of the generations. Back 
street and the front street and gossiping and shops - that was her world and we'd moved her from it, you see, and - she never really settled down - never really. She - she made the best of it for my sake, you see, but never really settled down. }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4265682\charrsid11536143 And she - I
 used to take her to the park a lot - we had a park very near us - and I used to leave her sitting in the park on summer days whilst I went to the office and she would tell me afterwards that she'd get sit chatting with people on the - she could chat to s
trangers, you see - there was no inhibition there about talking to strangers - and she - they would tell me afterwards that - said - eeh, your mother does think you're wonderful. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
She said, we were grumbling about this, that and the other and we were saying 
this ought to be done and that ought - and she says - I'll tell our Alice and they'll send a letter up paper. She had - she had great ideas how you could put things right by sending a letter to the paper - the Evening News. But - there's a lot more mobili
t
y and of course I think it's a good thing really it's a good thing. But we suffered from it, you see, we suffered from the lack of mobility because you were tied to the job, you see. You were tied more or less to the one shop who you went to and you were 
t
ied to the one school and - you - you didn't change schools and you - you - you didn't change much at all, you see, you grew up in that traditional fashion, you see, and it wasn't until you get much older and then you can compare that you begin to see tha
t there is something - a good deal to be said for mobility.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
You described your community as a close knit one and people helping one another when they were ill and so on - did people come to help your mother on any occasion?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Well, they were alway
s friendly but they were always rather afraid of father and they would bob in - put their head round the door and have a good look and if he was in they'd decamp. But if - if she wanted sort of any - anything doing they were always ready and willing to co
m
e you see. She did most of the going and the doing, but there was a responsiveness that if there was a need there and you told them about it they would help. She was - very hesitant about ever asking anybody and I never heard her, in the whole of my life,
 ever ask for a penny piece off anybody. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4265682\charrsid11536143 
You see, a number of them they would go down to the guardians if they were pretty des - destitute, you see, they would go down to the guardian and plead poverty and perhaps get a little bit of help, but she never would. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
She thought it was rather degrading and she would rather fight her own way you see. But it was a helpful community in that sense, that you all stood by one another and if anybody got prosecuted for anything well it all went round the neighbourhood and 
if you could help by having a little collection towards a fine or anything like that it was done you see. But there was a community sense that you don't have now, you don't have nowadays. Because people are - well, they're more prosperous and, whilst they
 invite you in - into the house - there's not the same homely community, you see, that there was. Not the same 'Course people rely more now on the social services, you see, don't they for everything and so that's - that's gone by the board really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Do you know much about what went on in the other social classes in Bolton about that period?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Well, I think there was a - in the better class - in think there was a genuine liberal feeling that things were wrong - that there was too big a gap, you know, b
etween them and the fairly cultural standard living and ours, you see, in the backstreets and that kind of thing because I - there was - there were quite a lot of charities and they were always supported by the people who - the better class people, you se
e
, and whilst I used to be - feel a bit cynical bout it - because of my experiences in the mill and that kind of thing - I think at the roots there was some genuine feeling for it, you see, and when I joined Bank Street Chapel, which was later on - they we
r
e nearly all fairly - fairly well off quite a lot of - of aristocrats of Bolton. They nearly always had the mayor - the mayors nearly all came from Bank Street for quite a period - Liberal Mayors you see, and - there was a feeling that, I suppose in their
 
way they felt things were unevenly distributed, you see, and I know they had some very, very good classes. There was one man who took the men and he had a class of probably about thirty men and - didn't show any sort of feeling that he was superior to the
s
e other chaps that were coming to the class - the Sunday school class, you see, so that - I've grown a little bit more charitable towards them - my mind used to be on, yes, they go and live on the outskirts of the town and they had nice houses and nice ga
rdens and they don't care two hoots about us living in these backstreets, you see, they're indifferent to us. But perhaps that was a little bit harsh }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4265682\charrsid11536143 criticism}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  because a lot of them were mill owners and that was what made me a bit critical about them you se
e, they were making huge profits out of the cotton industry and not distributing it as fairly as they could have done by either shortening hours or providing facilities, so I was inclined to be very critical of quite a lot of these people, you see, who ca
me to talk to us. You know, about what we ought to do, you know, in the name of religion and that kind of thing. This was at Bank Street, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 When was it that you started going to Bank Street?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Well - it must have been after the - after the Sund
ay school closed - the Socialist Sunday school closed down. It must have been, probably the 1930's because by then you see I'd become a bit cultural, you see, as I told you' I'd started going to operas and good music and became a subscriber to the Halle C
o
ncerts in Manchester and of course began to think I knew a little bit you see. Well, the thing that attracted me to Bank Street was that the - there was an announcement in the Evening News that the minister at that time I think it was Mr Flower, was going
 to give a series of articles on Dante's inferno and that might have been a reaction from my early days because after they said that this brother of ours might have gone to hell I'd no use for hell at all. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid4265682\charrsid11536143 As a child I was always terrified of it and the - t
hey threw it at you in those days, you see, very forcibly and al - always you see I had a strange ideal that - the - the body was - the soul would - we were always being told - told about the soul and I had the childish idea that the soul was a kind of wh
i
te and I imagined it a shoulder of lamb, wasn't it funny, in your inside and this was all white and when you did anything wrong you got great big black marks on it and that was sin, you see, and hell I - I was so horrified that I could hardly contemplate 
it. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
It was so utterly cruel - because you see they taught us that even unbaptised babies went to hell and I was so near being not baptised that I thought about all these went to hell I was so near being not baptised that I thought about all these things you
 see and - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4265682\charrsid11536143 purgatory}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 I pictured as it was a kind of lake - a kind - serene lake where the souls swam about in this - lake and waited until it was their day and time to enter paradise you see. And when I - I'd heard of Dante, but only heard, I'd never read 
anything about him - and when I heard that these lectures were being given I thought - eeh, I'll go to this chapel. So I stalked to this chapel, and in those days it was always packed, I had to go in the gallery I remember because it was packed. And it - 
t
hey were marvelous lectures on Dante and the different circles he went into, you see, and - that started me interested in Bank Street, because later on he began to talk and give series of lectures on Thomas Hardy's Jude the Obscure and the things that I h
a
d read so I kept on going for quite a while - not as a member just as - just going Sunday evenings and then somebody asked me to join the choir. Somebody who'd been in a choir that I'd previously been in and so I was more or less roped into this choir and
 
I've been at Bank Street ever since. And - but that was how - how I got going. Well, there was a lot, as I say, of very rich people going then - very rich. And - I did feel a grievance against them you see. They were always very nice, very polite but they
 
at that time had two congregations - the morning congregation was the toffs and the evening congregation were the - also rans. And it was - there was a sharp division there you see. But gradually, of course, quite a lot of these wealthy people either died
 
or left Bolton, you see, as they retired they went to the - Devon and lovely places and the middle class more or less came in and the - unfortunately, more of the working class left, you see, it wasn't their cup of tea and - it's now, I would say, more or
 
less a middle class - a middle class organisation - or at leas they think they are, they think they are, you see. They've been lifted up from probably very poor surroundings and - they've got better jobs, their children have been better educated and that 
k
ind of thing. They - they were very shocked, you see, when somebody asked me to give some parts of my life story, at the Women's League you see, and when I started off with this business of Shaw Street and Milk Street they were - they were rather horrifie
d
 to think that you talked about those things - you shouldn't talk about them there, you see. And that - those are sordid parts of life but it's better not to refer to, you see, that was their attitude, you see. So I only got up to being about twelve years
 
of age and - I - I didn't sort of go on with it. Several people have said, oh you ought to have done, it was very interesting. But you could tell, you could sense their kind of reaction - reaction to it, you see, that - well, you didn't - you didn't do qu
i
te that kind of thing, you see, you hid those things, you never told people you'd worked in a mill -it was a bit, you know, you presented that you'd gone to Bolton higher grade school even if you hadn't you see, but - you shut your eyes on those other par
ts of it you see, rather vulgar.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Would you say there were two or three classes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Oh there were three. Yes. Definitely three. The aristocrats we never came in touch with. The real moneyed people were hardly - I don't think we ever - they ever touc
hed our life. The middle class just occasionally by as I say, the court and alley concerts, that kind of thing. They were more middle class people you see, who ran that kind of thing. It was a kind of charity but it was bringing light and culture into the
 
dark places, you see, so they devoted them - selves to that kind of thing - that was the kind of middle group that we had. And then our own group which was of course very consolidated by its poverty. Poverty and its lack of opportunity, you see. We hung t
ogether, really, for kind of safety - kind of safety valve, you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 What sort of people would the middle class be constituted of?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Well, I should say that some of them were town councilors, you see, who'd got on the council. Others were - members
 of various committees. The Guild of help was very prominent you see in those days and - organizations like that, they - they had a clog fund at Queen Street Mission, you see, for providing clogs for poor children and all that kind of thing. }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4265682\charrsid11536143 Benevolent}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  - t
hey were kind of a benevolent group, you see, some - many of them shopkeepers of course, who'd got shops in town and - were making a fairly comfortable living, you see. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4265682\charrsid11536143 
One or two might have been bankers, you see, who - who were in banks, you see and - they}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11536143  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4265682\charrsid11536143 
thought, well, we have to do some kind of - we ought - we ought, in view our religion, to be some kind of - we ought - we ought, in view of our religion, to be charitable, you see, and do this - do this kind of thing, and they did. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Now we children used t
o enjoy - the court and alley concert but, you see, when I got older and could discriminate I felt rather ashamed that we lived in housing where they had to come and give us the court and alley concert, you see, it - it impinged later on. You accept this 
a
s children and it's - oh it's lovely - it's part of your life you know, and we used to go pushing this - this truck with the piano on, you know, we had the time of our life. But later on I - I began to wonder why - why the court and alley concerts coming 
i
n this neighbourhood, you see, oh, we must be very poor, you see, to have a court and alley concert. Then the - the Victoria Hall started its penny concerts and we all drifted there. A marvelous concerts you know - a penny and then it went up to tuppence 
a
nd finally it was about sixpence 'til they - they died out but they were marvelous concerts. So we always used to go there on Saturday night, you know, it was champion going in there for a penny or tuppence. And we used to crowd, of course, into the tempe
r
ance hall when the first movie pictures came, you know, and those dreadful things, you know, to be continued in our next - you know, always left the heroine hanging over a cliff, you see, and we had to wait a week to see whether the poor creature - 'cours
e either murdered or revived - saved, you see. That was the kind of thing, you see, that we had for our entertainments, you see, we didn't go places only just that kind of thing. Parading in the market hall - there the boys and girls led}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15204880\charrsid11536143  down}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  the centre ais
le as a parade, you see, and the girls marched up one side and the boys down the other, you know, making glad eyes at each other - things like that you see, where - where - were your amusements and outlets.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 The middle class would include the professional types of people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Yes, yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Would they associate with the working class?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Well, I think they did in a - yes, it was a - it was patronizing. Yes, I can remember when I worked in the mill several of the daughters of mill managers or company directors were bring }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13978893 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 and so on that one occasion, we all had to contribute of course to a present, and they went round collecting for weeks, you see, about this - this wedding - and then occasionally they would give us two hours off - off w
ork to go to the wedding - but they never paid us, you see, and I can remember traipsing down with dozens and dozens of girls sot the parish church you see to watch these weddings, you see. Doctor Mallet}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15204880\charrsid11536143 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 s daughter and somebody else and somebody else, you 
see, but it was a patronizing because these people hardly ever came in the mill - never came round to look at the conditions, you see, and so I used to be rather incensed at having to pay for a present for somebody who didn't need it to begin with and the
n to be treated in this }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4265682\charrsid11536143 patronizing}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 way - we'll fill the church ab - absolutely to the church doors with our mill people you see and I - I could see through it - the other - quite a lot of the girls thought it was wonderful, you see, to be invited, you see,
 to see the daughter of a company manager being }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13978893 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 but it never - it never broke much ice with me. But that was the kind of thing they did, you see, they were patronizing. But I'm not saying that some of them hadn't good motives, you see. But it was - it was a patronising society - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
Was there anybody amongst the mill owners or their families or the upper class that you would say was a genuine real gentleman or a real lady?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Just one or two I came across in my lifetime in the mill and as a
 trade union secretary who I would doff me hat to and say they were - they were genuine, you see, just one or two. But for the most part - no, because - at first they never would receive us in the - when I joined the office they never would receive us at 
t
he mill and we had to do all the business either by letter or telephone, you see, and some of them couldn't even be courteous on the phone, you see, and would start bullyragging you and telling you what miserable creatures the - the workers were and they 
w
ouldn't do this and they wouldn't do that and I used to wonder at Mr Speke's patience - because he had the patience of Job - he never lost his temper and he would just say to them when they were - you know, going off, well, well, well, we'll have another 
t
alk when you feel a bit calmer, you see, or something like that. Well, I couldn't do that - I used to more or less hit out at them, you see, I had an Irish temper and have an Irish temper which I have to control, and - but I used to let them have the leng
t
h of me tongue about the way they were behaving, you see, and so I used to throw it back at them and say, well you're not behaving very well, are you, as a kind of example to your work people if this is how - how you go about your business. And Mr Speke u
sed to say I shouldn't - I shouldn't say that, you see. Well, then gradually as we got these shop meetings going they did begin to say, oh well, very well, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4265682\charrsid11536143 reluctantly}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 , we think you'd better come up and talk to us - we can't talk over the phone about all these matters - you'd better come up and see us. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4265682\charrsid11536143 
Well, there was a kind of frigid greeting when you got in. sometimes they were very rude - they would keep you waiting and waiting and waiting, you see, as though you were nobody, and then when they felt they 
had time, well you can bring them in sort of thing, you see. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
And used to try and overwhelm you with - all the wrongs were on the side of the worker, you see, there were none on their side and - this used to irritate me very much, you see. Now one of the th
ings they always did was to irritate me very much, you see. Now one of the things they always did was to hand a box of cigarettes round. Well I never smoked and occasionally would bring a bottle of whisky out and offer Mr Speke a - a small glass of whisky
 you see. Yet it was the one thing they grumbled most about the work people. They were always }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4265682\charrsid11536143 grumbling}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 about the work people going in the toilets and smoking cigarettes and this always hit me, you see, and I used to think to myself why do they keep }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4265682\charrsid11536143 grumbling}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 to us, in fact they used to send me in the toilet - they used to say, Miss Foley, just go in that toilet and you'll see how many of our work people are sit there. And I would go in and I knew what I would meet, you see. And there'd be a group of them si
t on the floor, gossiping, and there'd be some with the doors of the toilets open smoking and - but they'd nowhere else to go, you see, if they'd have given a break - a small break - if they wanted to smoke and let them go out but they didn't, you see, th
e
y didn't do that kind of thing in those days. And that was always the thing that I detested about this - inequality. They could see that they were in - a favoured position but they didn't do much about the other people who weren't, you see. And that was o
n
e of the reasons why I would never accept any bribes. They used to occasionally want to give you a - cloth - a dress length, you know, or they'd want to present you with towels or things like that. I always said I'd rather not. If you have anything I'll b
u
y it but I don't want to - I don't want you to - to give it me. Because I always felt that - it might have been genuine - I think some of it was genuine but on the other hand I always felt - oh they're doing this for a further catch, you see, so I never w
ould do it, but I was unpopular amongst the trade union people for that. They used to say it's a kind of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4265682\charrsid11536143 snobbery}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
, you see. I said, no it isn't }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4265682\charrsid11536143 snobbery}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 at all, it's me principle and they used to be so graceful for these tings, you see, that the employer br
ought out. but there - there was, as I say, a distinct feeling that they were different - they were different from their work people, you see. And - they - there were three distinct classes. I'm not sure whether there's still the three distinct classes be
c
ause I can hardly tell now which belong to which - of the - of the two lower ones, I mean I - I realize the distance between - between those at the top, the real - what we would say, the real aristocrats, but they're merging more, merging more the - the t
wo bottom classes and - whether of course we're creating in that - more special divisions of labour I'm not quite sure because - you - you only need to get talking about differentials to get into a barge. And I'm not too sure but - we've }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4265682\charrsid11536143 eliminated}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  this cla
ss instinct at all, you see. Because differentials they arise up so often and - really, I - I don't know, I just don't know,. You see, it's not a mans worth or a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4265682\charrsid11536143 woman\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  worth - it's always he - he's getting something more than I am and I'm doing this and 
I deserve more and then it gets somebody else wants a bit more because they're up there and - there's no end to it is there. No end to it. Is there anything else that we ought to -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Perhaps you could tell me something about the different types of peop
le who would go to the church and the chapels - if there were any sort of differences between the congregation of a church of England and a Catholic church and a non - conformist church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 Well, I should think that in the Catholic church, of course, ev
erybody went because, of course, it was - it was compulsory in the sense if you missed Mass it was a - it was a mortal sin, you see. And - but I didn't probably stay long enough to ever become interested in - in the - in the, probably what were the richer
 
people in the Catholic hierarchy. There used to be some doctors - I remember doctor - one or two doctors from Great Leigh - we had Doctor Paget had two daughters and son who were very, very, looked up to by the ordinary people, you know, because he was a 
d
octor and these girls were always tall and handsome and very beautifully dressed you see and - but I never - I don't think I ever spoke to them - they were so far away from me kind of thing, you see, that I never sort of got in touch with them. And I shou
l
d think that the three groups were there at Masses, you see, for the entertainments and of course for contributing. They were the people who contributed the highest sum - sums of money, you see. But we were all there in the church and you sat anywhere - t
here was no sort of separate pews for this family and that family. You just sat in - in straight rows and you could go and sit anywhere you wanted, you see. Now in the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4265682\charrsid11536143 Wesleyans}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  and I should say - I - I did go to the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4265682\charrsid11536143 Wesleyans}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 a bit after I left the Catholics I - I gravitated to the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4265682\charrsid11536143 Wesleyans}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 a bit - not very long - and they were, I think kinder and chattier than were the Catholics. They had more time for talking to you, you see, on a Sunday when you went to the service and that kind of thing, welcomed you m
ore than the Catholics did because the main emphasis as I remember as a child was on the collection and when we went into the Catholic church they had a - had - a - a there was a passage - kind of passage, and they had the sidesmen - about six at either s
i
de holding trays for the - for four offering. You paid as you went in not - not during the service and - and - con - and a priest stood at the end and watched what everybody put on the plate - I thing I was dis - I was distinctly annoyed with. And once, I
 
only used to have a penny, and I was going in one day and put the penny on the plate when the minister came - the priest came to me and touched me on my shoulder and he said - you're a very tall girl, he says, a very big girl, he says, to be coming in the
 
church with a penny. And I was so ashamed because he shouted out and these - all these sidesmen heard and people coming in the church passing me heard too. I just hung me head in shame and passed into the church but it sounded a knell and when I got home 
I
 told mother about it and as usual she was crude and sharp and all she said was, next week when you go tall him you'll bring him - oh, he said to me, you're a big girl, how old are you - ten or seven? And I told him me age, if forget what it was. And she 
says next week when you go take your birth certificate and show it him. You see, that was her answer - the practical hard-handed {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Lancashire{\*\xmlclose}
 woman and that was the way she did with nearly everything. But it - it stayed with me because I thought that's what they want here - they don't want your }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4265682\charrsid11536143 presence}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 - they want your money. And it - it sounded a knell, there was no doubt about it. It was easier for me to leave, although it took me two years struggling very, very hard to leave because, of course, they say gi
ve your child until he's seven and - I had - I was really a very, very pious child and struggled and struggled and struggled and prayed and prayed but these experiences always kept bobbing up, you see, which made it easier. Well, then I joined the }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4265682\charrsid11536143 Wesleyans}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 . Well I find the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4265682\charrsid11536143 Wesleyans}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
 not bound so much by - by the Bible and the Pope and what the Pope had said and what he expected us to do and all that kind of thing. They were friendlier. And I should say there were two classes there. I don't think there were
 many of the high up aristocratic group. But there were the shopkeepers, shopkeepers and bit - professional men, doctors and professional men and - but they were easier to speak to and - I remember them coming and saying how glad we are to see a new face,
 you know, and things like that. And, so I should say that that was there they got their congregations from - the very poor - no, not so very poor because they were rather - the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4265682\charrsid11536143 Wesleyans}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143  at that time were nearly all temperance people, you know, and they we
re a bit better off because they saved their money, they didn't drink like the other people did, and - but they were easy to get on with. Now when I got to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Bank Street
{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} there the aristocrats were there you see. Because Unitarianism was supposed to be a free
 liberal faith and - they were very well read and - they were - they were rich and as I say there was a very large grum - number of them, mill owners and that made me a bit biased against them, you see. So that I should say those were the - the groups tha
t - that did - not so many of the poorer classes went to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Bank Street{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
. You hardly ever saw a shabby person you see. And I used to tackle the minister on it, I used to say you've two congregations, you know. Oh nothing of the kind, nothing of the kind. Oh yes
 you have, I said, you've the morning congregational all the high ups because they all have carriages and in those days Bank Street, from top to bottom, was lined with the carriages of the aristocrats you see. And then there was this middle class group yo
u see and then there were the - not a great - there were more then than there are now - because of course it was the poorer people who ceased to go to }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4265682\charrsid11536143 church really}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 . And I used to say have a morning congregation of all the - the high ups but I said - and yo
u - your sermons are distinctive. I said, I can tell a morning service that's addressed to the elite and the evening service that's addressed more to us on the ground floor, kind of thing. He wouldn't have it at that - mind you it's worn away a lot now be
cause we've not got the aristocrats there - they've more or less left the town you see. But I should still say the classes do exist you know - scratch it and you - scratch the surface and you find - you find out. yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11012655 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 You wouldn't have any contact with the Church of England?
\par }\pard\plain \ltrpar\s15\qj \fi-461\li461\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid11012655 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14835199 AF  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
No. No. Only through going to funerals and attending a few weddings. I never was attracted - much to the Church of England because it resembled largely a lot of it what I had in the Catholics. The responses and so much in Lati
n - well, in Church of England didn't have Latin but there was a lot of formalized - shall I say formalized religion and I never really - it never really attracted me. The free church was more attractive to me than the Church of England, you see, after I 
l
eft - but they always say, you know, if you leave one group you nearly - in rebellion - you nearly always go to the other extreme and I was a long time outside the churches you see after I joined the Labour church and the Socialist movement, I was a long 
time more or less an atheist really. Believing not believing in anything at all, you see, and - I was almost a Communist. I could easily - easily have joined the Communist party, you see, easily. And then it seemed funny to go to 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Bank Street{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} but it was beca
use I suppose they supplied this kind of cultural side to the sermons and the service that I had missed in the other - the other sections you see. Yes. Now, if I was to go anywhere it would be the - it would either be the Quakers or the humanitarians - th
o
se are the two that attract me most - now. I like the Quakers. Couldn't accept of course all the precepts but I do like - I like their quietness - the quietness, you see, and I also like the humanitarians, you see. The humanists as they all them now - yes
, the humanists, yes, yes I - I'm attracted tot that - that part of religion.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs20 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6489771\charrsid11536143 
\par }}