{\rtf1\adeflang1025\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\adeff0\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang2057\deflangfe2057{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}{\f38\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f39\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f41\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f42\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f43\fbidi \froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}
{\f44\fbidi \froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f45\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f46\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f48\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}
{\f49\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f51\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f52\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f53\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f54\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}
{\f55\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f56\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden 
Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs20 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}}
{\*\latentstyles\lsdstimax156\lsdlockeddef0}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid2248743\rsid4207680\rsid4738731\rsid5048637\rsid6160996\rsid7303732\rsid8675640\rsid13067595}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 11.0.0000;}{\info{\title Information about interviewee}{\author SEENU}
{\operator lhorto}{\creatim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min9}{\revtim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min9}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords18151}{\nofchars103467}{\nofcharsws121376}{\vern24613}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 http://schemas.microso
ft.com/office/word/2003/wordml}}\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1800\margr1800\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0\ltrsect 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\donotembedsysfont0\donotembedlingdata0\grfdocevents0\validatexml1\showplaceholdtext0\ignoremixedcontent0\saveinvalidxml0\showxmlerrors1\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace180
\dgvspace180\dghorigin1800\dgvorigin1440\dghshow1\dgvshow1\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\splytwnine\ftnlytwnine\htmautsp\nolnhtadjtbl\useltbaln\alntblind\lytcalctblwd\lyttblrtgr\lnbrkrule\nojkernpunct\rsidroot6160996 \fet0
{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}\ilfomacatclnup0\ltrpar \sectd \ltrsect\linex0\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ltrpar
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid4738731 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\ul\insrsid4738731\charrsid16072257 Information about interviewee}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid4738731 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid4738731\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tx2057\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid4738731 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4738731\charrsid16072257 Date of birth}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4738731    
\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4738731\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4738731  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8675640 1908}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4738731\charrsid16072257 
\par Gender}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4738731           \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4738731\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4738731  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8675640 M}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4738731 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4738731\charrsid16072257 Marital status}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4738731 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4738731\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4738731  
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8675640 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4738731\charrsid16544153 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4738731\charrsid16072257 Occupation}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4738731 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4738731\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4738731  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8675640 Manager of butcher shop}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4738731\charrsid16072257 
\par Geographic region}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4738731 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4738731\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4738731  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8675640 London}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid4738731\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\qj \fi-490\li518\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin518\itap0\pararsid4738731 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Could I start by asking your name please?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 My name is Turner. Eddie George Turner.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 And your address here?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 213 Sumatra Road, West Hampstead, NW6.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 And you're married aren't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 I'm married - and a grandfather.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Do you know what year it was you got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes. 1940. And on my wedding night - the siren w
ent. My wife and my father went to - the shelters, and I went on my job as a firewatcher. So - that was -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 That was in the second world war of course?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What year were you born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 1908. February - 1908.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Where were you born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
In St Johns Wood. A little turning called Frederick Street, it's called Macalmal Street now. A little charm of a place where - everybody knew each other, knew each other's sorrows - good fortunes - and times of closing time when they come home at night an
d a little ding-dong would go on and everything later.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 How many years did you live in the house you were born in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Let me see now, about twenty-one years, twenty-one.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 So you were there all the way through to the end of the first world war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes. Right the way through from the early days there. Then - I moved up and lived in St Johns Wood Road. So - mos}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6160996\charrsid13067595 t of my life I've been in St Jo}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 hn}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6160996\charrsid13067595 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 s wood, 'til I was married and they came here. My family was born to me
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 How many brothers and sisters did you have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Only one - only one brother. Brother Bill, older than me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 That was quite unusual for those days really?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes. Yes, 'cos - previous to that - well all my uncles and aunties - were one of families of - ten to twelve or even 
fourteen children. See my grandfather, grandfather Turner had five boys, five girls. Every - every boy was a soldier of the Queen except my father. And the girls naturally married, but then - the families born to them were much - well, I suppose all in - 
in all innocence and ignorance it was being curtailed. The family got smaller.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Do you remember how old your father was when you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No. No, well I don't - I can give you an idea though. Dad was born 1886. And I'm 1908, so - that's twenty-two years.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 How about your mother, was she about the same?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Mother's about the same age.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What was your father doing, you say he didn't go into the services?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No, see - in those days as you know - progress - especially in London hadn't - a
chieved a lot, all the industries were in the Midlands, North Country. London was a place of retreat, apart from dockland, they had work there but when you came to the suburbs - working class relied on the - the happenings in that community like as you kn
o
w the - the splendour of Avenue Road - there were the - domestic - services, daily help, what have you, the - opportunities for - so-called gardeners, grooms, horsemen, 'cos after all we're talking about the days of the horse. Motor cars very few. And - m
o
st men turned to house painting, they had to because there was nothing else. 'Cos we're going to the time when there was Poor Relief you know. The vestry - Monday would have an open kitchen for pease pudding and faggots, that's how the times were. And lit
t
le Tommy down the street, have no boots or shoes, and that would go in to winter. But at a later date - fortunes would smile on that family and he'd take his place with us with his boots and shoes with a nice shine, and things began to progress. Those wer
e the days you know. The days when the lavatory was out back, the wash house, the lavatory, the coal cellars, all out back.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 How many rooms did you have in your house that you lived in?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 In the house - didn't belong to us. Grandpa lived on - groun
d floor, and there was a annex to the house, and also on that ground floor lived a Mrs Langdon, Mr and Mrs Langdon. Above her was old Granny Luff, no relation, but we called her old Granny Luff. That was on the first floor. And also on the first floor in 
the house proper was Mr and Mrs Flight. And dad and mum, Bill and myself lived on the top floor. Two rooms. Two rooms. The front was a bed sitter, and the other one was a kitchen sitter. Or a kitchen bedroom. That's how we prevailed in those days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 So your mother and father would have one room and you'd have the other?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
We'd have the other. But - nothing was amiss because - you were born to it. To know that the rich relations or the rich - not relation, the - the rich neighbours around the corner wi
th big houses well of course it was more or less a dream, you'd look in, but - it was a dream to you. 'Cos eventually that dream came true because - mum became - a caretaker in Avenue Road, and in that big old house there - which I consider that - every r
o
om had a - odour, a fragrance of its own, and - there's so much respectability in there, for instance, although the house was empty mother would say, you boys, go quiet - quietly upstairs. There's nobody in the house. And I used to wonder why I was out of
 
breath when I gained the top, had I taken mother too seriously. But it was a palace. Thick carpets - in the old house there. All the stairway would be wooden, which I would scrub as a boy. And as - and that - that was the mode of living. Didn't know any d
ifferent.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Were you aware of the sort of differences between the different groups in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Well yes, but - as a child I suppose I didn't realize that because - they were - a class on their own, I hate to say - use the word class - of today, 
but they were a class on their own because - if I walked along Avenue Road with friends, and in those days the police patrolled - which you - well, to me it's a mystery where police are today, and if he see - if he saw us boys strolling - for instance say
 
I wanted to go along Avenue Road to go to - into Ells - we - worthy Road and go to Primrose Hill, what are you boys doing up here? Go on home. And we'd be shuttled away. That was - regarded - and that was respected. But of course the time would come - Chr
istmas time and we'd sing carols. And we were received pretty well. Get a rebuff - if we were too early or something like that. But - and of course no peering too, all those - extensive drives - they'd willingly allow us to clear the snow.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Would they pay for that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Yes, and we were generously paid because - bits of silver. Sixpenny piece, I could buy my sweets for a ha'penny or a penny. I'd go to my pictures for a penny. So that sixpenny piece was worth a lot of money. We were happy. And of course 
- in a - all innocence we were youngsters, we hadn't got the cares then. There's no doubt our parents had the cares, but - I had good parents. They didn't make - obstacles.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Do you think your mother and father were conscious of being members of a social group?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
No. No. Because - in your own atmosphere you were happy. You had your parties. In fact - the old house there, in Frederick Street, in St Johns Wood there was a sort}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6160996\charrsid13067595 ing office in Aquill}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 a Place, Post Office Sorting Office, and the - the earli
est Royal Mail motor car, the wheels would be of solid rubber. The tyre would be solid rubber. The roads then were Macadam. Badly kept I suppose because of pot holes here and pot holes there, and that - Royal Mail would chase down - town - St Johns Wood T
e
rrace, down Townsend Road, past the house, and everything would vibrate, and - I can remember the parties. Well it'd be a sort of knees up Mother Brown and dad would hold the mantelpiece, everything would jump. You were happy. Because, as I say - you had 
y
our own atmosphere, now Christmastime, it if was mother's turn - to give the Christmas dinner and the party - and what relations were there, brothers and sisters of mother - or dad, they would return a party on the Sundays to follow, so of course Christma
s
 carried on for quite a little way. And they were happy days; because - you didn't have to stop to listen to radio, there was no radio. And of course television wasn't - was a dream. The piano was there, and you heartily sung - chorus and chorus of - Marg
y. And I had an aunt, not very much older than me but - there was - Auntie Lil, her piano and me. We would sing all the score sheets and everything you know. Great days I - I consider them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Was this before or after the first world war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No, before
 the first world war. Because - her young man - who actually became a - a sailor, she referred to him as a sailor on the waterfront. And - of course time progressed and - radio came in and so on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did you have many relatives living round St Johns Wood?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Yes. Yes - either of the sons - only two of the sons moved out, one went into Surry somewhere, but the rest were just - round - New - New Street which is Newcombe Street now, had two aunties there - one round the corner, Townsend Cottages. And so on
. They were all close by. Because after all that's how - the family knitted. 'Cos the life progressed in that way that - every child at a certain age would - jump classes of the age group, so you knew them all the time. We squabbled, we fought, but we sti
l
l loved each other, 'cos we still played cricket. But - you wouldn't see the girls so much. You wouldn't fraternise with the girls. Boys would play boys games, and sometimes the girls would encourage you to skip because the rope is right across the road n
ow. We said, no, we're not going to skip with you. But you grew up.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What kind of school was it you went to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Elementary. You went in at five and you were turfed out at fourteen into the big world - to earn a living. Well they were very -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 It was just round the corner almost?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Yes. In Binehall Road. St Johns Wood. Great times. We'd several achievement for instance - my pet master was a Mr Timms. He wasn't sport minded, but he allowed me to slip over to Lords at tea break, to see how the sc
ore was over there and I'd shoot out - out of school, Wellington Place - Tavenor's Place, sit on the wall, right in line with the bowler at the Nursery End, and I could tell by the old clock there just by W.G. Grace's gates which - the gates wasn't there,
 
that was a tower and a clock there, I'd have a quarter of an hour and rush back and tell the school what the score was. Well first I'd tell my Mr Timms. But he was a great - recalling my memories of school life I loved singing I loved the old ballads of -
 Farewell Manchester, Barbara Ellen, Drink to me Only, and - carol - carols at Christmas time I'd roll out the sheets - to give - yes, to give round, and we sang }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6160996\charrsid13067595 crucifixion}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 , sang this }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6160996\charrsid13067595 Crucifixion}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
 for the local Wesleyan church. And - in the congregation was - Sir Douglas Hogg, the MP for Marylebone, father of Quinton. And we - we had - well we su}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6160996\charrsid13067595 r}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 passed ourselves with that singing of - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6160996\charrsid13067595 Crucifixion}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
. And I could sing it now at this very moment.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Was that the chapel choir?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No, no, the school choir. School choir.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Were you a member of the chapel choir?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
No. No. I was never a choirboy. Brother Bill was. But - you can call me - I was part of the choir because - I would pump the organ. And I'd wear the - the dress -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Was that pumped by hand?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Yes. Pumped the - pumped the air into the organ, because that little church, St Andrews in Henry Street - was the Parish Church of Portland Town within St Johns Wood.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 That was Church of England was it?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes. Yes, all Church of England. The 
Parish Church of St Johns Wood was in Avenue Road, St Stevens. But a far - in the - late thirties I think - destroyed that. And St Johns Wood chapel then - which is on the - by the roundabout at - St Johns Wood, became the Parish Church. That's how it pro
gressed then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 So which one did you go to mainly, to the Wesleyan chapel or the Parish church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
No. No. Went to the Parish church, St Stevens. We'd go to our little church - once a fortnight, like Sunday school, we'd all go - to the Parish church, 
St Stevens, and of course - they were the days of Scout - the First Marylebone Scout - I was the Cub, Billy was the Scout, and the bugle bran - bugle band - once a fortnight. Parade the streets, all go to church.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Was Billy older than you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes. T
wo and a half years older than me. Billy was a - not only a brother but a good friend, good friend to me. He took my part in everything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 When you first went to school who took you along, was it him or your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No, mother would take me. See p
rior to that you - prior to school days there was the nursery. See, mom would - dad would be working or out of work, mother would be domestic work, and we'd go - on the corner of Barry Hill Road and - Lower William Street, which is now Reginald Street, th
ere was a nursery, and all we toddlers went there. But you know if I smell - rice pudding cooking at home here now my mind will go right back to those nursery days. 'Cos they - you know that was the main diet.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did it cost her anything for that nursery?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Yes, only a few pence. Oh incidentally - although I went to Barry Hill Road elementary and the cost was nothing, as you know was LCC, London County Council, next to the old church in Henry Street was a school and they were the days of my father wher
e they had to pay a penny a week. And there was some naughty boys in those days because - where they queued outside - before - class session - the teacher would come out and - and - and spy the - this throng there and say, don't want you today and I don't
 want you today, away you go. And he had the power to do that. The naughty ones.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What would happen to them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Have to go home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Wasn't there a rule in those days?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No. No. His word was law.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 I thought if you didn't attend school you could be in trouble?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Ah in my day, not in dad's day. See? And as I say they paid a penny a week. And I said to dad on one occasion, I said, for instance, you had several brothers, why - what was the plight there, 'cos after all pennies was a lot of mo
ney to a big - family. They made a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6160996\charrsid13067595 concession}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
 there that - a penny would be enable the rest of the family to go. Because that - I'm talking about the days of hardship when - sometimes they had no boots and shoes you know. See nothing of little Tommy Tucker
 sort of - going to school with a bit of bread and jam, that was his breakfast.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 How about in your house, what kind of things would you have for breakfast?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 We were lucky. We were lucky. Wintertime mother'd always have a - porrid}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6160996\charrsid13067595 g}
{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 e, plate of porri
dge, the old fashioned oats. I had a good mother. Very keen for my health. The Saturday bath in the tub, not bathroom. Summertime. Sulphur tablet once a week. Wintertime - any suggestion of a cold, rub my chest with camphorated oil.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did she ever make any of her own medicines?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
No. No. No. No, mother wasn't that - you see, we're talking about suburb - you're going right to cat - country atmosphere there aren't you. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did she ever make her own bread or things like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No. No. No. I wo
uld go and get the - the loaf. In the Henry Street. Every loaf was weighed you know. And so therefore there was always a tendency there to cut another loaf into portions to add, and I would have to go, Eddie, get a nice - crusty cottage loaf. And of cours
e
 being a regular customer they'd know you. And a little tit-bit would be put on top and a thin-piece of brown paper would be on top of that. As soon as I got outside that little - tasty bit of - makeweight - was lovely. Always tasted very nice. See and of
 
course - continuing a bit - when it comes to food, I can - I've got an early recollection of mother saying to me, Eddie, go round to Mrs Bunion's, that was just round the corner, I'm only a toddler, there's a note there and on this note was - please - a h
earty cabbage, seven pounds of potatoes, and a ha'porth of pot herbs. And mother would say to me, there's sixpence there, and there would be some change.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 So it was quite cheap?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Mm. Very cheap. Seven pounds of potatoes would - probably tuppence.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What about meat, was meat very cheap?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes, reasonably cheap, yes. 'Cos it - you know, I've been a butcher, my early days I sold rump steak for one and nine}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6160996\charrsid13067595  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 pence a pound. And today - they're asking a pound a pound.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What about in the days before the first world war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Yes, yes. Now for instance look, in mother's day, now you take mother's day. Now mother was born in Marylebone. Big family. In the High Street Marylebone, that' serve people like - or serve the residents of Wimpole Street, H
arley Street, as you know they were - how - well - Barratt's of Wimpole Street, see they were householders then. Where the local tradesmen would}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6160996\charrsid13067595  get their price - and the left}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 overs in the shop which I know of which you've got to make money on, you don't wa
nt to throw it away in the waste sack - for soaps and all that, you realize money, now mother in turn, she would go to either the butchers, and that was Konigs in - High Street Marleyboen with a mat bag, six}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6160996\charrsid13067595  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 pennyworth of pieces. And - through my experienc
e that when you bring your meat out of the safe in those days it was in an ice safe, everything looks a bit tired and I couldn't present that to a customer, I'd probably have to trim it, and if I can realize a sale, here you are, wrap it up, take it away.
 Mother would get quite - an achievement there for sixpence or whatever it might be, the same they used to buy stale loaves you know. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 And heat them up again?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes. See that - that was the mode see, that's - that's - how far the money went in those days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What kind of cooker did you have in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Oven. In the -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 A gas oven?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
No, no, in the hearth. Coal fire. Two ovens each side. So everything was cooked in those ovens there. And of course gas light. We were lucky, gas li
ght Yet of Granny Luff, Mrs Langdon in the annex had - paraffin lamps. And of course the electric light was unheard of as far as we were con}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6160996\charrsid13067595 c}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 erned, in the - the established homes yes. But not - although our street lamp - our street lighting, oh no, in the 
early days I remember street lighting was gas. And then they converted it into electricity. But the household no, still - that's why in the early days of radio it was a Godsend - to have battery sets, because we hadn't - electric light. See all this plugg
ing in and just switching on, it's so - yes, it's so simple for you, but not in our days. We didn't know about it And - as I say, if you use the lavatory, can be teeming with rain, you had to put a coat on to use the lavatory.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Where would you have baths, would that be in the kitchen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No. Yes, in the kitchen. Every house carried a big bath. Water was heated and there you are.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 That would be on Saturday nights?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes, always Saturday night. My - my parents - my mother particularly - but dad
 was - dad was the same, when we bathed, when - when we were bathed - straight to bed. No fear of any colds. And that was - regular.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What time at night would you go to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Oh really - my parents would be in bed by ten, so we children would go e
arlier. Summertime like with the longer day - play in Regents Park, or Primrose Hill - at dusk you'd say well you'd go home and be accepted at that time and wash and go to bed. But never late. And my parents were - had regular habits, not drinkers. Only a
t
 - party, if there was a - party they - well when I say drinkers, dad would get a party going - and refill the glasses and if he thought they were getting merry he'd see sandwiches - were stuffed into 'em, to sober them. Do you know what he'd drink? R. Wh
ites lemon squash. But mum would have an occasional Guinness.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did mother make the family clothes or did she buy them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No, I was lucky there. Lucky again. I have a sewing machine now, a Singer sewing machine which was my mother's. The old handle. 
I can always remember as a child - she must have repaired with that. I think she made occasionally a dress for herself, but not for us boys. I can remember my first }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6160996\charrsid13067595 knickerbockers}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595  suit, with a hard Eton collar. It felt quite good, because - I'd got pockets down the - inside. And I think that was a great joy to any - any young boy to have pockets.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 So you were one of the lucky ones really?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes, I was lucky. I was - although we were working class - I was very lucky.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What about shoes and things like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Lucky there again. Although I used to kick 'em out, because I - I couldn't resist a can, let alone anything else. But I was very lucky. In fact - look}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6160996\charrsid13067595  this is dad. Dad bought me skat}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 es when I was a boy. And he - the instructions he gave me
 always see that the straps are securely - tied up before you go out skating, and if he was about he'd see that that was so. Very strict. Dad was a good man. With my father, he had no ambition - no ambition for - and I don't think he had a - well he - he 
didn't know how to make a bad friend. Easy going. But mother and I were more - impulsive. For instance - we'd want to go here and there and dad'd say, well look, you go. And we always did go.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Where would you go?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Like - for instance - we went and
 saw - we'd go down and see shows down the West End. Saw Fred and Adela Stell - Steer in Lady be Good. Went to the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6160996\charrsid13067595 Cenotaph}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
 first opened, when it was first erected we were the - one of the earliest fifty on the queue. When Alcock and Brown after flying the Atlantic, the first men to fly that, we were on the procession, to herald them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 So you went out quite a lot?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes, mother and I.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did your father ever go out with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No. He was more retiring. Now for instance in those days that - in 
waiting for a bus, if a - a small - or so many had congregated there dad would sort of retire more and more whereas mum and I - always looking round to see that nobody was going to take our place. And when we'd get on, look round for dad, he's right back,
 so we said, come on dad, you're on. And he'd say, oh I'll see you. That was dad. You see, infuriate mother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did they have many mutual friends or was it mainly your mother's friends who came round?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No, dad had - no - in coming to the house they w
ould be relations. Because - to put it quite mildly or - or - to - to be honest with the fact, we wasn't - a boozing family. We didn't - go regularly to pubs so therefore you don't bring them back. And regular in their habits of going to bed. Well when we
 had our parties, it would be relations. And of course being so many brothers and sisters there was quite a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6160996\charrsid13067595 throng}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
. And that's all you could manage. But dad - was a club member, there was a working mans club in St Johns Wood, which dad, in his early years, 
was a member and he became a life member and so on and so on. In fact, the - be - became such a senior person that - in the '39 war, where the shelters were - was erected at - which is now the Parish church, it was then the chapel - dad was shelter marsha
l there, being a senior citizen. And - everybody knew - dad.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 You say he did odd jobs before the first war, what did he do after?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes. He became a house painter for a big firm - which he would go out and do a country job. Be missing for a fortnig
ht. And then in the thirties, he - the advancement of - of traffic regulations came about, white lines and the painting of - of - of - of lamp signs, black and white. You know, they started painting in the middle of the road with white lines. Dad became a
 painter of - on - Marylebone Council. See, and he saw out his - his working life there and then he retired from there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 How old was he when he died?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Dad was - seventy - seventy-nine when he died. Good man dad was you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did your mother continue domestic service?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Yes, mother died first though. Mother died fifty-one. Dad died sixty-one. But - mother was - only a - a daily help. But recognised as a thorough good person because that's why the compliments was given to us to care take. See? Which we did do so.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 She wouldn't live in when she was caretaker would she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Oh yes. Yes, she'd live in, look after the house. In Avenue Road.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 And she'd just pop round to see you were getting on all right?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Oh no, we - the whole family were there. Oh yes. The whole family. Oh it's great fun for me. Proper }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6160996\charrsid13067595 lawn}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595  and I could bring on bat and ball and Bill would bowl to me. See?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 How old were you when that happened?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 See, that's - let me see now -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Would that be after the first world war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
No, no. Before. Before. Because I would take out the master's dogs, in my lunch break. You asked there where - when we were caretakers, that could have been the early part of the war years, because I'd just told you there I would take out
 the master's dogs. And at the time - the blinded soldiers - were coming from Flanders and St Dunstan's had erected some bungalows, just by the fork pathway - when you go over Charbot Street Bridge, a fort on the right, the pathway there - and behind used
 to stand a white house which eventually Barbara Hutton bought.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 The film star Barbara Hutton?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Yes. Woolworth - heiress. They built some bungalows there, and housed there were the blinded soldiers, I suppose partly in convalescent. And a little f
urther along, when you come into the park proper, there was a little slip, edge of a field, which the local car}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6160996\charrsid13067595 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
man could graze his horses there, but he had to relinquish that. They had - erected some goalposts there. And when I'd enter the park from any e
ntrance, if it was far - over by the zoo, I could hear the whistling and the cries, and I was attracted, and I'd see these boys - taking penalty shots into a - a goal and of course naturally - an orderly you could see. And these lads became so efficient -
 
that the great Arsenal club would send a side there, and of course those men had to be blindfolded to take penalty kicks. And more often than not St Dunstan's would beat them. Now I would know that because every day I'd take out the dogs, and if I heard t
h
e whistles - if there was a game on I'd hear the whistles and the cry, and the dogs and I went one way. Straight there. That was the - sixteen, because - then they became to come out abroad into St Johns Wood. It was nothing to see - four or five of these
 
lads all bunched together, all chatting at the same time, they knew what direction they were going, they were going to Charlie Abardo, an Italian who had a - restaurant - in the old Hendon Street, eggs and chips, whatever it might be. And of course - the 
locals would see them round any obstacle and they were quite happy.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 So they adapted very quickly?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes, they're - they're - extraordinary.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 When you were caretakers at this house were the people away?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes, away, yes. See -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 How long were they away for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Month. And then of course the domestic - that was the time for the domestic staff to have - take their holidays. The cook - there was a Scotch - Scotch woman, and the other girls would go whatever - what part they cared.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 You just did it that once did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Oh no, several years. Several years.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 But you still kept up your own house round the corner?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Oh yes, round - see that was all right naturally because grandpa was still living there, and there was Mr and Mrs Fl
ight and so on and so on there.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Who was the landlord of the place you lived in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 I think - I think the property was either the Aire Estate or the De - Dewaring Estate.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did the landlord come round?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes. I can remember his name as clear
 as - as it was now. Man named Fairclough. Well respected. I suppose - he was the lord of the manor because there's no doubt because he was asked favours - can't pay this week, we'll pay next week sort of thing you know. But we were - regular, mum - that 
was her code of honour, to pay him right - than ask for anything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did he do repairs to the house or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 In a small way, yes. In a small way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What about your father, did he do anything round the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes. Like - dad would naturally paint - in - indoor - interior and everything else.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What about things like helping to do the washing up and cooking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes. Oh yes. Yes. That was commonplace. Even for us boys. Now - for instance, you - now you've hit on a note there - I would
 clean the knives and forks, with that powder.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Silv}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6160996\charrsid13067595 er}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
 type stuff?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Yes, not - not so much Brasso, but with powder, and I would scrub down the stairs our flights of stairs, all wooden - carpet, nothing so - so - inventive as had a carpet on them. 
For one thing you couldn't afford it and - it was our - just plain wood. In fact I got many a rub in the - you know what young lads are you take every flight at one stride, and I would end up by slamming the front door, and my grandfather would say, you y
oung bugger Eddie. I - I couldn't realize why he was - getting at me for.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Was he there on his own?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Grandpa, yes, yes. The - the children had grown up and - well when I say on his own, there was a young - younger daughter, Nellie, she lived there 
with him, unmarried, but was courting. But of course in the house there were - as you know, there's quite a few people. And we all lived happily there. In fact, all my - our - all our neighbours in that house, we fitted in so well I can - can't remember o
ne harsh word. They were so good.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did the other people have any children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes. Only one, that was Mr and Mrs Flight, they had a little girl called Bessie.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 You wouldn't play with her I suppose?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 You'd play with boys mainly?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Yes. Had to be boys, and she was younger too. 'Cos - the elder child - in a - in a friendly sort of way, you cuff them, oh go away, I don't want you. That was -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What about the other houses next to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Ah now, for instance -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Were there any neighbours children there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Yes, yes, in the - next door, number 27, mother's - mother's brother lived. 'Cos mother's surname was Sparrow. The oldest brother lived there. There was Johnnie, there was Carrie, there was Alice - Johnnie we - he wa
s nicknamed Chicken, or Flyaway, and that was his nature. You know. On the first floor was Mr and Mrs Ransford. Johnnie was a prisoner of war, John a prisoner of war in the '14 war. Louise - Alfie, Sid, Ethel - Lily, see, quite a family. Mr Ransford was a
 driver of horse and cart for the Metroplitan - Railway, 'cos they delivered their own parcel. There was no -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Rather than the GPO?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes. See, all this - forward - well - the workings of - of delivering like today wasn't - wasn't thought of them ye
ars. Even - the local Carmen in those days was Carter Patterson, and apart from that the railway might deliver one or two parcels, dealing with the railway, otherwise nothing. And that - see, it progressed from that. In as much - now talking of the police
.
 On the can rank which ran on the side of Coppins Square, which is the - which is the plot of ground, in - in front of - the St Johns Wood church, which is now the roundabout there was a cab rank there, erected in the days of the horse because it was all 
c
obbles all - all up that side there. But on the end of that cab rank was an ambulance, a police ambulance, some eight foot, ten foot long, two back wheels and a front wheel - canvas and straps and all that, and that was a policeman's job to pick up anybod
y that was hurt, any drowned person - see he hadn't got those ambulances running about in those days. A policeman - collect all that and take them to the hospitals or like that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What were the police like in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 They were good, they cuffed you, but they were good.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Were you ever told when you were young that if you're naughty I'll call a policeman or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Oh - you know the attitude of adults in those days don't you? Little boys should be seen and not heard, and tha
t summed up authority of the adults. Our neighbours - in a way, were sort of mind your business, what are you doing down here, go round your own end, sort of thing. Oh lots of that. Quite willing to sort of jump on the - on the junior, but - you got by al
l right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Were you ever allowed to talk when grown ups were there, were talking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Only in my turn. Only if encouraged, otherwise - that was the - the attitude, little boys should be seen and not heard. But you'd play amongst yourselves, see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What would your parents say for in stance if somebody hit you, if a child hit you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Go back and hit him. And - having brother Bill we did our own - retributions if you like to call it those. Oh Bill and I could take care of ourselves.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Would you ever be punished by your parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Yes. One occasion there - we were playing in Regents Park cricket and it was drizzling with rain all the morning. And when we turned - from Townsend Road into our turning mother was looking out the window - you rascals
. We were greeted by the cane when we got upstairs, for playing cricket in the rain all that morning. But - we hid - after taking one or two slaps, but mother's temper cooled and there you are, it was forgiven. But with dad - dad would wear a belt you kno
w, a strap. And if I - if I was guilty of something serious, he'd take of that strap, he says, next time you do that I'll give you this. And he never did. Always threatened, but never did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 But it was your mother who hit you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes, mother - I think
 mother's are inclined to sort of clump the children. But only - that's only - stress or whatever it is, mm, of course you're forgiven the next minute, ha'penny, you're given a hapenny go and get sweets.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did they give you much pocket money?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes
. I'd get my pennies and tuppences, and further more too - I'd say - its according to you, you'd help - the baker - you'd help the baker, the coal or the milkman. See all milk was delivered by the - it was a - a big round, he'd have the horse and float, o
t
herwise it was the push barrow, the three wheel. And of course the milkman's life in those days was very heavy you know. There was always a chance of picking up - yes, see inasmuch too that - jam jars, you take jam jars to the - the old rag shop and - and
 get money. Ha'penny or a penny, and of course ha'penny and a penny was a lot of money. Go round and buy - load of sweets.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Where would you get these jam jars from?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Oh I don't know, but they were returnable I suppose, see, by my - the rag - rag an
d bone merchant. See when you think, rag and bones, even take bones, if you - had enough in quantity. Yes. Well of course again you take - naturally being a butcher I know about it - John Knights, take all your waste away. Fat - full of maggots. You hadn'
t got refrigeration then, all you had was ice boxes, usually in the floor of the shop.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Was there any tinned meat around in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Not much, corned beef there was. But - when it came to the grocer even the ham was cooked by him, and it's stan
d on it's - it'd be there on its stand and all paste would be in dishes, and he'd scoop it out. Pickles would be in big jars loose, and so on. Even his - sugar and rice would be in sacks in the corner, because he weighed the quantities, that's the old - g
r
ocer's shop. All neatly packed - you could have two sort of counters and a - one - in the shops there'd either be - tins of biscuits, very tempting, mum can we have some of those? On the other side would be - rolls of firewood. The shop would look - very 
span and span with a sprinkle of sawdust down on the floor, but you could always smell the paraffin. 'Cos that was a commodity always wanted. That was nothing out of place, it was accepted. That was the grocers shop.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 You said that your mother and father were both easy to get on with, they'd show you affection you said?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Mm hm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What kind of things do you think they expected you to be in life, what things did they expect you to hold as important in life?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What, when I went out to work you mean?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Before that, what kind of things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No. No, I'll say this without fear of b}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6160996\charrsid13067595 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 ing bumptious, mum and dad were very proud of - both proud of me. And I'll say it, I - outshone my brother. I was very good at sport. In fact - in 1920, the schools 
of Marylebone had - a sports athletic meeting out in Regents Park, and in various age groups there were various dis - distances, and I think I was twelve, so that was twelve and under, I was champion runner of Marylebeone. I've got the trophies to prove i
t
. I was second in the hundred yards, for which I got a silver candlestick, no, silver inkpot, and the two twenty I had a pair of silver candlesticks. I played for London schoolboys when I was thirteen at Stamford Bridge. And I was sport mad - mad - sport 
minded, and my parents would - readily buy me the things concerning that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Was your father a keen sportsman?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No, he - he - as a spectator, but he wasn't a - an athlete, not in that respect. Yes - he was a person who could take care of himself. In 
fact I think he put me on the right road - as a junior I would go in the back yard - with Indian clubs and chest expansion - and when I say that I'd do a thing, it wasn't five minutes wonder. I would go out, and I was proud of that because I can show you 
p
hotographs now. In fact - when I was sixty working down in Barhtolomew Close one of the two of the lads were showing themselves off, and I said, I'll bet you a pound to a penny I've got a figure than you. Pound to a penny. And I stripped to the waist and 
t
hey said, ah Mr Universe. I've always been that way. Proud, want to - achieve at sport, which I have - achieved. Whatever I under - took to do I've enjoyed doing. And I suppose I was - blessed with this that I always had a feeling I wanted to prove whatev
er I done. Without being conceited. I don't want you to throw bouquets at me, it was a self}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6160996\charrsid13067595  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
pride that I wanted to do it - to the best of my ability, I - you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Do you think you got that from your parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 I think so, yes. I must have - must h
ave done. Must have done. 'Cos mother - my parents were good to me. Very good. And - frankly look this is a little inner thought there - my mother wasn't a spendthrift, and she wasn't frugal, but she had all - helpful in this say, now for instance, we was
 
never encouraged to have suppers at home. There would always - always be the joint the weekend. But - afterwards there'd be no suppers. No, go to bed on an empty stomach. Good for you. In fact that Sunday joint, we'd have it cold on Monday. And there'd st
ill be remnants for Tuesday's - hash. Which is like a stew. Yes. And that was the programme.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What about the rest of the week?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Oh sausage and - steak pudding or something like - but it came - the diet was pretty good though. All plain food. Nothi
ng inventory. Which - which is me now, because - I'm the butcher, and my wife was the cook. Which I married. And it's all - always been plain food. 'Cos my wife - cooked for Refall Tuck's granddaughter. Rapheal Tuck's daughter, Mrs Cohen who lived in - Ha
m
ilton Terrace. Being the butcher - I met her, then progressed from there. But - as I say - with that, mother was frugal, and I've known the unemployment with dad, yet I was always lucky to have a holiday. The scheme of the school, London County Council - 
w
as country holiday. You could pay so much each week into the fund, and you were helped by the LCC, and I went several years - I can remember going to Dorset, Gloucester, one or two places there, by that scheme. And as I say, still - unemployment prevailed
,
 especially in the painting - trade, summer time naturally there was work, but come the winter, no, there's no decorations could be done. What a few decorations interior, so small and so much of the time was unemployed. But I was amazed - at a later date 
w
hat money there was in mum's Post Office. And it wasn't left - by any relations. Not to my knowledge. She just saved. That was her mode of living. Save so much - and spend so much. Yet at the same time I wasn't denied, I was always well dressed. I always 
had a pair of shoes, as far as I can remember.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did she buy the shoes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes, she'd}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6160996\charrsid13067595  buy them. I always had me comb}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 s, always had me vests. I've already spoken, I had me holidays. Yet we were only working class, but mother would daily go out and work.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 How many hours a day would she work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Probably go out - leave the house say about half past nine to ten, and return by the time I come back from school. But as I say, I was amazed later - that - when the question of money arose, this is in the t
hirties when mother had her illness - that - I was amazed that mother had accumulated at least five hundred pounds. And that was a fortune. And as I say, with - with that - that was astounding to me. But that was how mother eked out her life. If anybody w
ent without it would be her, not me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Do you remember whether she had less food perhaps at the dinner table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No. No. But as I say - oh no. When all the fruits came in in the summer time, we'd have all that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 How often a week do you think you'd have meat? Would you have it every day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Yes. I can give you the routine. From the Sunday's joint - be cold meat on Monday. And the rest of the joint hashed, stewed up - with all the vegetables for Tuesday. Wednesday could be sausage. And - and - I had to go to the butchers and - and get some }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6160996\charrsid13067595 scrap}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595  o}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6160996\charrsid13067595 f lamb or steak pieces. In - in}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 asmuch, we would have - a haddock for Saturday's tea.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What time would tea be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Half past five. Half past five to six. See, when dad came home at night if he was working.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 That's when you'd have the meat course?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
No, no, no. No. No, dad would - see in those days see the working man - there was plenty of coffee shops about. Where they could do - get a reasonable midday lunch. Ten}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6160996\charrsid13067595  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 pence, nine}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6160996\charrsid13067595  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 pence, ten}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6160996\charrsid13067595  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 pence.
 And dad would get it there. But probably come home to a - a fish tea, like a pair of kippers, something - or a bloater, something like - all very reasonably cheap. But food, no there was always food at home. But - not to be greedily ate. Mother'd say, no
, no, you've had enough today. And that's how mother - sort of - eked out life.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What would you do at midday, would you have school meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 In the war years see - so many years took up my schools - my school years like. There was food kitchens ever
ywhere, outside the school in Barrow Hill Road there was a food kitchen. You get patties, and - mashed potatoes and this and that. Made a meal. And of course - children wasn't inclined to - stick rigidly to buy food when you - had the money to buy your me
als. It's done today isn't it. You'd buy buns or some sweets or something like that. But - mother would keep an eye on that sort of fashion.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 You wouldn't come home for lunch?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No, because mother would be - but see there again, if I took out the do
gs - I'd return to Avenue Road, and I'd get a little - tasty little bit like - bit of fish - jam tart, this and that, see, I'd get little nice bit - bits and pieces there. And then you'd have - meat spreads, fish paste - in the summer you'd have - watercr
ess. My father was very fond of watercress.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Would you be abel to pick it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No, no, no. No. Bought cheaply - Because - when there }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6160996\charrsid13067595 
was abundance of growth, vegetat}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 ion, like - meaning vegetables - not only the shops but the co}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6160996\charrsid13067595 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 ster boys would be coming round with their barrows. Gluts of everything. All go on the market, be - reasonably cheap.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did you have a garden of any description?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No. No, just the back yard.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 So you didn't grown any vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Or have any livestock?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
I had a little - crazy, I pulled up some paying stones to make a little - allotment there, I was growing - mustard and cress sort of thing, just a little phase. Also too I - I - always had an ambition to keep chickens. My neighbours kept chickens but
 not we. Not the Turners. I was so - but I had a rabbit, pet rabbit. I kept a pet rabbit out in - the back yard. In a hutch.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did you have any other pets?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Cat. We'd have a cat. Which I called Tenger. Most deliberate in his - his walk, even when w
e'd - mother dished up Sunday's lunch, I'd look out through the kitchen window onto the dryings, Tango, Tango. He'd come, but he'd just - tango fashion sort of walk. And he'd have exactly the same as we did. Meat and veg.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Where would you eat your meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 In the kitchen. Like the - bedroom kitchen. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Would you all sleep in the same room?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Bill and I would. The kitchen - the bed would be up in a corner, leaving the window, and the table would be here. And - Bill and I would sit against t
he wall - the table would be pulled out just to allow you to go there because - it was very secretive for me because I would pop my fireworks underneath that cushion - which was tied on. - I was forbidden to bring fireworks into the house but I would, and
 I'd hide 'em - underneath those, see and my -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 You'd have the bonfire night and things like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Oh yes, great fun. Especially on the dryings, because - we had - two borders of trees - as well as - ladybirds and caterpillars, the leaves would fa
ll - late autumn and of course you'd go through the man kick them - and that's where you would hide under these heaps, because you had a cotton on any knocker's number from one to seven. And also the great - fun of bonfires, naturally the adults would be 
there as well. But I mean -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What were the dryings again?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Was a - was a - plot of land - just - beyond our back yard which faced the houses, that ran parallel with - Townsend Road. Dryings.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What was it you said it was named after?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Well
, it - it - there's no doubt it arrived because they were drying lands for - naturally for washing days. But we children all played there. In fact I would relinquish my little section because on our garden wall I'd already chalked up the wickets. I - I us
ed to get told off, young - Eddie - you can't play cricket today, the washing's out.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 When was washing day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Well - early part of the week. Early part of the week.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did your mother do it at home and then hang it up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes, but we wouldn't u
se that because we had our back yard. But those people, with the houses that faced the - this square of ground - they - they would use.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 But your mother did the washing at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes. All washing was done at home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did she ever have anyone come in to help her round the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
No. No. No. No, nothing - no - no extra services - then in those days. In fact, you've heard me talk about Granny Luff, no relation but always referred to as Granny. The extra revenue she got would be through washing
. She'd wash - for people. And in a - small coppers that would come her way and that would be - intake. But I can remember. I would take the stairs there at a - at each flight and I'd hear Granny calling me, Eddie, Eddie. Yes Granny. Will you get me half 
a pint of water? And I can see that jug today. A fat little - blue glass jug with a small neck to it. And I'd go up to the local - Duke of Cumberland - and you go in the bottle parlour, children were allowed in. And - get the - porter for the old girl.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 When you were very young would somebody come to look after you children when your mother was out working?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No, there was never - never services like that. No services like -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 I wondered whether Granny Luff or something?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No, no. No. No. No. 
No, you took care of yourselves. See dad was out at war, mother was working round the corner, and - if it was school holidays I'd get the ten commandments from mother. Always wind up with, don't go down by the canal. But we did it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 That's where you used to play was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes. Yes, you was out of bounds down there but you went. Oh - every tiddler there was - every type of tiddler.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did you ever go swimming in it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes, we were all taught to swim in the horse}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6160996\charrsid13067595 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 pond there. And of course if - the park keeper or even the policeman saw you - you know, a - a boy can be very elusive, he's gone. And so - how that was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What other kind of games did you play?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Everything. In the road - there's the old fashioned bumps, and while you're on - ju
mping over - what is like that - one called cut lump, there was lamp release, there was warning echo.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What are all these things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 I'll explain this one to you, tin can copper. You know in the roadside there's water valves. That would be a base. A
nd this base was right opposite Beckets place, the court}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6160996\charrsid13067595 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
way, I'll tell you about that - led onto the Dryings. Well - one boy would have to retri}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6160996\charrsid13067595 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
ved a tin can that thrown down towards Townsend Road. And on his way back he would come back backwards, arrive
 at the base, and he should put the base of the tin on that base, then he'd look round and - if he would see any of them hiding. If he could see somebody hiding he could recognise, he'd bang the tin down on the base, one, two, three, Wally - Wally Leanard
 
in number 28. But if he couldn't find anybody, he'd have to - go out and seek. And if you could dodge him to get back to that base and say, one, two, three, I'm home. And that was the game. But anybody caught out he was - in turn would have to retrieve th
e can as it was thrown down the street And they call that tin can copper.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What was Cut Lump?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Cut Lump. Yes. It's - on the - idea of bumps. One man would go down - the team would jump over him, and the last one to land, say you landed there, from that chalk mark of where you - where you start you'd go to the next. And that'd be a o}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6160996\charrsid13067595 w}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
ner, and he's got to jump from that point there, not come over, it's on the same part - line as - in - as in tennis, football you see. From that - and jump over - over y
ou. And if everybody succeeded the last man would go on, there'd be a tower. See. Cut lump. The one to fail will have to go down and take the stand. And the lamp release - was a game which was between two sections of lamp posts. So on one side of the road
'
d be up there and the other one down here. Be two teams. One - would be in - in the interior of that section there, and the - you'd encourage the others to run right the way through without being caught or touched. But - if one of your team was caught the
n one of those protecting the area would have to go on the kerb line. And you - you outside would encourage him, come near him, and if you could push him off that kerb line you'd release your man from the base. Lamp release. That's how it went on.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 So you really made your own games up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Yes. Yes. Inasmuch too, now for instance I - I - I just surprised my - my in-law and my friends. Because in this house there's footballs and there's tennis balls and there's this and that. I said - it was raining an
d they said well we can't go out grandpa. I said, come on, I'll tell you what to do. I threw a two shillings piece down in the front room there. And I said, now you've got the - Barry, demonstrate, have you ever seen this game? He hadn't I said look - see
 
where I'm standing away from that coin, now you get in line with me on the other side, I'll throw the tennis ball down and hit that coin, and you'll catch it on the rebound. Don't drop it because otherwise that's a penalty. But the idea is to knock that a
s
 far towards me or me towards you. And so you play there too. And if you're on your own that was against the wall. Ricocheting off it. No trouble. What's finer - in the cricket sense to keep on taking the ball without thinking. Yes, it's all games like th
at.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did you ever go for many walks?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Yes. Now for instance - as a lad, especially - breaks of holiday time - mother would - fill the knapsack, there'd be a mineral bottle full of tea or something like that and sandwiches - and the trek would be th
e same way. Avenue Road to the Swiss - Swiss Cottage, along Finchley Road - to Childs Hill, and when you - that - little pair of - Childs Hill you go into Crooked Lane, on the right side that was all fields. Right down as far as Cricklewood - Midland Stat
ion. Because that Road there was a lane. And where - the Hendon football ground is now - and those houses were all fields. You could go up there and sit in the fields, with the skylarks - 'cos just down -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 These places where you played, you were telling me about sheep being all over the place?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Oh Regents Park. Regents Park. Naturally - it was so easy to just fall into Regents Park from where I was living. You took it as a mater of course, that was the - the open space to go to. And all our cricket 
- would be played there. School cricket. And the day of the grass}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6160996\charrsid13067595 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
cutter, or the roller - was only a myth. The grass was determined by the sheep that grazed on it, the length of the grass was determined by the - and naturally you'd have to shoo - shoo the 
flock away so as to play. And if a - if a - the markings were first made there, you'd play there and the block hole would be like a pot hole - until you'd move on. Oh the sheep were there every summer, in fact - I used to get the tea for the shepherd, you
 know, always - helped the shepherd \{BLANK\}
 And all the slip parks - from Charlotte Street to the zoo - they were all grazing grounds. Railinged off, you never used them. Never used them, because - you say never to a boy, that was the - the challenge for you to just seek, and then you do so.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 You wouldn't disturb the sheep by being there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No, no, because your - your aim wouldn't be to - it wasn't - it would be to go}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6160996\charrsid13067595  through it and not to - wilfully}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595  disturb the sheep, 'course the sheep would }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7303732\charrsid13067595 shier}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595  at you naturally as you approach. But - Regents Park every summer was full of sheep.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Who was it you played with, just people who were at school with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes. It would be your friends about your - your own household, and - as you got older and m
ore - organized you'd play - the top of the street, or - another turning. And then the school days naturally the more you made friends, you'd -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did the boys come from the same area as you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes. In - all the same area went to the same school. Yes
. See so you - you knew - you - you knew about each others characters. Because, as I say, you - you - you jumped school - on your age group, not on ability, on age group. So your friends were always there all the time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Were there any gangs or things like that in the school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Any gangs? No. No, there wasn't that - you had games - gangs, now for instance, I - I - I had a gang, always had a gang, but only in sport. Never ruffians. There could be a little rivalry sometimes - if you saw - youths - come
 from Camden Town - walking along the canal walk - which was prohibited. But if you saw them and of course there would be a clash. You knew what a clash meant don't you? Stone throwing. There would - there could be that. Or some would come the other way f
rom Marylebone. In a - in a way you were jealously guarding your territory see. But otherwise no, there was no -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 You say it was out of bounds anyway, you shouldn't have been there?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes, well of course out of bounds to a youngster. No. He'd slide
 in just the same, my - I could always gain admittance into the zoo. Never any task for me. In fact - as soon as I go through the bushes with all innocence I would seek what pleasures what was in my mind. That was nothing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 There were lots of things going on around you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Oh yes. There was. Life was pleasant, it was pleasant. And of course as I say - if it came to an arduous - anything arduous well - it didn't hurt you, its your parents - would - have all that responsibility. Life was very pleasant then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 And you say you belonged to the Wolf Cubs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Yes. First Marylebone. In fact - I've written - one of the Queens - sons, I think it's - you know, one of the Queen's sons held a meeting, he joined the First Marylebone Cubs, and of all places he
 held a meeting at Buckkingham Palace, to think that I so many years beforehand was in the same group, but our Scouts Hall was in Charlotte Street. An old ramshackle of a place. Which it was a bungalow type of building - there was an upstairs but it was a
l
l sort of a semi loft where we kept all the camping equipment, pots and pans. It was a good job because - otherwise the rain would have poured down into the hall itself. 'Cos when it rained every pot was put there for - use - catching all the drips and ev
erything else that came through. That was the First Marylebone - Scouts.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 It must have been one of the first of its kind actually, it didn't start 'til late?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No. No. Baden Powell started it - what - turn of the century didn't he? First Marylebone Scouts.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What about any other organizations you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 You say you played for the schools football team?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes. Well I can't say - that's LCC. LCC. As you - a - well - as you got older naturally your ability was - had improved, an
d this as well as class matches of the house matches, there'd be school matchers, inter-school like - Byehill Road would play - Bell Street, or Gateforth Street, or High Street Marylebone, which was a - a High School in those days, and they were boys of s
i
xteen, and we were thirteen. They left there at sixteen. But we would play them. In fact we took the shield away from then in 1921. But any rate - then the other interests of life of course - everybody went to Sunday school. Everybody went to church Sunda
y.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did your parents go along to church as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
No. No, just the children, the children were shot away. In fact I think - Margaret Powell explains that very well. To get an empty house the adults always shot the children away to Sunday school or
 whatever it might be. But of course - also too the interest there - now for instance there was Baptist church was - away from Protestants. We were greedy children, of course we would attend there because we knew full well there was a treat coming off the
r
e say in a month's time, and the attendance made it - to your benefit that you would be able to go. And - you'd have a tea party in - in the - church hall, and there might be a trip as far as Pinner - or Ruislip, via the old Met. line and they were villag
es then you know. Villages. In fact the show would have its - seasonal tour round there, you - there'd be the - coconut shies and the boats, swing boats and everything else.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 This would be in the summer would it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes. Yes. But in St Johns Wood, in
 Charlotte Street there's - now what's the name of the rooms, the Colliet Rooms, oh, it's called the Dewar - it was called the - Dewarden institute. It's called Rooms now. We had all our - winter treats there. And I know - I look up that vast staircase an
d
 I think, I'm going up there. To me that was sheer adventure. A long - not winding but a straight - staircase with a huge wooden rail, I wanted to climb that. Now on that first floor - there was a gigantic hall and it was always divided by - if there was 
a
 big assembly, the partition would come and there it would be. And - we'd have a concert there, and the MCC would get us all going and do you know one of the earliest tunes we would sing there, to get us all going. When the Moon Shines Bright on Charlie C
h
aplin. Have you heard - ever - have you heard the tune? When the moon shines bright on Charlie Chaplin - his shoes are cracking for want of blacking. And his little baggy trousers they want mending, before they send him to the Dardanelles. Imagine can't y
ou.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 He was around even in those days, Charlie Chaplin?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Oh Charlie - because Charlie went to America in the early - before the '14 war. Yes. Charlie did. But any rate - we'd have fun and games there and they were, they were lovely treats because -
 the little snip of the evening would be - after the concert you'd file out and all the parents would be down there on the ground floor to receive you, but you'd have to pass two - wardens they were, one would give you an orange, and the other would give 
you a bag of sweets. And you know what that meant to children. That's how the fun was, that was very delightful.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 How often would that happen, once a year or twice a year?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Oh - twice a year. Like in the wintertime. So had the - sort of a thanks g
iving day from Sunday school. And there'd be a Christmas party. And probably in the Easter}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7303732\charrsid13067595 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
time there'd be a party. And when it came to good weather, now I've had a treat, I don't know if you know St Edmundstows at all. There's the waterworks up there. And now they're building on it. They've reli}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7303732\charrsid13067595 n}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
quished some of that ground and sort of - come in the market for buying. There were fields, we'd have our parties up there, fun and games on - on those fields. Right adjacent to Primrose Hill. But now its all alter
ed. But as I say I told you about we'd have - the trips to Pinner, Ruislip.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did you ever go to the seaside?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No, no. No. Now I'm glad you mentioned that. Really - especially North West London, I can understand those in South London or East London
, cos naturally they're nearer, might find their way to the seaside, but as far as working class Londoners, they rarely saw the sea. Couldn't afford it. There wasn't that extra money allowed. I was lucky, but I know even to the thirties - school friends I
'd - I'd known all my life had never seen the sea.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yet it's only about fifty miles away?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Yes. Yes. See. As you know, there wasn't the money to go to it. When you come - when you stop and think - some of them have got no boots and shoes. But I wil
l say this, there was a pub on every corner. There was those ding-dongs by a certain character at every weekend.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Was it quite noisy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes. Dings-dongs were, yes. Ding-dong. Still you accepted it, I'd sooner hear that than all this - slamming and 
- slamming of - car doors and revving and everything else like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Were there any children that your mother or father disapproved of you playing with in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No. No. No. No. Can't recall a - one instance.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Can you remember whether your parents ever went on holiday anywhere?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Mother did, mother - I don't - I don't recall going away with dad. I can recall going away with mother. We went to Ramsgate. We went to Worthing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What would your father do, just stay at home?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes
, probably if there was a bit of work on, like - house painting or something like that, he wouldn't forego that, he couldn't afford to. And he was a chap - as I say, he was a good person like that but - you couldn't push him out of his stride our dad. He 
had a set way, and there you are, that was him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did he ever take you out on his own?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Yes. He'd take me to Lord's cricket ground when I was only a nipper. One little fault I still bear in my mind now - just by the main gate in St Johns Wood Road -
 the footway there - was of yellow tiles. And I can remember dad taking me to Lords and I'm walking - you know how a child is attracted by - tile or - or - yellow colour, I can always remember saying to dad - in my childish way, what was it? He said, dick
ie birds made this one. And I've never forgotten it. Dickie birds made it. Of course it satisfied me see. That's always been in my mind. And that was just - approaching the main gate at Lords.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7303732\charrsid13067595 How old would you be}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595  when you first went to Lords?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Oh -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 About six or seven?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Might have been younger than that, because my - my memory can hitch from the age of four, I'll tell you why. With Charlotte Street, no, with Avenue Road Bridge which is Northgate, it's still the same bridge as I've always 
known it, the pattern of the ironwork there is - is like diamond shape. And in '68 I took my grandson down there, he's four, and he's not tall enough to look over the rail He's looking through - the metal work which is diamond shape. And then he found he 
could put his foot - into one of these - designs and lift himself up and just look over the top. It hit my memory, I remember doing that. So I could have been about the same age, about four. Yes. To put my foot in that rail to look over the rail. See?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Was W.G. Grace around in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Yes, he was, yes, no, he was still playing. As you know he was playing up 'til about 1914, '15, early part of the war years. I must have seen him but I can't recall him, 'cos I was always in Lords. Even - as you k
now, sport still prevailed in the '14 war because - nothing like the air raids of - the last war. So sport would go on there, and I - when I gained my commonsense I could stand outside at lunch break, one thirty, and as you know, they iss}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7303732\charrsid13067595 u}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 ed a pass out, an
d you get a lot of business people there just going for the morning, might think, well I might go back, and you know what you are, expectant, here you are son. Failing that, I knew every well to get over round Cavendish Works. I was always in there every 
night. I chased everybody for their autographs. Everyone.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What about football?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Oh football. Dad would make me alternatively either to Stamford Bridge - or - Queens Park Rangers ground at Goldhawk Road. And when I became - a junior able to go on 
me own I'd always go to Chelsea. Eventually I played there as I told you. When I was thirteen I played for London Schoolboys there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Which did you prefer, cricket or football?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Well - I've got to make a choice there, I suppose cricket. I was alway
s considered a bat. And right through from the time - 'til I broke off to - and enjoy the atmosphere of the roaring twenties - up 'til the outbreak of war, of the last war - to the times when I was - when I took up cricket again with my son on the local g
r
een and news got hold of me and I started cricket again, and I'm playing for the suburbs again. Against - I'm playing for Cockfosters - against Barnet and places and naturally I meet the county men, I play with the county men. I always opened. I was alway
s an opening bat. I was a gre}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7303732\charrsid13067595 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
dy person, could bowl a ball too. In fact Parfitt knows that, I had three seasons with Parfitt, of Middlesex. He'd always stick his pads in the way of a - that good ball.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 He's played for England as well hasn't he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes. See, so I - that's my cricketing days. But - at - the preference would be cricket. Mad on cricket.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did you do anything like fishing at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No. No. Oh no, don't - you mustn't talk to me about fishing, I think that's a lazy pastime. How a pers
on can sit there all day and not get a bite, and if you call that achievement in sport - I don't think that way, no. It's got to be a bat, it's got to be a ball, doesn't matter what size, where you achieve - achieve something. You're the recogniser - and 
when you're extended with the sweat on your brow, and whether you've got the guts to keep on carrying on, that's me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 You say your father was more interested in sport as a spectator?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 He'd watch me at sport.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did he ever go to the horseracing or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
No, but dad liked a bet. Now I go back to the days of the News Chronicle, which was always the daily paper at home. There's one tipster there at the back there as well as Captain Heath there was a man called Bookworm, gave you t
hree selections. And dad at the weekends when he could afford it say - he might have a four shilling bet, that would be on these three selections. Three cross doubles and a treble. And then when he talked - horseracing it would be on his pet selector, Boo
kworm. But other than that, dad was very content to watch me at sport. That's my son sort of. And I didn't let him down because I always achieved. See?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did you ever have a bicycle?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 I did. Mother bought me a bike, it was a Raleigh.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 How old would you be then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Mm, I hadn't left school. I was a very lucky boy you know. Although cycle then would be about - may - no more than about fifty bob, three pound, that's a lot of money. But there again as I say I was very persuasive. I'd say to mum, 
look, I must have a bike mustn't I? The more I worried her - the more it cinched the idea I was going to get one. I'd dwell onto that bike. In fact - you wouldn't see me ride up kerbs onto a footway. I'd get off and help it down. I treasure that. And I'd 
polish that. And the beauty too of it, you could go out as far as Barnet, St Albans - very little traffic you know. Good fun. They were good days you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What about things like fairs or cinemas?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 With a fair, as you know, you could always rely o
n Hampstead Heath. There you had Easter, Whitsun, August. Also too Hampstead Heath, all your frogs. Yes, tadpoles and frogs from the old leg of mutton pond, that's the pond -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 You'd get them in jam jars?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Oh yes, oh come out with your jar, go - ti
e your string around and - always get a tiddler in that. Yes. Used to spend a day up Hampstead. We'd either walk up Fitzjohns Avenue, see naturally from Avenue Road - to the Sweiss, Fitzjohns Avenue, and - that white stone pond up the top there, that's on
ly a pond, there's no - nothing in it. You either go to the Vale of Erith or the best pond was the leg of mutton pond. That's the pond just by - if you up - went up Pratts Lane, onto Sandy Gallop where the horses take, that's that pond down there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Why is it called leg of mutton pond?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
The shape of the pond. 'Cos I've read history like since - in my - earlier days of course - to help me with my - writings. The tadpoles would be there, and of course - in those days it was open. Now it's fenced. But i
n those days - the - the banking would be so - that you reach - and of course you get an armful of wet sleeve or something like that, or the - bank would crumble and your foot would be in. So your shoes and socks would. But that was the sport, that was th
e hazards and the sport.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did you have any other hobbies like collecting things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Fag pictures. That's all you - cigarettes there - called cigarette cards. Black Cat had the silk. Mainly flags and all that. And then - Pinner Cigarettes - Pinner Ci
garettes came with all the football groups. Various footballers. But other than that no, I had to play games. I wouldn't go to many exhibitions, I hadn't got the time, I was always playing games. Because I - I had always been a promoter of a game. That se
r
ious game, in the middle of the road - a box - and a wicket and coats round it, and eleven a side and all that, and because you're not batting and bowl - either - if you wasn't either batting or bowling, you're inclined after a time to sit on the kerb. I 
was the skipper, stand up. The game had to be serious.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 You never got moved on or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 You - occasionally, not very often no, because you - you'd spy - a policeman from afar and you naturally you'd - retire.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Were you allowed to get dirty when you played?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 We just got dirty didn't you? We just got dirty.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Would you be told off for that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Oh yes. Would do that. You know. But - you talk about that, great fun was had - do you know the weather then - we were more fortun
ate with our weather. There was - such a thing called a heat}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7303732\charrsid13067595 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
wave which you never experience of today. You had several weeks of this glorious weather now. Really hot. So that - all - the - local council to water the roads with their water carts. A big tank
 on a cart. And at the back - would be a line of pipe which would spray the water, and of course we children would take off our clothes and just paddle behind it. And court ways would be decontaminated, washes of water be - be forced up there and brushed.
 
That was great fun to us children. And of course you - you imagine the child would - if he could he'd get down - if he'd got his boots and shoes on, stand in the water. There's lots doing there. Nothing in your way in the street, the girls would be conten
t
 to play - mothers and fathers over there and - push - mounds or - or - lines of dirt as - that's the house sort of thing. They were quite happy playing and we were. And I'll tell you another little thing too, contentment was so - in - when you played gam
e
s, a son would be invented. For instance - girls would play with a ball - up against a wall and they would sing a tune like - eight o'clock bells are ringing, mother may I go out. My young man is waiting, waiting to take me out. And there's several verses
.
 That - when they played that they would sing. And probably they'd invent one or two little rhymes and add, and that's how it was. Just the same as the old tune, I can - now I've recalled it here that the playing games and of course we wouldn't fraternize
 
with the girls and the ball - is punched where the girls are playing, and they're singing, wallflowers, wallflowers, growing up so high. I'm so embarrassed I collect me ball and run away, see, too embarrassed to linger with the girls. Lots of little thing
s like that, little - when you look back it was great fun you know.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 It's been taken away a lot now by pop music hasn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes. Yes, and there again - instead of you enjoying with it - you just sit and watch it, instead of participating in it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did you ever have things like kites?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Oh yes. Kites. Hoops. Tops. All manner of type - tops. The big boxer. The big heavy fellow. And the little - round varnish little boxer, pint - pint size and - oh lovely to spin that. And ho}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7303732\charrsid13067595 o
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 ps. And another thing - thing too. In your junior years there you'd have harness made of wool, which you knitted yourself.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What was that called?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Well I - how it came about I don't know but - in time we're all dong the same, we've got an old - cotton reel, a small
 cotton reel, with three of four tacks surrounding the hole, and you were able to buy coloured wool, rainbow coloured, and with a hairpin from mother - you'd go round there with a thread of this wool and lift it over the tack or onto the tack. In the proc
e
ss of knitting, and the finished job would go down in the hole of the reel. Like a small sausage. That would be the reins. And you acquired such a - such - such a pair of - of - of manufacture, you'd even knit harness. And you're proud of it and so of cou
rse - one lad would be the horse and you'd be the - yes. See all little things like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 So you invented all the time really?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes. See, so there was games in plenty.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Would you ever get presents on your birthday and Christmas?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes. Yes, very lucky. Very lucky.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 It wounds as if you made them all up rather than were given games as such?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What kind of things would you get as presents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Well - you'd get your - like the earliest would be your - wooden horse. Get forts. I can al
ways re - remember - little farmyard set. And in my little mind there I'd gallop the - the horse into the stable, you know the little, stables and all things like that. Just the same as the lads are today, I've got a grandson, you give him one of these li
t
tle motor cars, he'll play with that for hours. Sip round here and round there. All in the mind, and that's how you widen it. Oh no, there's plenty of that, because - the Christmas stocking was very much in evidence, full up with nuts and this and that, f
ruit. And you thought of a lot of - Father Christmas coming. And you believe it to a late age too. Great fantasy that was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 You say you used to sing, have piano sessions?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What about during the rest of the year?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Would you have sing-songs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Yes, because - we would visit mothers sister at Kilburn. And a younger sister lived with this other sister, my Auntie Lil, not much older than me, and mother would say, Eddie, Auntie Lil to you. 'Cos I'd call her Lil. Yet she wa
s only a - couple of years older than me. Now she could get all the - early sheets of music, rag time - Ma He's Making Eyes at Me, Margie, all your - and I'd stand there with her and - learn it from her, sing it, and when - the rest of the congregation mi
g
ht be - in the dining room or - the kitchen, and when we got 'em into the big hall we'd say listen to this. And if we prompted them to sing I'd whisper to Auntie Lil - come on, give it to 'em, give 'em that. A line of tunes there, and we'd all be singing 
and - Oh Johnnie and - tunes like that, they were love - lovely times.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Who played the piano?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Lil, Auntie Lil. See and I've written about that, Auntie Lil - her piano and me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What about your mother and father, did they play an instrument?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No. No. Nothing like that. We was all fort - always fortunate to have a gram}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7303732\charrsid13067595 o}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 phone.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Before the first world war you mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes. We had a little box, I remember coming home from school - and I heard something playing in the kitchen, and mother 
was playing this gramaphone and know what the tune was? Destiny Waltz. Yes. Destiny Waltz, yes, I can recall that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 So sport and music was your forte really?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes, I was keen, I was keen from - even schooldays like singing - in the school choir, i
n - classes you know as part of your subjects, sing. Like tunes as you know by - I mentioned Barbara Allen and - Drink to me only and all that. I was always keen to sing, I loved singing. And - and of course when ragtime came in that was - oh that was mar
vellous, lovely, you see I was a new generation. I was going into the twenties.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did you ever go to}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7303732\charrsid13067595  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 any concerts or music halls?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 As regards to music - music halls as you say, the Old Met - Edgware Road, the Kilburn Empire. The Bedford, Camden Town
. I can remember as a teenager just finding me feet - I'd have a friend come round to me about - half past eight, twenty to nine, Ed, let's go to the Bedford, the last house. As you know there were two houses then. Six o'clock. Nine o'clock. Right. From t
hat point there - penny fared take us to the Britannia and of course just round the corner would be the Bedford. And those were the days of vaudeville and - Harry Tate, the motor car - Gertie Getano - Nellie Wallace.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Would this be after the first world war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 After, yes, yes, after, early twenties. Early twenties.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did your mother and father ever go to the music hall?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes, Kilburn Empire, I'd sometimes go with - with mother to Kilburn Empire. It was easier for us to get there than go all t
he way down to the Metropolitan. But as I got older, especially in the thirties,}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7303732\charrsid13067595  late twenties and thirties, I}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
 would visit either.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 How about before the first world war, would they go on their own?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes, they had - they - I think they did because 
- although mum didn't - mum or dad didn't talk a lot about it, I think - their - their days were spent in courtship more. Didn't get about so much. The working day was a heavy day for them. In - in their teenage days, and - their courting days were of cou
rse, local Primrose Hill was -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did they have any particular friends of their own?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
No, no, the - no, it was more family, 'cos as you know so many brothers and sisters, no. No, there wasn't a lot of friends of the family. You - you accepted the fa
ct that you knew of everybody but you didn't - you didn't have to, it was that end of it then. And of course - life goes so that you - you can't have too many keep crowding into the same house otherwise the house is - not your own. You've got to keep priv
acy to an extent. Yet you knew if there was a row going on next door, there's a row going up Beckets Place, you were just part of it, you enjoyed it all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 So the only people who would really come round would be your relatives?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Relatives, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 And you'd go around to see them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Yes. That's how you would exchange. Yes. Yes, after all you had no other means of entertainment, you had no - see you've got to forget radio, television and all that, forget all that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Would your mother and father play any games with you in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Yes. Not - yes, card games. Sevens, the old fashioned game of Sevens. And of course - in the summer, Regents Park attracted you because the band would play every - Sunday. Relations would meet out there. And of
 course - games was taboo, you couldn't play games, no - the Sabbath was entirely the Sabbath. Any - anything from serious music was frowned on. In fact jumped on. A ball, you couldn't produce a ball not - we would - compensate ourselves by - stuffing an 
ordinary handkerchief with grass, and - and sort of making a - improvised ball to throw at each other. And further tall - fur - further too that, as you got older it was a one way of boy meeting girl, round the bandstand.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 That was on a Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Sunday, yes. That was Sunday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What kind of bandstand would it be, Salvation Army type?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No, no, military bands.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 That would be all right to play that kind of music would it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes, it would be - all the old - like as - as near as you might 
get - a - a - apart from classics you might get a bit of light opera. Those were two - pioneers of - say the Chocolate Soldiers and all that sort of music, bit light, and - later, Rose Marie you might hear.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What did your parents think about swearing and things like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No. That was - that wasn't only frowned on but you were jumped on, two swearing. No swearing. In fact - the words }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7303732\charrsid13067595 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595  ain}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7303732\charrsid13067595 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 t or she you were jumped on. Don't refer to her as she, don't say her. Refer to the person at - by its name. Mrs or Mr, never she or what. No. You'd be jumped on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
When you were living in St Johns Wood can you remember whether there was anyone that you used to say that she's a real lady or that's a real gentleman or something like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes. Well anybody that come out of the by turnings - you'd refer to.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What did the people do in these big houses, what kind of jobs did they do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Well - if there was any work at all they would be somebody in the City. They would entertain, especially when - the 
session came round of Oxford and Cambridge and Eton and Harrow which took a week in July. Cricket matches at Lords. The local people would be of that class and set, and there'd be morning dress, all go to Lords, and as it extended a week, they would proba
bly entertain their guests - at their own house. Because in the vast gar}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7303732\charrsid13067595 dens I've known - tents and mar}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
quees being erected there and dance bands play in them. Which we'd sit on the kerb on the opposite side of the road and listen to.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Who would be the most important people in the area, would it be these people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Yes. Recognise - the - the rich people. They were recognised as being the important people as - oh that's a lady, or that's a sir, that's the respect you had, you were brought up to.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did anyone ever call your mother or father sir or madam?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Oh no. No, no, no, No. The best - probably could refer - some would refer as - oh this is my daily help. Some of the nicer - persons of that class were referred to as a - as Mrs Turner. But major
ity was inclined to look down. Look down, yes, very much. Very much. It was accepted because after all that was the mode of life.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What were the different groups in those days, say these people, what other kind of groups would there be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Well as far as views like political views you mean?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No, not so much that as different social groups, the people who lived in these big houses, and you say yourself sort of working class?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes, well they're entirely on their own. They lived in the clean o
f the respectability and actually - as I say that - if you were seen walking along these turnings they'd would want to - the police would want to know, what are you doing up here? See, so that would meet your question there half way wouldn't it? And - whe
n
 they - when they caught a local tradesman, of course the red carpet was laid out for them, yes madam. In fact you wouldn't refer to her as a - as Mrs Richardson say, yes madam, yes sir. I think you - you'd be asking, you'd be speaking out of turn - be sl
ightly on the rude side to refer to as say Mrs - Mrs Jenkins or Mrs Is}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7303732\charrsid13067595 r}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 ael, madam or sir,
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Were you brought up to touch your hat to these people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes. Always be most respectful. Most respectful. In fact - cap in hand. Take off your cap. And hold i
n hand to talk - if you were asked to talk. Yes sir, yes madam. And of course very much in evidence too - the classification of the tradesman calling at the tradesman's entrance. Was only two persons - two trades allowed to go to the front door, that was 
the postman and the paper boy. Because as you know, you - you use that front letterbox, otherwise, you'd be a - a rude - intrusion, a breach of protocol to use the front porch. Tradesman's entrance, you'd be - if you did you'd be readily told. And -

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 And in the working class was there much sort of distinction, with different grades
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Well no you - no, in - in the working class, there - there's hardly a - there isn't - naturally the shop keeper would feel more important. It's like the suburban - over 
the - over the - over the working class of a town. There would be a slight there - for instance - there was a butcher named Chapman. The '14 war made his fortunes better than they were. And at that period of time - mother - would go to the mothers meeting
 
with Mrs Chapman. And then after the '14 war in the twenties, Chapman moved from - Charlotte Street area - working class, and went up into the local high street, lush territory. And that's the time when I met his daughter, Connie. But they frowned on the 
fact that I was keeping company with Connie.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 So it was possible to move upwards?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Oh yes. Yes. Especially in trade. According to who you were serving, and - and of course it - it was a case of - well - what you were - had accumulated see. In fact 
the boys were going to - High Street, Marylebone, the Central School against us the grammar, elementary.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What about people like doctors or school teachers, what kind of group did they belong to? Or church people, clergymen?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Well with the local clergy, he was a friend of everybody}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7303732\charrsid13067595 \rquote }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 s. The schoolteacher, they - they always came from afar. They were - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7303732\charrsid13067595 importe}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 d into the area, but never lived in the area. No, they - for the - I would say that the school - the teacher - in my day - he was dedicated to 
improve his pupil. And - in some senses there a - a great relationship, now for instance My Mr Timms, him and - and myself were great friends. There was - there wasn't a thing I wouldn't do for him. There was great respect there. I - I had a love for my t
eacher and he had a great respect for me. That - that - that was fostered. Of course you had your dislikes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What kind of things did he think was important, what was he like on things like punctuality or manners, tidiness.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Well let me give you jus
t a little insight here. One evening I should have played for school - at cricket. We were playing Bell Street in Regents Park. But I'd - refused on the grounds that I wanted to go into Lords, there was a big county and I wanted to see some County members
.
 And when Mr Timms heard of that - before closure of school he called me in front of the class. I've got it written down there as a matter of fact. And he - he says, Turner, I understand that you've refused to play for school. I said, yes sir. You know I 
w
as quite honest. Well why, he said. I said, because the reason that I want to go into Lords, there's a - important County match there and there's men I want to see. And after a pause he says to me, you mean to say that you put your own - selfish desires -
 
in front of - school? School is expecting you to play to represent them, and you're going selfishly for your own desires? And I didn't realize the significance of that. But he'd given me a wigging after - first of all a lecture, then a wigging, and I felt
 
so hurt. Hurt in the respect that he hurt my feelings, I hadn't realized - what I had done. And also our friendship had - had sort of been strained. Well after several days of thinking about it, I knew full well that I'd been - foolishly and selfishly thi
nking of - just myself. Or rather selfishly. And that was a - one of the finest tonics I think I ever got. He pushed it home to me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did you have the same teacher all the way through?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No. It did fluctuate on several occasions, but I was very fortunate, I always seemed to have my Mr Timms.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What other kind of things did you like at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Well of course sport - dominated. I used to love history. I was very good at writing, printing, map drawing, very good. In fact I was so good with the p
en - that I would - when I was thirteen I would copy every class exam - of - headmaster's dossier, I'd sit in the big hall and do it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Would you have gone on if you could have stayed at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No. No, I was - impatient to get out into the big world.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 But you think you benefited from school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Oh - much so. I look back now and I would have liked to - if I had the - what shall I say, if I had the desire, I wish I had the desire to sort of - further my knowledge. But there again I don't rep
ent well whatever I've done. Whether there have been failures, whatever it is. 'Cos after all that's life. I've enjoyed what I've - been able to do.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did the teachers teach you punctuality?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes. That was very 'course that's the day of the school 
bell ringing, and everybody heard the school bell. That was ring - rung twenty minutes before time. And - even in your earliest memories there, you'd be walking along the street and - another pupil would say, school bell's gone you know. And you'd say, I 
k
now silly, you know, that retort. And when you were - assembled in the - in the playground - after school bell, the whistle would be blown. And you would queue up in your various classes. And on the further command you walk into the school. School assembl
y. Punctuality was everything. I've always been a chap, and I still am, I watch a lot of cricket, I must be at a cricket game before it starts. That's always been me, punctuality.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 You think you got it from school do you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No, I get it from my mother. In fact I was a chip off her block. Mother and I - thought - we loved the same things. And I was more }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7303732\charrsid13067595 impulsive}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
 and more persuasive - so I got further into it, and she got further into it. But punctuality's always been my - yet against that, my wife, b
orn in Tiverton - would lose a day in a - I'd say she'd lose a day in a month. Not me. You'd break your neck to - be to time. I said, well it's just that you're - you're - just the opposite. She would. She'd moon around - well she'd lose more than a day i
n a month, she'd lose a day in a week. Now I must work to a schedule in my mind.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did your mother and father show much interest in your schoolwork?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No. I wasn't a brilliant scholar, yet I was a good scholar. I was always - third or fourth, sometim
es second in class exams and all that. I'd be brilliant in some and just fail - now for instance - one of my weaknesses was spelling, that's why I was reluctant at first to start writing. But - writing very good. History I love, geography I love. Now for 
i
nstance the little things that come up on telly, I tell my wife exactly - I mean with her she doesn't know the left from the right. In fact - I wrote in the school book down at Tiverton which we've just visited, there's a school book now because there's a
 
museum. My wife always told me - and she's left handed you know, and she was always told by a teacher, Anna, use the hand next to the window, and it's always stuck in her mind. And I've wrote the little - written that little quotation in - in the museum b
ook. But - my wife is hopeless - direction.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did your parents ever visit the school at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Yes. Yes. There would be the school - assembly where - the awards were given out, you know in - in an ordinary way, and - as I say I did achieve because my parents were very - they were proud of me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did they ask you what you were doing at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
What - yes. And when my teacher heard - that I was - at the - plain and simply an errand boy, they were - flabbergasted. And I said, well it's only temporary. But I - somehow I'd like the life somehow, it was -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 How did you get that job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Oh yes, the - errand boy was wanted and I just took it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 So you found it yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes. See, and furthermore too I loved meeting people. Love talking 
with people. And as time went on I couldn't see myself - caged in any - office, or anything like that, no. I had to be free. Even now - when the sun shines I must go out and walk. I often take the Heath. My legs let me down sometimes, but - as long as I h
ave some exercise then I - and - when it rains, I'm quite happy, I'm right. And that's how I - conduct myself now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did you have any other part time jobs before you left school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Well only the milkman. Milkman's boy.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 When did you do that, on Saturdays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Yes. The weekend, because there wouldn't be much time, not - any other time like - until I got older. Then of course the paper boy and then I'd be - up at the shop at half past six you know. Do the papers before school, that was no - no tro
uble. And I was a - also too I was a lad that if I took a turning - and it was long, I couldn't just walk through that, I had to trot through. That was my - approach to anything like. In fact I'd ride on paper round - get it done.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 When you first took this errand boy job what kind of hours was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 As a junior eight - 'til seven.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Eight in the morning 'til seven at night?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Ask me what the wages were.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What were the wages?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Ten shillings a week.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did you have half days with that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
The shop would close on a Thursday - but as in butchers shops there's all so much clearing, it could be two o'clock or half past two before you were out.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did you work Saturday on that as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Saturday was a full day. Your - five day a
 week working which prevails so easily of today was never thought of. Your working week, six days a week. Seven days a week for some. Because little markets was open on - on a Sunday, just for the morning. But Saturday }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7303732\charrsid13067595 a full day, now butcher}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595  shop, on a Sa
turday was controlled by law - no later than eight o'clock at night but - what time you started in the morning was nobody's business. Five, half past five, six was the latest. On all day. Hot weather. Of course madam wouldn't want the meat 'til late. Beca
use refrigeration - might be a small ice box they might have, otherwise they'd have nothing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 This was errand boy for a butcher wasn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes. Always butchers.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did you learn anything about the trade?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Oh yes. Yes, naturally when you're 
in the atmosphere - for instance, from the first - growing of a - ham machine for - fat rendering down for dripping, you'd help to make the sausages, all fascinating stuff. And then of course - you were given a knife to cut a bit of meat - what - might go
 into sausages.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 How would you get on with the employers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Oh yes, yes, I got on well - well with employers. 'Cos after all I was obedient. Even under - under stress if - if - something had really upset me, and I was saucy, I'd still work hard. I w
ouldn't sulk as far as work, in fact I'd go all the madder at work. And that was recognised. I was never sacked. And - and of course naturally turning to all this and that you acquire - knowledge, use of knife, and -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 How long were you there for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
The first job, for a year and a bit. Then I went up to High Street, in a further butchers where there was four boys on bikes. And then - I got older and I went into John Barker's - as a - a learner sort of thing. I stood five years of that. Then I sprout
ed out to seek - second shop}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7303732\charrsid13067595 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 man's job, or third shop}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7303732\charrsid13067595 -}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 man. Not old enough to make first shop}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7303732\charrsid13067595 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
man. The time came when I was first shop}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7303732\charrsid13067595 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 man and then I become a manager and so on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 So you've always been in the butchery trade?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes, always been a butcher. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did you have any Bank Holidays in the early days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Oh yes, you had every Bank Holiday. You had your East}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7303732\charrsid13067595 
er, your Whitsun. And your Augus}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 t. Yes, you always had Bank Holidays.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Were these paid?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 To us, food}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7303732\charrsid13067595 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 wise, yes. But - I don
't - even office workers, I don't think in factories, they worked by the hour there. See where - where they wanted their pound of flesh - they couldn't have it both ways in those days. They only - they gained their money through what they earn - overtime 
and everything else where as you, a weekly paid servant, you work - twice the amount of hours in one week, and wouldn't be paid any extra money.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Were you ever a member of any trade union?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No, no. No, I was never - politically minded. All my spare
 time was for sport. Anything to do with sport. As far as politics I wasn't concerned.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What about your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No, dad, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Or your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Never sort of got involved in political activity?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No. Mother as far as social life - she belonged to the Ladies Conservative Party. Only for the social life.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 How often would they meet?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Once a week. They - they knew - they - they'd make it Abbey Road. There was a church along there and there was a hall there they all met t
here.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Was she ever a member of something like a mother's union?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
No, no. No. No movements like that. No movements like that, just to be part of - to enjoy what benefits there was. But - otherwise, no. Just - minded her own business sort of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did you ever feel there was a difference between employers and workmen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Oh - well there was you know. You'd call him sir - and you didn't have to challenge any statement he made. And - you'd wait cap in hand at the last moment on a Saturday nig
ht for your wages. And when you come to realize what; chance did you have to buy - groceries or anything at that time of night. So there was no consideration, not by a - the employer. There was all that. But you took it and see that - that's - the only th
ing you knew of. And it wasn't challenged not until later, not until the progress of life.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Was there much difference between skilled craftsmen and say just general labourers in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes. There was. You - you've heard the term - food - food
en headed? Well that was a labourer in those days. He was pudden headed, that's all he's fit for, pick and shovel. This and that. Those with more initiative turned and - acquired a trade, was able to carry out a trade. See, and there was the semi skilled 
l
ike the bakers roundsman or a milk roundsman, that didn't - require a lot of skill, but it requires initiative though doesn't it? And - and of course there wasn't the skills to - to turn to in London. Factories stated waking up with the coming of the moto
r
 car, and they were - that was in a garage form. Radio improved things because radios - manufacturers were - round Great Portland Street area, all round there where the car - car business was see. Otherwise there was just shops. And you're going back to t
he days of the corn chandlers shop because it was the horse.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 The corn }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7303732\charrsid13067595 churn}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 ?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Chandler. See? Anything to do with - buy hay there. Seed and whatever it is see. Now that's - oh I don't know, that's gone by the ball now, never seen.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 You say you didn't do an apprenticeship for the butchers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
No, no. Only - well you worked hard doing the labouring - side of it and you acquired as you went along, and you want to do it, you - they gave you confidence to do it, and you - the confidence was retur
ned that you could do it. Because - by seeing naturally you know exactly what's got to be done.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Would you have preferred to do anything else apart from be a butcher?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Well no, when I look back no, I - I don't say that I would have liked to have b
een this and I'd like to have been that, 'cos life has been great really. I always have enjoyed good health.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Do you think that full time work changed your attitude to life in any way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No, because full time work was necessary. It was without ques
tion you had to. Full time work - as you know there's - a phrase of today called fringe benefits. You soon acquired that because you know full well your employer - if he - if he stuck strictly to the letter you wouldn't make the profit. There's always fri
n
ge benefits in any trade. And when you're a part of that - I had enough common sense that fringe benefits would help me as well. As a teenager, as a butchers - roundman. Through my fringe benefits, oh I had - my Oxford bags. And I'd have three suits, 'cos
 I was dancing - dancing maniac. And a dance would only cost a shilling. Good class hall.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 I suppose before the first world war you wouldn't be old enough to go dancing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No. No. See, and dancing hadn't come in as much as that. The Roaring '20's th
at started all that. As you know, Sylvester would start. Yes, Sylvester was born 1900. He was the first one to introduce the new style of dancing, the slow foxtrot. I met him recently. And I always thought it was him and Josephine Bardly invented the slow
 
foxtrot. And I said where did you get the forty-four tempo from? He said, we pinched that from America. And we exploited the new dance. See the tango is the French tango. The blues naturally come from America. And then we invented the quick step. I know q
uite a lot about dancing, and I dance a lot.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 You say you went in for championships?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes, star championship.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 When you had your first job did you give money to your mother?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes. Gave most of it. See we had to give most of it up. Mother saw to that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 You still lived at home did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Yes. You can only have so much. But there again as I say fringe benefits came in this way. When you're a boy on a bike - even the meat skewers, not wooden meat skewers, meat skewers - the households 
where you went to, they - they'd save all them you know and they'd give you them to return them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Going back to your school days, can you remember if you did something that the teachers disapproved of what would happen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes. The teacher would - u
p - would walk up and down the class and - as you know, from the front benches there they'd always raise up towards the back of the class so that every - they could see what was going on all right. When there was - an atmosphere of a bit of fun going on a
t
 times - which the teacher would detect, and he'd always carry a - a - a paper pointer. Cardboard sort of thing, he'd rap your knuckles with that. But - anything out and out naughty - would go beyond his - jurisdiction, it would go to headmaster. And the 
severity of what - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7303732\charrsid13067595 misdemeanour}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
 had taken place - was the difference between you - having the cane across your hands, or your trousers down. With the headmaster the - he was - affectionately k}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7303732\charrsid13067595 
nown as Teddy, Mr Edward Norris}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595  was his name. His study was right
 in the corner of the boys - hall, there was a wooden spiral staircase that went up to his study. Any boy seen to disappear there that meant he was for it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What kind of things would you have to do to warrant that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Truant too many times.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Was there much truancy in school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
No. Severely dealt with. You know how misdemean - misdemeanours happen. And it'd be cured - ignorant of some children not realizing the - how severe it was. But - if it was really naughty - whether it was act of bad tem
per or anything else, it was dealt with. Across the palm of the hand. Or if there was any show of temper, trousers down and you - were walloped. I once had that experience of having the cane. I felt humiliated by it. I never went up there again.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What did you do for that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
I can't remember what I done but I remember going up there. 'Cos after all, until you're found out you - you're inclined to be - show - acts of bravado, show off in front of your friends could be over something and which is - pro
bably somebody else would suffer and you're doing something wrong. Could be in that - atmosphere. But on the whole - now I'll tell you another thing too, as you know with school - ground floor was infants - first floor was boys school - top floor was for 
-
 second floor, girls school. At the end of one corridor was the stairway of the girls, but that was strictly out of bounds. No boy would ever dream of walking down - they had to sort of - wait 'til the girls had - even - the - part - high partition wall -
 in the playground, girls were playing over there but - wouldn't dream of - of interrupting any privacy there. That's strict.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Were the children all from the same kind of homes as yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes, all - see otherwise they would go - high class scho
ol would either go down to the High Street Marylebone to - High - they call that Central School. Otherwise it was working class elementary. You went there at five and as you see, put your - years 'til you were fourteen and then you -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 You say there were some boys who didn't have shoes and things like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Were they sort of looked down upon at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No. No, it was accepted somehow. There's no doubt parents would - criticize them amongst themselves. Criticize the parents but somehow i
t was accepted. In fact, if you had boots and shoes you'd want to be like him, you'd want to throw your shoes and socks off sort of thing. Not knowing before that it was - compulsory. And of course the great friend of - the poor in those days, there was P
o
or Relief you know, there was such a thing as that. Every Monday there was a - a kitchen in St Johns Wood where you could get pease pudding, faggots, and also too - there was always that regular visit to the pawn broker. Monday to Wednesday they'd pawn th
ings for ready money, and if the wage earner came in Friday or Saturday with money then they would redeem and wear those clothes on the Sunday. And to some that was a practice - a regular practice. Pawnbroker got his living.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Do you remember any children being sort of left out of things at all at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
No. No. No. There was none of that. Only by their own - lazy attitudes, you know. But - not for - any spite or anything like that, no, everybody was in.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did the teachers always treat everybody the same?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes. Yes. No, same treatment was given to all - there was probably a little bit of favouritism, but not a lot.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did anybody in your family ever have anything to do with the Parish people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No. None at all. None at all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Do you remember feeling when you were young that your parents had a struggle to make ends meet?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
No, somehow because I suppose they were always - their main thought was for us two boys. That's the only thing I can look at. I'm sure mother must have denied 
herself quite a bit 'cos - I knew - on a - knowing the value that - that - the periods of unemployment with dad. So that as he - he - should have been the main wage earner, he just didn't earn. And of course unemployment was nothing was it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Was there unemployment benefit he could get?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
I think in a small way but not a - not a lot. Even then they were always up for a means test. Those were the days too if you were unemployed you signed on three times a week. And - went cap in hand down there too. Oh yes, that prevailed then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Can you remember whether there were any newspapers around the house and books and magazines?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No. Just the one newspaper which was our - News Chronicle, and always the News of the World Sundays. We'd buy our comics - a
nd I'd buy my school - papers. School books like the penny popular, the Gem, the Magnet, the Boyfriend. Used to love - to read about school life, especially if there was any sport going, I used to love it. But otherwise magazines no. Tit-Bits. If you're g
oing into any sort of weekly, occasionally mother would buy Tit-Bits. That's all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did they ever read to you, or read amongst themselves?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No. No. No, they wasn't that way minded. Because I was -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did they tell you stories?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Well - no doub
t in the early days they told me stories, but - when I was able I always had to be in an open space, I had to be out, I had to play. I was a fidget, as soon as I had me meals I'd want to be out. So therefore was - no, I was not -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did you play with your brother very much?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes. In the early days. Always be sport.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 He was interested in sport as well was he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes, Bill was a good sportsman. Football, cricket.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Can you remember whether you were allowed to take books or toys to the table when you were eating?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No. That was bad manners. And that was never - well it was just discouraged. Put that down.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Were you taught to hold your knife and fork in a certain way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes. Never any elbow on - on the table. Sit there - sit there o
rderly, oh most strict in that respect there. Don't make a noise when you're eating, and so on. But just told of it, not - you know, not cuffed in any way. I suppose the fact that we - just took notice of what was told to us. Oh yes, there was always that
.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did you have set places at table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes. Yes. I had my chair against the wall and as you know I told you about how I'd hide my fireworks, approaching Guy Fawkes Day.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What about things like when you wanted the salt or something on the table, could you ask for it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Or did you just take it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No. You'd respectfully say, will you pass - always a please. If not you were picked up about it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Could you get down when you felt like it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No. I'd want to get down, no, you sit there. Sit there and that's the end of it. 'Cos the next second you'd be worrying to get up again.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Were you allowed to ask for second helpings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No, no, no, mother would stick rigid to that, just the - that one - what she - supplied, that - that
 would be sufficient. That's how - I should imagine that mother - had a method in her mind the same way as she accumulated that little bit of money and so on.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 What about things that were left uneaten on the plate?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 You were told about that. But I don't know any - no, we were healthy people, healthy appetites.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 When you had breakfast would all the family be there or would your mother be out at work by then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No. I would be - be there with mother, dad probably if he was working - would be 
out. Mostly an egg for breakfast. Wintertime porridge. Quaker Oats.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Then you'd make do at midday, you wouldn't come home to midday meal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 If - if we came home, there'd be - sandwich of something. And probably have a good high tea when we - but of
 course the weekend naturally there was a good knife and fork lunch. Weekends.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Then you had a joint of something on a Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes. That's how we - carried on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did your mother ever make her own jam?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No. No. None of that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Or pickles or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No. I was -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Could you talk during meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
No. Although you did, but you were picked up. Mum and dad would converse. And it'd be a case of we - we were eager to interrupt you were told, now look, be quiet, just be have yoursel
f, boys should be seen and not heard. That was always foremost in the - in the first statement.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 How was the meal served up, was it from the table or the stove or what?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No, out of the cooking utensils, dished right up and there you are.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Would you have any particular order you were served in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No, no, no, probably dad might get it first. Probably, but - no, there wasn't any -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did you say grace before meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No, no. Never did. None - none of us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did you have anything like family prayers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
No. No. No, we - we would be - as a part of our education, we would go to Sunday school - we would go to church, the children, not the parents.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Was there anything like a temperance league?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No. No. No. Band of Hope. We child
ren went to Band of Hope. Because that - we - we would gain an extra treat. There'd be sort of a - a tea party at some time or other or be a treat and so on. That's why you attended so many in those days like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Where did your mother and father come from, you say your father came from St Johns area?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Dad was born in St Johns Wood, mother - was a Marylebone woman.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 So they were very local?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes. Considered - St Johns Wood considered in the borough of Marylebone.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 You say your father was a member of the workingmen}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7303732\charrsid13067595 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 s club, how often would he go there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
In the early days every night. See, being a building worker, they finish at five. After his tea he'd wash - mother was content with sitting there and mending, and dad would go to his workingmen}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7303732\charrsid13067595 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
s club, probably about seven. But return preceding the patrol of the ten o'clock police force coming out - regular, be home by ten. Tell the time by father returning home. And that's the time mum and dad - retired.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 But you'd go to bed before that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes. Yes, we children, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Who put you to bed before you were old enough to go to bed by yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Mum, or dad. Either - they were lovable parents, now for instance dad would always tuck me up in bed. You know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Would he look after you when your mother went out, say to the ladies Conservative club?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Ah that would be an afternoon. Yes, never in - not an evening.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 So she wouldn't go out in the evening?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No. She would go out of an evening when I'm more adult. You know -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Where would she go then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Either be the Baptist church or - Abbey Road. Mothers meeting. They might - be seeing a show down the West End. Or places like that you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Was your father ever a member of anything like a boot club?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Or a funeral or a sick club?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No. No. No. Oh sick clubs, yes. Yes. For instance, a loan club - the whole ideas was to pay in }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7303732\charrsid13067595 in a loan club - so you benefit}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 ed at Christmastime when extra expenses were - needed. In fact, in my younger days, to
 gain me a little extra money I would belong to a loan club. Partly the fact I could always have a loan that you've got to pay back in a certain time, but then you - you get your share - share out at Christmastime, as you know, which is - commonplace. Mor
e so than it is now. Because after all you always required a lot of money because of - presents - presents to buy and this and that. Yes, that did prevail. And a sick club.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Was this sort of common practice?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 And a sick club, that was partly sick c
lub as well. So anybody was sick you get a - you would get a - a benefit. All promoted by working class people. Solely that reason, because there wasn't a lot of money about. And all those - was always - the headquarters was always the local pub. Anywhere
. Always on the Monday night.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
You know you said that your parents weren't political in any way, but if you didn't want to vote the way the employer wanted you to might it affect you in terms of your job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No. No. No. That - no, that didn't - didn't apply.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did they actually vote in general elections?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Yes. Extraordinary as it seems they always voted Conservative. They believed there should be an employer and employee. Just purely on that. And after all m}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7303732\charrsid13067595 other's social life she benefit}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 ed in that way, by going to their functions. I think that's mainly the reason. In other words, my parents conformed. You know.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did your relatives come in without an invitation, or did they just come when they'd been invited?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 They could come without 
an invitation. But - it - relationship was quite - easy going, they'd only come - occasionally, they wouldn't make themselves a nuisance. And of course naturally if there was - something important on then it was arranged. Yes, it wasn't - life was full to
 
the fact that - at the end of the day they're quite content to sort of just relax in their own surroundings. But weekends, for instance, you - you could meet them - Regents Park round she bandstand. You know. And so on. But - prior to any Bank Holiday, co
uld be pre-arranged.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Was there anybody you can remember in the area you grew up in who people disapproved of very strongly, didn't want to have around, would anyone like that fit that category?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 You don't remember anyone being made to leave the area?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 No. No. No, they - they were - all in check there, you know. No, there was no nuisance values as - such as that, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Can you remember a funeral before the first world war in the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Well just - what - I - I - I was
 a toddler. Grandfather - grandfather Sparrow, mother's father. A little turning just off - Cosway Street is - is a little turning called Highworth Street. I used to love to go down there and visit grandpa Sp - Sparrow because he kept pigeons, on his wind
o
wsill. Made a little sort of hutch there. When he died - all we young cousins - were there all day, we didn't go to the funeral. All the brothers and sisters, like mother and her brothers and sis - they all went along. Buried at Finchley. And - the whole 
a
ffairs starts this way. 'Cos there's a high tea there's the - cockles and there's the watercress and there's the celery and all that. And after all the consolation of talks, little arguments start - and there's always a glass of beer to be had. And there'
s
 no love without a song as the time gets on. In fact, as it started out as a wake it turns out to be a party. That's what I noticed, I noticed, that particularly. Anyway, all we young cousins there, I can always remember, we sat on two beds, a dozen of us
,
 across ways. There's a church there, that overshadows this little turning, it's called the - church of St Eze, Cosway Street. And that clock tower - chimes every quarter of an hour And I recorded her that - gosh that night - what with the chiming of the 
c
lock every quarter of an hour and the other - the other eye, or the other ear - was on the party going on downstairs. The atmosphere down there was the King is dead, long live the King. That was going on downstairs. That's the only - funeral I remember. U
ntil my grandfather died - early twenties.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Was it the same kind of thing then as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
No, no. No, was much more - sorrow, much more sacred. In fact - recalling that - was it twenties, I don't think I had left - no, might - yes, might have been 
round about 1920. I still didn't realize and feel the significance of grandfather dying. In fact - it was just out of bravado in saying to my friends my grandfather's died you know. You know, that - sort of feeling. And then the spectacle come like the he
a
rse came round and the carriages, all horse. And all the neighbours there showing their respect there. And of course I wanted to be up in front - front of all my little friends there. And when the coffin was carried out, I didn't realize not until that co
ffin had passed me - that was my grandfather. And I cried. It just come on me like that, remember crying. Otherwise - it was a sense of - bravado to say, well that was my grandfather. He's died. My grandfather was really going.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 It does take a time to sink in though.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes. That's my - memories there recalling that..
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Your mother was in domestic service, what did she do in domestic service before she did care}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7303732\charrsid13067595 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 taking and things like that, general help, did she always do that before she got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Well do you know - mother's first job to my memory was this. In Mandeville Place - which is the continuation of High Street Marylebone, Thayer Street, Mandeville Place into Wigmore Street, there was a private nursing home there. And like anything e
lse - because of all the - fatal - happenings out in Flanders there, men came home and that nursing home was turned to an officers - hospital. I can remember - I - I - I can recall the fact I went along there once or twice as a junior, and I can recall mo
t
her saying to me that - which - made a - finish with the job, the railings that skirt the footway there, then you look down into an area, a basement of those houses there. And of course it's nothing to see dustbins, that's quite an ordinary thing. Dustbin
s
. Well those dustbins there at the hospital - contained members of a body. They were put into that and when she - this - this is the early days of - of - of that sort of life. The hygiene wasn't about then. In one dustbin there was an arm, there was a leg
. Put mother off. She terminated. Wouldn't work for them. Mandeville Place}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7303732\charrsid13067595 . And T}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 udor House now, still there.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Then she did more domestic service?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Then after that - went in proper domestic. Job she had in Neville Court, that's - opposite - Abbey 
- House, EMI studios, and - then places like Avenue Road and places.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Would your father be working in 1911?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Yes, I would say for the - yes, 1911, yes, he was working for the - the baker. The bread}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7303732\charrsid13067595 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 man. He was bakers rounds}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7303732\charrsid13067595 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
man. Yet all his other 
brothers - went to war. Rather - joined the Army. The Queen's Army. Well then, 1911, would be Edward. Teddy. But - as you know, went places - all over the - all the history maps at school showed you the red - blob, all the way round.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Did you ever have anything - you had regular tasks to do you told me about that, did your older brother Bill help you in any way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Oh yes, he'd fall in for the same. See, and then as he got older he would go out and help the milkman regularly and I would be left to do
 - the bits and pieces at home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4738731 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 Would he help you at all when you were very young?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8675640 ET  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2248743\charrsid13067595 
Yes. Brother Bill was more than a brother, he was a great friend. He was my champion. Yes. He helped me through my adolescence as well. With all the care and love of a - of a boy.
\par }}