{\rtf1\adeflang1025\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\adeff0\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang2057\deflangfe2057{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}{\f38\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f39\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f41\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f42\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f43\fbidi \froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}
{\f44\fbidi \froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f45\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f46\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f48\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}
{\f49\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f51\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f52\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f53\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f54\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}
{\f55\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f56\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden 
Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs20 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}}
{\*\latentstyles\lsdstimax156\lsdlockeddef0}{\*\revtbl {Unknown;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid201694\rsid6181909\rsid10625749\rsid10690491\rsid12210835\rsid12600992\rsid15497574}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 11.0.0000;}{\info{\title Int 249a}{\author PRASAD3}{\operator lhorto}
{\creatim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min8}{\revtim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min8}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords31402}{\nofchars178992}{\nofcharsws209975}{\vern24613}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 http://schemas.microsoft.com/office/word
/2003/wordml}}\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1800\margr1800\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0\ltrsect 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\donotembedsysfont0\donotembedlingdata0\grfdocevents0\validatexml1\showplaceholdtext0\ignoremixedcontent0\saveinvalidxml0\showxmlerrors1\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace180
\dgvspace180\dghorigin1800\dgvorigin1440\dghshow1\dgvshow1\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\splytwnine\ftnlytwnine\htmautsp\nolnhtadjtbl\useltbaln\alntblind\lytcalctblwd\lyttblrtgr\lnbrkrule\nojkernpunct\rsidroot6181909 \fet0
{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}\ilfomacatclnup0\ltrpar \sectd \ltrsect\linex0\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ltrpar
\ql \fi-461\li461\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid10625749 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\ul\insrsid10625749\charrsid16072257 Information about interviewee}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid10625749 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid10625749\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\ql \fi-461\li461\ri0\widctlpar\tx2057\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid10625749 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid10625749\charrsid16072257 Date of birth}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid10625749    \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid10625749\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid10625749  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid12600992 1894}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid10625749\charrsid16072257 
\par Gender}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid10625749           \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid10625749\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid10625749  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid12600992 M}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid10625749 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid10625749\charrsid16072257 Marital status}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid10625749 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid10625749\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid10625749  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid12600992 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid10625749\charrsid16544153 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid10625749\charrsid16072257 Occupation}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid10625749 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid10625749\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid10625749  
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid12600992 Post office sorter}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid10625749\charrsid16072257 
\par Geographic region}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid10625749 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid10625749\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid10625749  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid12600992 
Little Clacton, Essex}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid10625749\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\qj \fi-461\li461\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid10625749 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Could you give me your full name and present address?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 My - Christian name first? Charles - just plain Charles Ward, and the address is 92 Harwich Road, Little Clacton.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Could you tell me your year of birth and birthplace?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes, I was born in Bow, London, East on the 11th of May 1894. Which brings me to seventy-seven.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Are you married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 I was but - now a widower. Wife died.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Could you give me your year of marriage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Year of marriage, yes, 1920.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How many years did you live in the house you were born in Bow?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Well I should imagine about four
 because - I had rather a - you know, a - an out of the ordinary - childhood really, 'cos my father died when I was only four, and I was one of five children and - three of us went into an orphanage. So from the age of four to eleven I was in an orphanage
 at - Forest Gate. Run by the Poplar Board of Guardians.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What happened to you at eleven then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
At eleven? Oh well, my mother married again - and - I - therefore we were no - no longer orphans, and incidentally one - one of us, the eldest - my brot
her George who was - at the age of thirteen, he was taken - into the offices of the Board of Guardians at - incidentally the Chairman of the Board of Guardians then was the - famous George Lansbury. Yes, he was - he was the Chairman of the Board of Guardi
a
ns and he took a fancy to my brother and he took him into the offices there and he served - well, on the Board of Guardians and then in the London Country Council - for the rest of his life. But at eleven, as I say, my - mother married again, we were no l
o
nger orphans so she had to - take us away and - you want to know more about - she married a man who was a - whose name was Wilson then, she was known as Mrs - Mrs Wilson. We didn't alter our names at all, and - he was a fish-monger and - he managed a shop
, he and - my mother, manage a shop at Kings Cross just off the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6181909\charrsid12210835 Caledonian}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
 Road near the Kings Cross end and - I was eleven, I went to school then at the Caledonian Road school but also in the evening I - used to cut the potatoes. Used to cut three hundredweight of potatoes every night.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 By hand was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
No - well, they had - it was by hand a - to a great extent but they had a sort of - a table something like this when it's shut down, with a heavy top, but well-balanced, and then you threw the pota
toes in and - dropped the handle and that automatically cut them into chips and - first of all though they had to be - used to be in a big tub and scrub them with a hard broom you know, yes, to clean them yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 So you had quite a busy time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6181909\charrsid12210835 
And then the evening - some part of the evening I used to - I used to help in the - in the room at the back, serve the - incidentally you could get a - a nice middle piece of skate for a penny, ha'porth of potatoes, about half a plateful you know, and - h
a'porth of bread was about - oh, about a sixth of a loaf. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 So - you got a jolly good meal for threepence.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Which road was this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 That was in - it was called North Street, but it became Northdown Street afterwards.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How long did you live in Northdown Street?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Oh we lived there 'til - well - my mother and - second husband, they broke up after about a year - a year or so there, and we had to leave - leave the shop, they had to leave the shop and - my mother and - us, there was myself and my you
nger brother Tom, we - we was under very poor circumstances then for a time and we lived in a place called Lavinia Grove if I remember it, still at King}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 s Cross. I remember we used to get out on the roof to see the time at - by St Pancras clock. Is this an
y - all relevant to you. After about six months, well when I was about - was twelve and a half - my mother in the meantime had turned Catholic, the Catholic - nuns and that had helped her a lot and - so she turned a Catholic and - she couldn't cope with u
s really you know and get a living as well, there was no - no - you know - help then. And - so we were put in a home again, which was in the Harrow Road, it was called the Crusade of Rescue - no - and the homes for destitute Catholic children.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 So you changed your religion as well did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Well - I - we didn't really but we went in to the home and - and - now this is where comes an interesting bit really. We went in there and - the schooling there was very poor. There was only one teacher to eighty
 children and they ranged from seven to fourteen. Well he took the class you know, he sort - of split them up into classes and - when we went in, young - he took young Tom first for a test, and he put him in a certain class, then he took me and evidently 
I was very good at this other - school was good schooling there and - I was pretty good apparently and - he said he couldn't do anything for me there. You know, with the arrangements they'd got. So - he said, I'll - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6181909\charrsid12210835 recommend}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  that you go into the office. So
 I went into the office there. And - I just did office work there, mainly - writing out labels 'cos they used - as well as being a home like they had a - a bakery and a printing works, and they used to - send out about - thirty thousand - circulars - you 
know, like booklet, St }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6181909\charrsid12210835 Vincent\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
 press it was called, every month, and - they got about the same number of donations in. And we used to - there was two of us in there by the way, two boys, we used to - write these labels out, the labels for the pamphlets, r
ather the wrappers, write them out and - they used to go back to the - to the printing works then and they used to wrap up you know - the - what do you call it now - booklet, yes. And in addition to that we - after they'd been - received and acknowledged 
b
y some men in the office, there was about three men in the office - they used to pass the postal orders and loose money and all that over to us and we used to sort of - list that and - eventually on a Monday morning we used to take it over to the bank. I 
used to take a thousand pound in a - in an old }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6181909\charrsid12210835 Gladstone}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
 bag over the bank every Monday morning, yes. Oh we had some wonderful people on the books mind you, all the - in fact all the aristocracy you know, Duke of Norfolk and all those.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How long did you do that for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Well I was there - there 'til - I was at twelve and half when I went - went in there and - I left - just after I was fourteen. Now I was fourteen in - 1894 - 19 - 1908 that's right. And - we left there then, well - I - what would have 
happened I don't know but - being in the office I used to get to know what happened to boys when they were fourteen and most of them went to Canada and were put on farms, some were - some were - you know, got on very well, but others, they were - you know
 
how farmers can be, they were sort of worked to death and - and I though, well, that's not going to happen to me, I had a mind of me own in those days, and - so I wrote to my mother and said - it's time you took us out again and we'll make our own way. I 
d
on't want to go to Canada and be on a farm or anything like that. And - I said I'm speaking for young Tom as well. So - she got a bit upset about it and - said, oh no, you stop there. So I said, well, if you don't - we - we'll just leave the place, run aw
a
y you see. So - she wrote to the principal and he called me in and of course I knew him well, had it out with him and all that and - he - tried to talk me out of it and that but I said, no, I said, I want to go. It's time we looked after ourselves like. S
o - we left. Just after - just after fourteen then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 He agreed to you leaving then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
He agreed to us leaving, yes, he didn't want to but - he agreed to it. He was very nice about it too. Quite a nice man, the Reverend Emmanuel Bans, I always rememb
er him, he was a - we don't know if you ever saw a chap named Sullivan on the - a big chap on the films, Sullivan, you know, wasn't it - Edward B Sullivan or something like that. Anyway, big burly chap you know, jowly face like. Well that was the Reverend
 
Bans all - all over again. Terrible - oh - he weighed about eighteen, nineteen stone and now and again he used to take us to a convent at Feltham near - Hadden near Feltham, and - he'd hire a hansom cab at Feltham station, it was about three mile out of H
a
dden, and - 'course he took up practically all the cab, and there was generally two of us. Any you - I know - don't know if ever you've seen a hansom cab. Well they're only small inside you know. Incidentally that's what my father was, a - hansom cab driv
er. The - the first father, proper father. Yes, oh well we - I left there and - we went home and - that was to - a house in Leyton, or a flat in Leyton. That would be in 1908, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 That was back to your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How long did you stay there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Oh we stayed there - with my mother until - oh - well 'til I was about - 'til I was about nineteen, that's right, 'til I was about nineteen, well I was fourteen then, was about five years.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 So that brings you to about 1913?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 About - 191
3 - 1913 yes. Yes, well then - we went to live with my older brother for a short time. Poplar. And then - they moved after we were only there a few weeks and then I got lodgings at Islington. That still be 1913, yes, lodgings at Islington in Penton - Pent
on Street, Islington. With an old Birmingham couple.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Can you carry on until 1918?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Yes. Ah well, now - 19 - that was 1913, well by that time I was - oh at - when I was seventeen I was a messenger - you don't want to know all that do you, that'll c
ome later on, yes. Well in 1917 I joined the Territorials and so at 19 - at - in - in July, the end of July 1914 - I was in the Territorials, we were at camp, the war broke out - and - except for just calling in at the office to say I was now in the Army 
- I was then in the Army. 'Til - yes, 'til - about March 1919, that's right. Yes, it's a bit - complicated that. I've got it all in a book there you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How many brothers and sisters did you have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh we had - at the time - when I was four - we 
had - there was four of us then, but there was one just coming on, you know. So that was five all told. Four brothers, one sister.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Could you give me the birth order of your sister and brothers and yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh - well birth order well - George w
as the eldest, he was - when I was - I was born in 1894 and he was four years older than me, so - I was born 1894, 1890, yes. And the next one, Will, he was born 1892. I was born 1894. Tom 1896. And then my - the sister - she must have been born in 1898.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Do you know how old your father was when you were born or how old he was when he died?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 When he died, yes, he was thirty-five.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 And when did he die?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 See, when I was four, 1898.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Where did he come from?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh he was - well he was b
orn in - Bow. Yes. No, well not strict - well, yes, he was, yes, he was born in Bow, but his father, or my grandfather, I've always under-stood that he was born in either Good or - or - Goodeaster or Higheaster. Matter of fact I took a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6181909\charrsid12210835 cycle}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  - I'll tell you I had a little motor bike when I was living in Romford like, went round that way one morning and I }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6181909\charrsid12210835 spoke}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
 to one or two old boys who were just making for the pub at twelve o'clock, I thought these were the blokes - and I asked if I could - you know, if th
ey ever remembered a - the name of Ward there. But none of them did, so - I don't - didn't get any further with that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 And your father was a hansom cab driver?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 He was a hanson cab driver, yes. His -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did he always do that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes, because his father owned a fleet of them in Bow, yes, he owned a fleet of them in Bow, just by }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6181909\charrsid12210835 Burdett}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  Road, Bow.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did he ever do any other type of work, casual or part time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Not that I know of, no. No, I - I shouldn't think he could do because - it was 
a busy - I mean - well it was long hours and they was perched right up on the top, that was what caused his death, pneumonia you see. But - they were busy chaps because - you know, all these music hall artists used to go from music hall to music hall, the
y do at least - well the two hours in every night and they do two music halls every night, so they were going from what - London to Stratford and places like that you see. So they were always busy.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How old was your mother when you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Ah 
- now - well I should say she was about the same - I should say she was about - about the same, yes, somewhere about thirty-five, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Where did she come from?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh - she came from - she was born in - the East End of London, Lancaster Gate. She came of a very good family really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did she have any jobs before she married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes, she was on the stage. Yes. She was a singer, a good singer and - you know, chorus and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 This was music hall?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes, mostly music hall, or musical comedy
 you know, 'cos they used to have - you know there were theatres other than the music halls you know. Like the - well the old Borough Theatre Stratford was one, very good place that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did she work after she was married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes, she did all sorts of jobs. She did all sorts of jobs. I know - one job she had - she was matron at a - a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6181909\charrsid12210835 children\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
 home at - Aldersbrook, Leytonstone, with old Aldersbrook. She was a matron at that place, and that would be - it was after we came out of the second home, it wou
ld be round - I was round about sixteen. Sixteen or seventeen which would bring me to - 8 - about 1912 }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6181909\charrsid12210835 wouldn\rquote t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  it

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Do you know what she did in the period after you father died?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh, after my father, died, yes. Yes, it must have been a terrific st
ruggle but I don't really know. No, I - being in the home you - you see you're sort of lost to the outside world. The only thing we ever saw of the outside world was - a walk round on - I think it was Wednesdays and Saturdays.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 You say she jointly managed this fish shop?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Fish shop, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Do you know any other jobs she did?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Well - I tell you during the war - she was - supervisor at a munitions factory somewhere, but where it was I wouldn't like to say. Somewhere in the Midlands I think, b
ut she was a supervisor there and in fact she - she was a very determined woman you know and she - she was pretty sure that - the examination of the shells wasn't - was being done very perfunctorily and she wrote to the minister of munitions and he went d
o
wn there to have a look. She was like that you know, she'd write to anybody and - wasn't afraid of anybody. Good managing woman she was. From that I do, I remember the - you know being in the home and all that sort of thing. How we used to go on holidays 
to Dovercourt down here by the way. But - for the life of me I - I can never remember anything up to that - that time.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Can we talk about your time in the first orphanage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Could you give me it's official name and address?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6181909\charrsid12210835 Yes, it 
was - it was called the Poplar Training School, it was run by the - Poplar Board of Guardians, 'cos that was the - the local councils you know, they - that's what they were called then, the - that was the Poplar Board of Guardians, and it was situated in 
- Forest Lane, Forest Gate.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 About how many children were there there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 About two hundred.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 All boys was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 All boys, yes. It was run on - rather military lines, the - the - of course it was good schooling, they were ordinary teachers,
 but - the people who looked after you in the daytime, well they were all ex-Cavalry men. Ex-Army men. And they used to put you through a lot of drill and that you know. Which stood - stand - stood me in good stead I think since.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How much actual schooling did you have in the sense I would understand schooling?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Well we did the usual school, you know, from about nine to twelve and then again from - about half past one to about half past four. Yes, and they went in the - classes you know, from - jun
ior - 'cos you were there from seven you see - juniors up to what they call the ex-seventh then, which was the top of any ordinary elementary school. And - it was just like an outside school really for that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What was the age range of the boys living at the orphanage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Well from seven to - fourteen. Oh no, wait a minute, no, from four - to seven - it might have been even before four but - I was four when I went there, oh yes, my younger brother was two. It must have been almost from birth then. Yes
. And at seven you were sort of segregated, at seven you became - what they called seniors and - that was when you were eligible for a fortnights camping holiday at Dovercourt.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How were you organised?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Well, as I say, we were - we were organised into - as I say these classes, we - we - were in dormitories - slept in dormitories.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How many to a dormitory?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Well I - from recollection I think there was about four dormitories, about fifty apiece. We were up - about half past five in the morn
ing - six o'clock into a - what was supposed to be a hot shower but it was generally a cold one, and incidentally the last one in always got a cold bucket as well.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Who dished that out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6181909\charrsid12210835 Well one of the - these chaps, you know, the ex-military men
, they had a - sort of - sense of humour - in fact I remember one of these senses of humour was - and he'd come round, you know, when you were - sitting round playing, perhaps you were playing draughts and that in your spare time and - and he'd come round
 and look down at you and then he'd - get his fingers and pinch your thigh like - between the thumb and - give it a good old pinch you know. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
I - I often wondered whether he wanted you to say something rude - you know, not quite right. But - on the whole though you were well }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6181909\charrsid12210835 treated}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 . The - for any }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6181909\charrsid12210835 misdemeanor}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
 you would get - six of the best, given properly too. Yes, but it was - had to be something real bad.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Who gave out the punishment?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 That was one of these - one of these -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Was there one special one?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Yes, there was general one special one. Yes. Yes. Oh it - it'd have to be reported and the - head of the school - head of the school would - would - give his consent to it. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6181909\charrsid12210835 
I remember - the only one I ever saw for a real - 'course they used 
to give you - the teachers could always give you a casual hander and that, but - a real one I saw once - was at - Captain of the school as a matter of fact you know in sport, and - he tied a can to a cat's tail. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 And they gave him six of the best. Didn't half lay it on too.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Was that in public?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 That was; oh yes, in front of all the - all the school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
You say the teachers would behave much as ordinary schoolteachers and give the occasional hander, what about the staff who looked after you the rest of the time, would they punish you?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Well, they could give you a cuff round the ear and that but - they didn't do it very often. No, because - I think the - Poplar Guardians, you know, old Lansbury was in charge and he was a - he was all for the u
nderdog really and he'd keep an eye on everything and I think they were a bit too cautions to do anything like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Were the teaching staff and the domestic staff completely separate?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes. Oh the kitchen staff I think came in from outside. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 So from our point of view it's more or less a normal school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Yes, a normal school - normal school to them, yes. All I remember is that - or one of - one thing I remember is that every - class, you know, there was a long - a long building and ea
ch class had glass partitions in between so if you was in class three, and the next one was class four - and they all - had doors running from each - oh, you could go out in the corridor and come in from the back. "cos I always remember once I was - he'd 
s
et us some lesson, I'd got it over pretty quick and - so I had the front of me desk up and I was doing a bit of - drawing like, and he came in from the door at the back, came behind me and - gave me a whack on the head with - he used to carry a piece of -
 
picture frame with him, whack on the head with that. You know, came so sudden, I didn't hear him coming or anything and then - I hit me head on the - on the upraised desk like and - got a terrific bump there and he was quite upset about that, in case he g
ot into trouble about it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How about food there, what time did you say you used to get up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh half past five in the morning. We had our cold }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6181909\charrsid12210835 shower}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  and that. And then a little bit of physical jerks, we used to do a bit of physical jerks in the mor
ning. Incidentally we were generally separated into about twenties and - you could drill with the broomsticks, coloured broomsticks you know, some red, some white, some blue, and - do all sorts of - exercises those - very affective. Use 'em more or less l
ike a rifle sort of. And - well then you got breakfast I think about eight o'clock. Half past - or half past seven.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh generally - a large - soup plate of - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6181909\charrsid12210835 Quaker}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  oats, with a - I always remember it, a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6181909\charrsid12210835 big}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  dollop of - well a dollo
p of - brown sugar stuck in the middle, you know, evidently you could - imagine them. And - I always remember I used to go all round mine, you know, eat all the oats without any sugar until I came to the middle, then have a real - yes. Well there was that
 
and - bread and dripping, 'cos butter wasn't not many people had butter you know in those days. It was - compared with wages it was very dear, butter was. Well, I say very dear, it was about a shilling and one and fourpence a pound, which doesn't seem any
thing now but - it was a lot then. So nearly all dripping, and there was always plenty of dripping then. And it was very good. A lot of people would be glad to get hold of it now.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Could you have as much bread as you wanted?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No, it was dished out but it - but it was pretty good. It was pretty good, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What did you have to drink at breakfast?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Oh - cocoa. Always cocoa, yes. Every drink was cocoa. And - a thickish sort of cocoa too, with - you know, you could see the grease on top. It would be - nourishing they believed. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Then you'd have your normal school from nine?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Then you'd have your normal - yes. And then come - dinner. Well it - I suppose there was a little bit of playtime first and then dinnertime would come and - th
e dinner I think was a general mixture, you know - sometimes meat and two veg and - but always - there was always pretty good bit of - you know - not currant duff, just plain - plain pudding with syrup on or something like that, yes. Always a - a tidy bit
 of that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 So you always had two courses did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Always had two courses yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you get anything to drink at dinnertime?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No, not for dinner, no. Only water. Water.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Then you had afternoon school and then what time did you eat again, or what would happen after school hours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Well after school - tea was round about - I should think about half past five and - or six o'clock I should imagine, six o'clock. And that would be - well as far as I remember just bread and dripping and - 
tea. Or cocoa - cocoa again, yes. Bread and dripping and cocoa.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you get anything after that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No, nothing after that, no. No. That was the lot.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What about bedtime?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh bedtime was about - oh about nine o'clock. And - you'd get into the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6181909\charrsid12210835 
dormitories}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
 and you could sit and talk for a bit, for about half an hour and then lights out at about half past nine. But as I say, they - there was a tidy bit of - physical drill. They used to run a - a sort of - you know, athletic - oh and incidenta
lly for games we used to play a lot of hockey, with these broomsticks. Plenty of damaged ankles I might tell you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What did you think of this school on the whole?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Well - looking back on it - well of course - during the time I was in it - I think 
you're in a sort of - you're in a sort of coma, you know, you don't see anything of the outside world and you think you're there forever and - carry on, but I - I never remember being - miserable or anything in it - got on well with the other boys and tha
t
 and - we had these - this - these - this hockey and - learned to play cards I remember, you know, just ordinary cards and - draughts and all that sort of thing, and - as I say, we had this drill and - a bit of - what's the other name for athletics, you k
n
ow - parallel bars and all that kind of thing, yes. Yes, we used to do all that. Gymnastics, yes. Had a lot of that, in fact - once a year we used to - oh we - when we went to camp, after you were seven, and you went to one of these camps at - Dovercourt,
 we used to give displays before the public there. 'Cos we were under canvas there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 You used to go every year did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes. Yes. Once - once you were selected, there was only about a - I think there was a hundred went out of the two hundred but -
 depended on your general }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6181909\charrsid12210835 demeanor}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
 you know and - how you got on with the - general gymnastics and that sort of thing that - you always got selected. I always got selected I remember once I got to the seven - the age of seven.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 So on the whole you enjoyed it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 I - I didn't - yes, I can't say I disliked it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 You probably went there young enough not to really remember anything else?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes. No. All I remember - I'll tell you what, it did me a world of good in some ways. Having - you know, you 
had nothing to eat in between, it was only about - I think it was once a week that visitors could come, and I always remember then that they nearly always brought oranges. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6181909\charrsid12210835 
Oranges were very, very cheap in those days you know and everybody had them, even if you went in the theatre you know, the - tragic side of a play like'd be suddenly interrupted by somebody going - hash, you know, with an orange. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 But - I remember these - children used to have these oranges and - I was always one, I don't know if it was an
 instinct in me, I never ate any skin or anything and - I know a lot of these children you know, used to be sick afterwards and - generally orange - you could see the orange skin coming up. And it made me very careful of skin afterwards, I never eat the s
kin of anything, not even tomatoes. No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How did you feel about the teachers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Well, I thought they were - they were very good. I think if they - they thought you were - you know, pretty good at your work you - they - they treated you well. But - 
as I say, you could get a couple of handers for almost anything. And - I can remember - I don't know if you'd like one incident again there. Well, a friend - a - chap I palled up with, he was about as much of a dunce as I was fairly bright, and - I rememb
er on one occasion we were standing all in a circle and the teacher was in the middle, and he was asking questions on geography and - he asked - he came to this boy, he says - what are the two chief wool}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6181909\charrsid12210835 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 en towns in Scotland? Well the answer was Aran and Cl
achmannan you know, and he didn't - he hadn't a clue what it was so - I whispered to him, and in a fit of devilment I said, Alloa and Smackwackams And he told the teacher, Alloa and Smackwackams, oh, being funny are you? Brought him out - couple of hander
s. I had to apologise afterwards. But I couldn't resist it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did the teachers emphasise certain things as important, ways of speaking or tidiness, manners?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes. Oh yes. Oh - oh yes, yes, they used to, you know, teach us to be - well mannered and - polite. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6181909\charrsid12210835 
And all that sort of thing, and of course these other chaps outside they were - they were just the same too, you know, you had to - make sure you said sir every time and all that sort of thing and - oh yes, I think the schooling there was very, ve
ry good, I think it must have been because - as I say, I - I didn't do any school after twelve. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
I was twelve and a half when I left there. No, wait a minute, I left there at eleven of course and I - went to other schools then. Incidentally another one was 
the - in - in Poplar. Just for a short time. But - I never did any - real schooling - I didn't do any schooling at all after I was twelve and a half, and yet I was pretty - pretty good. Yes. 'Cos I mean at eighteen I went in for a - a sort - what they cal
l
ed a sorter then in the Post Office, an - an examination. Well the examination was no - you know, you didn't have to know a foreign language or anything like that, but - it was pretty stiff. And - but the stiffest part of it was the competition. There was
 
only thirty vacancies and there was three thousand sat. Well I came twelfth in that and - I think it was mainly for - you know, for what I'd - the schooling I'd had there and - yes. And the very fact that when I got into this - Catholic home that he said 
h
e couldn't do anything for me because I was - really at the top of the - top of the grade. I'm not trying to boost - boost myself up you know but - it's - yes. It's just what happened, yes. Oh, incidentally they also had a band there. Used to give - the b
and displays and that they used to give you know. Boys band.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you learn an instrument?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No I never - learnt an instrument. I don't know why I'm sure but - I never did. I often wish I had.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Probably that came after you were a bit older, you left there at eleven didn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes, left there - yes, probably - yes, they got the twelves, thirteens, fourteens.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What sort of offences would you be punished for - how about the domestic staff, what sort of things would upset them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6181909\charrsid12210835 Well
, I never saw any of the domestics really - but - 'course any - any deceit of any sort, they were well down on that, or any - telling lies about anything, well of course there was always a little cross section amongst the boys themselves you know, that - 
somebody given a surreptitious kick and - you helped just at the wrong time, you know, when you were supposed to be quiet and - then you don't like to tell and all that sort of thing, and you - you might get a-}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did they have any system of monitors?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No, not as I remember, no. No, we - you know, these men in charge, they - they - did the whole thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did actually any of them sleep in a dormitory?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No, they slept away from the dormitories. Yes, I - I don't know how they - maintained order I
'm sure, they must have been very close to the dormitories I should imagine. Because - I - I never remember - any - you know, pillow fights and that sort of thing there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did your mother manage to visit you while you were there at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes. Yes. Yes, she used to come -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 So you kept contact with her during this period?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Oh yes. Yes, only - about once a - about once a week. That was if she was in the vicinity because sometimes the jobs she was in she wouldn't be able to get away and - so we didn't see her a lot really. But - whenever it was possible she came in.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Do you remember how long the visiting hours were?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 I think it was about two hours in the afternoon. And - you generally just walked round the playground and that sort of thing.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Were they allowed to take you out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
No, couldn't take you outside. No that was a - used to go out, you know, in the old crocodile and go - I think it was Wednesday, used to go around, just walk round parts of - of Forest Gate there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What was the idea on taking you out on these walks?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Well I mean it was just to get you out of the - out of the school itself and - give you some idea of what was going on outside.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did they used to instruct you on anything or just take you for a walk?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
No. No. They - they used to take - some boys to the - the chap who gave music lessons, he lived in a road just close handy and they used to take some of the boys and drop them there, but the rest of us, we just - march - you know, sort of walked 
round chatting and all that sort of thing and - and you'd generally get a - a look at the outside world. What I always remember about that is that - I remember the name of Benalluck, you know there's a Benalluck a golfer now, he comes from there I believe
,
 yes. He was - they used to be - used to be a sort of - you know - anything to do with horses then - carriers and that. And - then they turned in - 'course they're quite big - motor - motor place now. But - I believe that - Benalluck, he comes from that, 
and I always remember that as much as anything. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did they used to give you any pocket money at the school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No. No. And you couldn't buy anything in the school. No, no tuck shop or anything like that, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Some of the boys would get pocket money when their parents came?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did they get a chance to spend this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
I suppose they must have done but I don't remember - no, I don't remember - anybody dropping out of the line when we were walking round outside.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did the other children come from similar types of home to your own or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Yes. I think so. You see, the point about an orphan then was that - I mean the same thing would happen now you know, the parents could - die and leave the two boys but - now - well I don't k
now what they do - the same sort of thing'd have to happen wouldn't it, if - if no - if no relations'd take them. You see, two of ours were taken by relations. One, Will, eventually - he's in Zambia now. He was taken over by his - grandfather and - and th
e girl who was born - after my father died, she was taken over by - some friends who brought her up - right until she died. She died about - when she was about sixty-seven.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did the teachers single out some children for different treatment from the others?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No, only in regard to - gymnastics and that. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 There wasn't any favouritism?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No, there wasn't any - as far as I know there was no favouritism, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How about amongst the boys themselves, were there any gangs or groups?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
No, not there, I could tell you a tale about the next - home I was in though. If you want to get to that. Well in that one now there's - there's quite a lot to tell about that place because - as I say first of all I went into the office. Well there were
 any amount of boys there who came from - you know - the Liverpool Irish type, and they used to play hell with my brother, Tom, 'cos he was - he got - you know, used to get all }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6181909\charrsid12210835 het}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  up if they - ragged him and all that sort of thing and - he - I - often I w
as told when I was in the office there, somebody'd come up and say, they're not half getting at your brother Tom. And - I used to get in - fights myself with 'em. But - I got on very well with them myself because I - I was a - you know, a sort of go as yo
u
 please sort of temperament and - and I could - back - chat them and that sort of thing you see and - so they - very rather wary of me. But we had a lot - quite a bit of trouble in the first place with 'em - with - my brother Tom. But - now there - there'
s quite a lot to tell about that. Now the food for instance - the food there was always - two slices of bread and dripping for breakfast.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No porridge?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No, no porridge. And cocoa. And for dinner it was always pea soup. Pea soup. Rather thick pea soup. Ever seen pea soup have you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Green pea soup was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
No, split peas, you know, the yellow - yellow. Yes. Well that was always there, pea soup - every dinnertime. Never varied. Sometimes a trifle of meat in it but - when - teatime was two slices of bread and dripping again and - cocoa. And that was the lot.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 You lived much more poorly there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Yes. Much - much more poorly, yes. And - the clothing was different. It was always a - a blue jersey and a pair of knickers like. Now I being in
 the office - being in the office - some - another part of my job was to go - go round and see foster mothers you know, 'cos they - they used to have children - they only had children from seven there and only boys, but - they had foster mothers looking a
fter the other children, I used to have to go around and - talk - you know, see them about something or other, sometimes go and pay them, which was very handy to me because I always - used to get a tip from them. Which enabled me to buy - buy a dinner }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6181909\charrsid12210835 outside}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  very often.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 So you had a reasonable amount of freedom at that place?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Yes. Yes, a tidy bit of freedom. Well what used to make me mad there was - I'll tell you about this pea soup dinner every day, well - sometimes I'd be out, say - been to on
e of these - foster mothers and by the time I came back it was past the dinner hour and my - my plate of pea soup would be left there all cold, you know, what cold pea soup's like, well that used to make me bad and I - found several other ways of getting 
grub. Which -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What would happen at weekends, would you have any change of diet on Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No, there was nothing special there on Sunday. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 You wouldn't get an egg for breakfast or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No. No, never got an egg for breakfast, never got a change at all from this - eternal bread and dripping and - and never even jam.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 You just had bread and dripping?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Just bread and dripping every time, yes. Generally had - one - one ordinary slice and a crust like, I don't know where they 
got all their loaves from, but - nearly always one big crust and a - and one flat piece.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How about apples or oranges or fruit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No, you never got any of that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 It's a wonder you didn't all get scurvy or something?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes, but - they didn't
 and - well of course I - I was in a better position there because as I say I could go out and I used to go to a - well what they called a coffee shop then and you could go in there and you'd get a - well, meat and two veg and a bit of pudden afterwards f
or about fourpence ha'penny.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 At your first school did they do any sort of craft training, apart from the school work?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes, there was a - a - there was a - a woodworking class I remember there, but I don't remember anything else.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Because you left there when you were eleven perhaps you were too young to start craft training?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 In most orphanages in those days they used to have some boot repairing, carpentry and various crafts?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes, that's right, yes. Yes. They do outsi
de. But I don't remember anything there, no. All - all I remember there was the drill. And that was - you know, you got tons of that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Possibly because you were so young while you were there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes. 'Cos eleven is no - great age, although - althoug
h once I got out of there I was - almost a man. Cutting three - three hundredweight of potatoes, and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Do you remember any craft training at the Catholic school at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No. No, I never saw anybody - I don't even think they took anybody into the 
- although they had a printing works and a baker, I - I never heard of a boy going in there and I would have known because I was in the office there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 You say they mostly used to send them off abroad?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes, they generally went abroad at fourteen, they - generally went to Canada to farms.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Was this boys only?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 That - that was - is boys only yes. The girls - the girls were in a convent at Feltham. I went there once and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Could you tell me the routine at this place, what time would you get up there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Oh we got up there about - about half past five, the same. And - there were just washing in - sort of - you know, metal bowls. Didn't have the showers there, no. And - then it'd come round to breakfast time and you'd have your two - your
 bread and dripping. Of course then I'd go in the office then and - the boys'd go into the school, schoolmaster was a - was a Scotsman - Scotsman by the way. Only one for eighty boys and he - sort of split them up into various classes. Went from one to th
e
 other. No, he - he lived in - do you know the Harrow Road at all, round that way at all? No. Lived in Eldred Avenue you know, in the - this - not far - round the Portobello Road area you know. And - I often used to have to go and see him in his home - at
 
- various things and - well then, you know, they'd have the morning school, come to dinnertime, have the usual dinner and - then the afternoon school again and - that was all there was to it. There'd be the usual evening, just - playing draughts or someth
ing of that sort.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you have any privileges because you were working in the office, did they give you a bit of pocket money for this work or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No, they never gave us any pocket money. I must say that I - you know, the other boy and I, we us
ed to take the odd coppers whenever - out of this thousand a week, yes. Then - going to visit these - foster mothers, they'd very often give you a penny or tuppence you know, so that - you always had a - a little bit in your pocket to get a dinner out or 
s
omething of that sort. But - peculiar life in a way because you never saw a girl for one thing - not from the four to eleven I never saw any. We went barmy when we came out. You know, got - taken to see all our relatives - aunts and uncles and there was a
 
- a new lot with a new father and - and a lot of them had - daughters and - we had cousins and all that, oh we had - really had a really good time you know, spent half the time - no, you know, you can write a book about this really because - I mean at Kin
g
s Cross for instance we had an aunt - we had an aunt that - lived up they the Nags Head in - on - in Holloway Road, and - remember my mother used to give me - you could get up there for a ha'penny on the - on the tram you know. Well we never paid the ha'p
e
nny, just waited for the tram to - get going and the conductor get upstairs and then you - there was a lovely - wide footboard you know, you just jumped in there and held on to the rail until you heard coming down, then you got off again. Was nearly at th
e Nags Head then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 In orphanages today they try and organise them more on a family basis with a woman's influence.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes. Yes, they're more the houses. That's what that did afterwards. They moved from there in the - from }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 Forest Gate}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  to a place at Hu
tton near Brentwood. Do you know Hutton? Yes, Hutton near Brentwood. They went there. I - I wasn't there, I - I was still living at }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 Forest Gate}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 , but - they did that soon after I left, and there they were split up I think into houses very much like college,
 and then later they went somewhere else, I don't know - where they went after that. But I know that - place at Hutton belonged to - one of the councils there I think.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 But you had no feminine influence at all during your time there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No, no femin
ine influence in that - no, the only - lady I ever saw was - in the second home, in - that was a - I used to see a servant girl coming up from the basement, she used to do the - bit of helping you know, used to do - in fact I think I had a crush on her be
c
ause I remember writing the usual piece of - poetry, you know, roses are blue, violets are - no, violets are red - rose - roses are red, violets are blue, I forget the other bit. No. The only thing is - did used to see a - a lady who was - I don't know - 
I
 don't suppose you've ever heard of her but her name was Miss Katherine Hallsbrook, and she was an Australian contralto, she used to sing at concerts and that, and she used to come to see Father Bans, the principal of the place and - 'course I - I did - n
early answered the door so I knew her and she used to see me and ask me how I was and all that sort of thing and - I got on very nicely with her, lovely woman she was.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 You went over the girls' convent once you said?}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Why was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Well - this was the - this Father Bans, he'd go over there to see the nuns and sisters over there and - it was a very nice day out because we used to go by train first to Feltham and then we'd get a - into this hansom to go to Hutton - Hadden, Hadden, whi
ch was about two - about a couple of miles I think, and then there was this big convent there with all these girls and - well he - of course talk about - to them and they'd - you know, talk to me and - then the other boy used to come as well - they'd talk
 
to us and - then we used to have a big camp fire sing-song afterwards, and - used to - I remember one of the songs, one of the chap - one of the men from - the Harrow Road place used to go with us as well, and - he used to sing a song which - well - I use
d to think was rather rude, you know, about - used to - it was about a - chap and girl gone out you know in the country and - used to go, I took my girl to the country once, she nearly - sat on a hayfork like a dunce, and shouted out I'm shot. }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 Where have - where the dickens have you got eyes, the maiden said. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
I said, the usual place, the middle of me head. And then it went, ching, ching, bing-bang, bing-bang, boo, she said I think you ought to have them moved don't you? I said, if I had 'em where I caught th
at prong, wouldn't I look funny with me glasses on? At that time used to thing, well that's a rather rude one for a - convent.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Why did he only take two boys?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh well, 'cos we were the two in the office, see. And - it was like - it was like a tre
at, yes, he could have gone on his own. He also took us to Westminster Cathedral once to meet - oh umpteen Cardinals and - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 oh}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
 yes, he was very good that way. Because apart from - our office job by the way, I was also - what they called an }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 acolyte}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
 in the ch
urch you know, used to swing the crucible. I don't if you are - are you Irish - Catholic? No. Oh I used to do that and also sing in the choir, you know, and - and of course we always followed, when - when he was giving Mass we always - followed him and - 
t
here I always remember the - you know, the crucible, they - it's charcoal at the bottom and - I remember sometimes they - the chap - one of the men who was always - lived in the building as well, he used to have to get the - charcoal alight so that when t
hey put the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 incense}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
 in you know it threw out the - the aroma. Well sometimes he couldn't get it alight and he used to knock his pipe onto it. And one of the priests there, he used to ask me up to his room sometimes, no dirty work mind you but - he'd - fetch
 out a bottle of - so called - holy wine and - you'd get a glass of wine, yes. Oh yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 From the age of four to eleven in the first orphanage how would you spend Saturdays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Well, I think it'd be mostly organised games, you know, like - as I say 
we used to have the hockey and - we used to play cricket, up - you know, up against the school wall - you know, with stumps - marked on the wall. And - also - corners of buildings they used to use for fives, what we used to call fives, what they call squa
sh isn't it. And we used to play that quite a lot. But - there was nothing really organised except this - of course rather intensive drill and that there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did the routine change at all, did you get up an hour later or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No, I don't think 
so, no. No. But we'd go to a church - on a Sunday morning. That was in the first school as well, yes, you - you'd go to church.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How many times in this first school did you have to go to church on Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Well - church in the morning, but a sort 
of Sunday school in the afternoon, which'd be - generally given by one of the - not by a - a parson, but generally one of the men. And - who was - who lived in the place.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Were there many social activities with this Sunday school section?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No. No.
 No, I don't remember anything - like that, no - social stuff at all. Never - never any mixing with girls you know, no dances or anything of that sort.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Sunday schools in those days usually used to organise outings didn't they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes. No, they never did that there. No. Oh yes, Sunday schools -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Was grace said at meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes. Always, yes. Yes. Yes, every meal, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Were you taught to say prayers at night?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No, I don't think, we - we were probably told to but I - I don't remember - doing it, and I don't remember seeing - others doing it.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How about the Catholic place, was there any difference in the amount of religious observation there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh yes, religion was - you know - there was plenty of religion, there was plenty of ch
urchgoing, there was Mass - Mass almost every morning you see and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 So you'd go every morning?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Yes. Yes, and - several - special - special services during the week. Oh yes, they made a lot of religion there and - also they - you know, used to se
ll quite a lot in the - well in fact one boy used to - sit behind the - table just inside the church and sell - you know, booklets about this, that and the other. Another boy there by the way used to be the - used to be the waiter for the - the priests th
e
re and - and these officers who lived on the premises, they used to have their dinner in a - say there was the office over there, they had a room over here and he used to come from downstairs somewhere with a - I always remember it - he used to bring up a
 
big tray of - potatoes, you know, big floury potatoes, they were - they were lovely you know. They used to put 'em on this big tray outside the door of the room where they were going to eat and - and then he'd go inside to set their knives and forks and t
hat, that's when - the other boy and I used to nip along - nip a couple of - potatoes each and - you know, I don't think they ever rumbled it but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Who used to supervise your meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh there was a - there was just one man there - I remember they 
called him Dickie. I think his name was Dickens and they used to call him Dickie. He supervised the meals, he supervised everything out of - out of school. You know, he was in charge of all the boys, apart from he office. He was even in charge of the offi
ce boys you know when you - when the office was closed at the end of the day, when the other men had gone home and - office work was finished.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did the boys have anything to do with the cooking at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you see it being cooked?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 N
o, you never saw any - anything being cooked. No. Never saw anything being cooked. Oh - there's one thing there which - I've just remembered, I've got it in my book by the way. Another job that I had as - as the office - from the office. Once a week - the
 
other boy and I went down - we took a - a sack each at six o'clock in the morning by the way, went by train from there, Harrow Road - we used to get on the underground somewhere and get out at - Farrington Road station and we go into Smithfield. And the s
a
cks - they knew us there and they'd give you, you know, big joints of meat and that, all free. Well, for the - for the home you know. Yes. We - have a sack each you know full of - I remember one - one - set of people, there, Fitters they were - their name
 
was - but I don't know if you've ever been in Smithfield, they're wholesalers there you know. They got all the carcasses and - well they'd - put, oh huge - joint of meat, bung it in the sack you know and give it to you, various other things and - we used 
to bring - we used to bring this home - back - we used to go back to the Farrington station, always stop at a coffee shop, coffee stall there for a cup of coffee and - or cup of tea and - a bun, the old bun you know, jam bun like. And -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Were you allowed to talk at mealtimes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes. You could talk but not - not a lot, you know, not - not shout or anything like that, yes. Just - ordinary talk.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Could you ask for a second helping?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Well I never knew anybody ask for one. I don't know what sort
 of result there would have been but - no, I don't think there was any Oliver Twist stuff there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 It didn't even cross your mind as being possible?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 I don't think so, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Were you expected to hold your knives and forks and sit in a certain way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Oh yes. You were taught to hold them properly you know and - and - deportment they used to go in a lot for you know, they - oh yes, they'd go in for deportment, they even go to the extent that really like the ladies do in - carrying books on your 
head. And I always remember - to teach you the way to walk, I always remember - used - there must have been a lady there then because I remember that she used to do this, used to say - now - she'd say - to a bit of music you say, heel, toe, one - two, thr
ee. To get you to walk properly you know. Yes, there must have been a lady there. I overlooked her but - there must have been one there. I remember that. Yes, that was in the first one, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 You were very young then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes, you were - everything wasn't - jolt in your mind really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 When were you allowed to leave the table, could you leave when you were finished?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh no, wait 'til everybody - everybody and get the word you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you always sit at the same places?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes, always sat in the same places, always - occupied the same desk in school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How was the meal served to you, was it brought round by a maid?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Well - I remember this - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 the}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  breakfast - the porridge was always there when you got there. It was all laid out befo
rehand and - you sat down and gave it a good glance of course. But the dinner - I should think that was in front of you as well but I'm not quite certain about that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 It was put on the plates before you got it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes, it was put on the plates befor
e you got it, yes, there were no - you know - helping yourself out of a bowl or anything like that. Or anybody coming round, you know, slapping a - a ladleful of stuff onto the plate.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What about if you had any worries or upsets as a child, thinking of
 the first orphanage, normally a child can go up to his father or mother if he's a bit upset?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How did you get on with that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Well - well the only thing - you'd have to - well, you'd have to go to the - you know, one of these - cha
ps who were in charge who - I don't suppose they were terrific lot of sympathy but he'd probably pass you on to a matron, they'd have a matron there you see. And she'd pass him - pass - whoever it was on to the matron. But - I don't remember - somehow I d
o
n't remember anything of that, I don't, I - I think you - I think you get a sort of a - settled feeling you know that - I mean half of the - family life, the love business I think is - it was sort of unnatural to a certain extent I think, a lot of it. Wha
t I mean is, the - the mother makes a fuss of you and so you'd automatically go rushing to her with - yes, it was it. But - if you don't get it you don't - you don't miss it somehow.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 So you are inclined to think this side of things can be done without?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 I think so to a great extent, yes I think the - you know - looking after - the youngster and that is overdone really -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 With so many children sharing a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 dormitory}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  there must have been the usual childish squabbles and fights, how were these settled, would the staff intervene?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Oh yes, if they got too noisy, you know, somebody'd come in and want to know - what it was all about, and probably pick on somebody and - give them a little bit of punishment but - but there was very little of that, I me
an - somehow in that - in that place there didn't seem to be any disharmony much. No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 You said there was a bit more at the other one?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 At the other - second place, yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Why do you think this was?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Well I think for one thing - from
 what I know of the Liverpool-Irish - they always - they're looking for trouble all the time, they - they like a fight you see and so they look for it and they - kick up a dust.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Were they literally Liverpool-Irish?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh they were, yes, they were mostly from Irish homes in Liverpool you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 And they'd sent them down to London?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes. And they send 'em down to London.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 So there was a bit of edge between them and the Londoners?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes. Well, I think it's their natural - natural way, 
I think all - all Irishmen are like - I hope you're - you're not an Irishman? But I think most of them are that way you know, they've got that - I always remember one chap - who I worked with, I worked in the Post Office all my life you know, well from fo
u
rteen upwards, fourteen and a half upwards, and - I remember one chap there, another fellow came in, I was sitting at the desk - next to me was an Irishman there and - a chap came in from another room and he spoke to me, you know, we chatted away a bit an
d
 - and I said to this bloke who's name was Bob Clark, I said, Bob do you know - do you know so and so, don't you? So he said, yes, I knew him. You know, I could tell by his manner that he didn't like him. So I said, don't you like him then? He seems a jol
ly nice chap to me. So he said, he insulted me once. So I said, well when was that? I said, it's not like him to insult anybody. He said, it's thirty years ago. He'd held a grudge for thirty years.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 At the schools if you wanted something could you just 
go up to the staff and ask them, how about if grown ups were talking were you allowed to go and join in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Oh no, no. No. No, if you - if you did have any - you know - something that was really upsetting you about something or other you could go and ha
ve a word with 'em. Or with the immediate - chap in charge. But - I don't know of anybody who ever did that really. I think you just - yes, I think it's just like - well - don't want to make the - the - I don't want to make the example like but - it was l
ike being in prison I think if you - if you decide you were going to be - do it as comfortable as possible well you'd just keep yourself quiet. And I think that's how it was there. It was with me anyway.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 When you had a birthday would that be different from any other day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
No, well I don't remember that, I don't remember it really, I don't remember whether I had - you know, birthdays - whether they were any special - mother came and - did anything special about it or not. I think some of the others
 did. I mean, 'cos I knew a lot of them used to - you know, be overloaded with sweets and all that sort of thing when they -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 But this would come from visitors?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Come from visitors, yes. Oh nothing to do with the school, no, there was no - no ther
e was nothing in the school you know, no - happy birthday to you or anything of that sort.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How about Christmas time, what would happen at Christmastime?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh - well I don't - somehow I don't remember the Christmases, yet I must have had about - fi
ve or six. No, I don't remember 'em at all but I don't doubt that they had a proper Christmas tree and all that sort of thing. Nuts - nuts and oranges and all that. I'll tell you one thing they had there which I never seen before at any school, and that w
a
s - they had a lot of arrangements in case of fire, 'cos the dormitories was on a fourth floor, and they used to have - they used to have chutes, put up to the window, like a chute which - fixed over the window, then came down to the ground and - we used 
to have practice on it. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 
And - you'd get in the chute upstairs and slide down, you know, like coming down a helter- skelter only straight, and warned not to put your hands on the sides, otherwise you burn the skin off, and they used to have that. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 And they al
so used to have ropes, which I've always thought ought to be in all hotels really, these hotels of about four storeys, and their standing up there, they don't know what to do. And if they had a - a thick rope there or a nylon rope now they'd have, tie it 
to a bedstead or a - chest of drawers or something.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 You said they had a band there but you didn't play any instrument?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No, I didn't play any instrument.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Were you in the choir?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No. No, we used to sing of course - you know - well we used
 to sing the school song I remember, I had a school song. As it was called the Poplar Training school we sort of made the Poplar Tree the - school song, you know, the poplar tree was straight and all I remember.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How much social activity was there betw
een the boys and the staff, you say this chap would come along while you were playing draughts or something, so they would be around?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes, they would come round and - but they wouldn't join in, no, they'd just come round and sort of look - look at y
ou and he'd - this one had this - habit of - pinching your thigh which I - often thought, you know, he wanted you to say something
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Were there books there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Books - yes. Oh yes, now that's a thing - for instance they had a - they used to have - ne
wspapers there, we had a proper - you know, like you see in a - in a library well the old libraries, a long rack you know, sloping, and they used to have that and I - I well remember they used to have - what they called Black and White Budget which was a 
-
 a sort of periodical came out at that time and it was all about the Boer War, they used to have all that. And - there was daily papers, yes. But whether we took much notice of them - I remember we used to - I remember that - Black and White Budget you kn
ow, all about the Boer Wars and that. But they did have books, yes. 'Cos I read -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 This is the first orphanage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 
Yes, 'cos I can remember reading - some really good books, there, you know, like Rider Haggard's She and - and - and it gave me a 
good - liking for books and - before I was fourteen I'd read - well, any amount of the classics you know, like - Dumas's - Monte Cristo and - Three Years After - you know, the Three Musketeers and Twenty Years After and several of his - and - remember Sil
as K. Hocking, he was a - a popular author there, he was more - well you know sort of Tess of the D\rquote Urbervilles and - sort of story.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Do you remember attending any funerals before 1918?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh before 1918?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Do you remember a funeral at the school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
No, I don't remember one at the school. Don't remember anybody dying there, I never remember anybody being ill there either. No. But - funerals, no, I don't remember a funeral - up to 1918, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Would you say there was any marked difference in the social activities at the Catholic school as opposed to the earlier one?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Well not the social activities, I should say it was a - a very - was run very inefficiently compared with the other one. The other one was run very efficiently I think. Well t
he food was poorer - and the general running of the place, I mean, for instance the school - well that was - shouldn't have been allowed really should it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you have any books available at that one?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No, I don't think there was any - I don't ever remember any books there, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Or newspapers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No, or newspapers. No, I don't - I think they were really cut off there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How about clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Clothing? Well - it was a general - a general - blue - blue jersey, you know, like - like - like a fisherman's jersey.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 This was at the second one was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Yes, the second one. And - a pair of knickers. And that was it. The first one was more of a suit, you know, like a - almost like a small Norfolk - you know Norfolk jacket do you? Like a little Norfolk jacket suit.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 So that was better too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh yes, quite better, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How about bedding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh well bedding, well I think that was about normal in both places. Ordinary, you know, the spring - the spring bed and - yes, I think
 they were all right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 While you were in these orphanages were you ever taken out on visits or shopping or anything like this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No. Not - not shopping. The boys - well in the first one of course we had that holiday, the fortnights holiday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Can you tell me a bit more about this, was this once a year?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Yes, once - once a year in the summer - we'd - go down by brake I think they - they get 'em, you know, the old brakes like a - what you might call a - a coach without - run by horses and - no top or anything. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 We'd go down by brakes to - Dovercourt from Forest Gate and - well when you got down there you went under canvas - bell tents you know, bell tents and - you fed in a big hut there which was called Gray's Retreat. }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 I believe there was a Gray knocking about in that part of Essex now. Yes a huge place was called Gray}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 s Retreat, and in that we used to have our food, and they used to give - sort of concerts in there, band concerts and - a bit of singing you know and - you know, everybody singing
. Some could get up individually and sing and - and then they used to give drill displays, both in there and outside according to the weather. And during the daytime we were - we were allowed to go about - as we liked, I remember a breakwater there, we us
ed to go crabbing and we used to get huge crabs there off the side of the breakwater there. And - well used to generally quite enjoy ourselves. We used to -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 So you were much more relaxed there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes. We used to go to Ramsey for - church on the Su
nday morning. And - we'd have a service every day, you know, a - a short service by - one of the masters, and - but Sunday we'd all march down to Ramsey which was about three or - three or four miles I think isn't it, from - from Dovercourt. And, oh we we
re very relaxed there, you were - you were made very free and easy there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Was it }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 the}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  same staff who come from the school with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes. Yes. Some of - some of the staff from there'd come with us. But - and always one - one of the - people from th
e - Board of Guardians. I remember it was a Mrs Files - and he used to come down - before you went you know, and he'd - come round you know, and an inspection in - you know, pick on one boy, he'd say - hah, how are you boy? Oh very well sir. He'd say, are
 you going to Dovercourt this year? Yes sir. Very pleased to hear it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you see much of the Board of Guardians while you were at the school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No. Used to see Lansbury, he - he often used to come and - often saw him, you know, during the other ti
me - in between the two homes, saw quite a lot of him there because - he was really a friend of my mother's you know. Yes. Well he became friendly. I think he knew - he knew all the family beforehand. Because they lived in - 'cos Bow really came under Pop
lar. So - he knew all the family and - he used to take great interest in them and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How about food on these holidays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh - yes, oh yes, that was very good, yes, a good breakfast, I think - I think we used to get an egg and tomatoes or something o
f that sort - there, and dinner was always good, plenty of it. I think - and I think there was always porridge before the egg and tomatoes by the way. And - yes, good - good meals and - I'm not sure about pocket money, I think we used to spend a bit of mo
ney but - where it came from I wouldn't like to say. Whether it was given to us, you know, each boy had so much. I wouldn't like to say about that. 'Cos you had no other means of getting money unless you got it from your parents when they came.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did the Catholic orphanage organise any holidays?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
No. There was no holidays there, and - the boys as far as I know never got out at all, anywhere. Used to have quite a lot who ran away you know - there, but - not because they were badly treated but - you k
now, the saw no - future like I suppose. Bored stiff for one thing and - wanted something different to pea soup for dinner.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you get any visits to the theatre or cinema or anything like this at either of these places?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No. No. No I did all my 
- music hall - visiting - later on, well, when I got out between eleven and twelve and a half, I did a lot then because - living at Kings Cross there I walked all over London. My father had left a - jolly fine - busman's map, you know, a real - real one a
n
d I used to - map it out and go - you know - do sections of it, Oxford Street and that sort of thing, City another day and all that. And - I used to go to all the music halls which you could get in for tuppence you know in the gallery then. See about four
 hours - performance for tuppence.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 All during the time you were in the orphanages you just had contact with one brother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Well I did have a little bit of contact with - my elder brother. Yes. George. Yes, well we were at - in the same place and we
'd be in school together, although he'd be in a higher class than me in fact. But then - when I was - it would be when I was - nine and he was thirteen - he apparently had got so - on so well at school here that - they took him into the offices of the Pop
l
ar Board of Guardians, so I lost him then you see. And - it became just myself and me younger brother, Tom. But he was - he was a very - well he was very brainy chap you know. I think you know, under a certain - different circumstances he'd have probably 
g
ot to university or something of that sort. Yes. Well - and another brother, the one who was brought up by his grandfather, he - he did get as far as - George Green schools at Poplar and then - the Peoples Palace. And he could have gone to - the universit
y - Oxford or Cambridge, but - nobody could find the money, you - you wanted about a hundred pound a year you see then. And nobody could find it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 As a child at the orphanage did you play with your brother particularly or did you go your own separate ways?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
No, well I think you - I think - mainly you went your - separate ways you know, you be - with that two years is quite a bit when you're young - and - you know - at - say - nine I should be, you know, almost getting a man as you might say, and he'
d still be a youngster to me so - you - no, you - you'd get friends you know just the same as you do outside and - you - I think you - you get really to know friends more than you do your own family really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Was there any one of your brothers who you felt particularly close to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Yes, I think it's this - the one - below, Tom. Yes. Yes, he - he was one who - more or less wanted a bit of protection, I think I used to - adopt the - fatherly - attitude to it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 So although you went your own ways ......?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Oh I kept me eye on him. Yes. Yes, if he got into any trouble I - I - he could come to me and - I'd see that he - well, I'd do me best to get him out of it. But he was a different temperament to me you see, I was a - sort of matter of fact and I
 could always give a good answer back to anybody and - hold me own, you know, in conversation and also physically and - but he - you know, used to lose his temper very quick and - could probably get into a fight, you know, but without meaning to.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Were you allowed to get dirty while you played?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 They weren't too rigid about this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh no. No, as long as you - turned up at - meals properly cleaned up and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What happened if you ripped your trousers or scuffed your toes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh well, you probably get - you probably got well told off and even probably cuffed a bit but - nothing desperate.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 They weren't unduly strict?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 Oh no, they weren't - no, they - they were never - no - all in all I think they treated us very, very well.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What sort of games did you play when you were larking about on your own?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Well there was all sorts, there's a lot of games that you don't see now and - tops is one, you've never come across tops I suppose have you. I'd like to get hold o
f one now just to show my - I've got a grandson at - Romford. And - it's a top, you know, a peg top, what they call a peg top you know and we used to play that and - well you could - you know, you got the string, threw it down to the ground, it span. Then
 
you got it in your fingers and got it in your hand and cupped it and - got it like in this hollow here and - you could throw it, you could skate it right across the playground. Oh that was another thing we used to do in the playground there, in the very c
o
ld weather they used to put the hose on a part of the playground, near the wall you know, and - and then make a slide. And - I remember we used to get very - very - expert at sliding, doing what we called little man, you know, going down practically on yo
u
r knees. Yes, we used to do a lot of that. And then of course - apart from that - 'cos that was at that school, but at one of the schools outside they used to have a game there where they got - a seat of a chair, you know these old kitchen chairs? Not - n
o
t this type. Yes, the bentwood ones. There's - with all the legs - legs taken out the back and just the seat, get two ropes and tie them to the holes where the legs and been and then - several'd pull you and one'd sit on it and - pull you all round the pl
ayground, of course the game was when they - turned, you know, they'd turn quick and you'd shoot round like that and - of course - very often - nearly always came off. Oh several games of that sort.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Were you allowed out into the parks to play at the orphanages?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No. No. No, never allowed outside at all. The only time was, as I say, this crocodile walk like.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you have much room to play in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh yes, plenty of play - yes, a big playground and a - and a green - big green field there too. 
Yes. Oh yes. Oh yes, they encouraged you to be out most of the time. They didn't encourage you to be inside much.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How about hobbies, did you have any room to keep collections or bits and pieces of your own?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No. Not - that I know of. You had a - 
you'd have a locker - no, you wouldn't have any toys, no, only - No, I - I - I never remember having any toys anyway.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What sort of personal possessions do you remember having then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Don't remember having anything at all. Yes, just your clothes and a cap.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
People often feel that parents were an influence on your life, you respect your father or your mother so you tend to take their attitudes and ideas?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 As there anyone at these orphanages, any of the masters that you particularly admired or took any notice of do you think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Well I think - if I did admire anybody at all it was George Lansbury when he used to come fairly frequently. And - he always struck me as being, you know, a very sincere man.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you actually have any conversation with him while you were there or did he just come to look round?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh he came for a look round but he would talk to various boys along the - along the line you know, and - it always }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 struck}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  me as he was, you know, a very - straight sort of
 chap. You seemed to - even as a boy you seemed to get the - an idea whether somebody was absolutely straight or - whether they're a bit - edgy.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 You thought your mother knew them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did he know them well enough to go round her house or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Well that I don't know. I don't know. It's quite possible he did - sometime or other, but - I don't know that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 You don't think there was anything like a father substitute there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No, no, I don't think there was anything 
like that, no. No, you - I think the - the effect on you really was - as - a private in the Army towards a Sergeant Major and - yes, I think so, yes. You sort of - not exactly feared them but - you looked up to them - a distant relationship, yes. There wa
s really nobody you could - cotton on to. You didn't see them - the matron enough to - have any effect on us - or her to have any effect on you, but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How about friendships with other boys, did you have particularly close friends or was it fairly general again?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Well, I think it was pretty general, although I did have one - one boy I was telling you about, he was a bit dim you know, as regards - educationally like, but he was very nice chap otherwise and - I used to get around with him quite a lot.
 Much - bigger boy than me although I was always fairly - fair size you know. Not tall, about - the same - more or less the same height as I am - sixteen I was the same height as I am now and I was about the same weight as I was for years afterwards, abou
t eleven stone.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Can we talk about the time you came out of the first orphanage, about 1905?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 The time after I came out? The first one, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 You had two years freedom in a way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes. Well - eighteen months really. At that time, yes. Well 
- do you want to ask it in question form? Oh. Well I - I would say in the first place that it was - you know, like a - well it was like going on your holidays to a certain extent. You're free, you come - coming away from a - sort of institution, you're ou
t
 in the world, you - you're - with your parents again and - of course we - they - there was any amount of people to see you know, uncles and aunts and cousins and all that. And - I really thoroughly enjoyed it. Of course we had to go to school again and -
 and then I did this work in the shop, after - after school hours.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 During this period you would have had at least one birthday, did that receive any attention, do you remember that or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Well I expect it did but I don't remember it really. Don
't remember if there was any - you know - there was any party or anything of that sort.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Could you describe to me the number of rooms in this shop?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh yes. Yes. Well the shop was on - on the ground floor. Quite a big shop, with - you know, a coup
le of big - pans for frying, a boiler underneath and - a room at the back. And then there was a big basement down below which occupied practically all the house - all the bottom of the house. Stone floor with this huge tub for scrubbing the potatoes and -
 
the cutting machine and wire baskets for carrying 'em upstairs. Well then above this - on the - the living quarters there was - a large kitchen, 'course in those days the kitchen was the main room, as a rule - the kitchen - we'd eat - would eat and do you
r
 work, you know, school work and all that sort of thing and your mother'd do her ironing and - and machining and all that sort of thing. And there was that room, there was a - what - was then called the best room or the parlour. And a couple of bedrooms. 
And there was - my mother and her husband, Mr Wilson, my brother Tom and myself. So there's four of us occupied the beds.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 There were just the four of you at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What about the other children at this period?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Well my brother Georg
e, he - he - as I say, at thirteen he'd been taken into the Board of Guardians offices, the Poplar Board of Guardians offices and he lived - with - with another relation. He lived with another relation. So there was two. Just us two, yes. That's it, yes, 
-
 there was one with a friend and the one - the second boy, you know, the one - who - when I was eleven he'd be thirteen, he was with his - well - with his grandfather's daughter really. That was Will, yes. And he eventually - 1914 he went out to - the Con
go.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Was anyone else living in this accommodation }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 besides}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  your brother and your parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 
Nobody at all, no, No, it was in a - talking about the situation of it, it was in a street there was a - next door was a fruiters and greengrocers and jus
t along the - two doors away from there, there was a - was a butcher's where the man - killed a - killed somebody about - just a year or two before we got there, yes, he was in prison and - funny enough somebody told me all about it down here once, yes. }
{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 An
d - I remember there was two - pubs there, one was kept by a man named Cheapon See. The other one was Donna Rummo. Yes. Two little pubs you know A big one the corner though, it was called the One Distillery.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did your mother pay anyone to help in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
No. No-, she used to do the - housework. With - with us I mean, because boys were always expected to do something like - cleaning the knives and one thing and another.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What other things did you have to do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Well, you'd do any - like 
sweeping up perhaps or - but you certainly on a - a Saturday morning was always a working morning you know, and - you donned an apron and - you got on with the knife - 'cos all knife - you know, there weren't the - you know, the non-cleaning knives, I mea
n you had to }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 clean}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
 'em all where they went rusty and - generally had a machine you know, put 'em in and turn the handle, and - all that sort of thing and polishing the spoons and forks - forks, 'cos they had to be done. Everything like that - blacking the s
tove, 'cos everybody had a stove, now that's one thing that perhaps is worth mentioning. That - in those days of course there was no electricity, and there wasn't a lot of gas either, it was oil, but nearly every - every house had a stove. You know, a boi
ler stove, and - you used coal.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What sort of lighting did you have in the fish shop itself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 In the fish shop? Lamps. Oil lamps. Yes. Oil lamps.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Would your father help with any jobs in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No, he was too occupied, I mean, 'cos in
 the morning - you know, the general clearing up and he had to get the boiler all - tidied up, the pans cleaned probably - of course they weren't cleaned every day - cleaned out every day but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Would he do anything in the house if the occasion arose or did he object on principle?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Well I think he'd have - I don't think he'd have ever had time really. 'Cos I mean they opened dinner time you see and - then again about six in the evening and - they kept open 'til about midnight.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 At this time in your life were your clothes new or secondhand?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Ah now that - I'll come to that. No - well mine - I think mine were secondhand at first - I remember I - you know, very often had to have - castoffs, even from father. I remember once mother - I hadn't g
ot any mac or overcoat and - she gave me one of her - one of her - me father - me father's or step-father's and - it was such a blooming great thing you know - I never put it on, walking in the rain many a time hanging it over me arm. And then when I came
 in you know she'd say - you know, I'd put it on - on just before I came in and she says, well how did you get wet like that
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 You felt too self conscious?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Too - yes, too proud to put anything like that on. And - oh, I didn't say - there's one lit
tle thing that might interest you, I looked up in an old gardening book in there and - it mentions in that - talking about the fires you see, everybody had to have a coal fire, it mentions in that that - there's no reason why anybody shouldn't run a green
house - because you can get the best house coal for one and tuppence a hundredweight. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you ever have secondhand shoes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No, I probably had proper shoes, they were cheap you know - in fact when the war broke out, 1914, 'course I was tw
enty then but - the Territorials, they dished us out with five pound ten in gold I might tell you, and - of course we'd already got our uniforms, it was supposed to buy - items of uniform and that - we'd already got that and - the only thing I bought was 
a pair of - hefty boots and - they cost me nine and elevenpence. So you can tell things were pretty cheap. I mean they were really good things you know. Good boots.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you ever have any cast offs outside the family, from neighbours and things like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
No. No. No, no, I don't think my mother would have - taken anything like that. She was - she was very - proud you know and independent, although we were - you know on the breadline really but - I don't think she'd have accepted any - anything like that.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Were you expected to go to bed at a certain time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Oh yes. Yes. It was always the - custom - to go to bed no later than ten. But - of course when I was in the shop there - I used to serve in the room and it was generally about eleven before I finished up in there. So I-
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 And you'd have to go off to school next day would you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Oh yes, go off to school next day, yes, that lasted about twelve months that did. And - one thing I was going to say, about the clothes, owing to the fact - I
 used to get six shillings a week for this job you see and - I used to give me mother five. I think she wanted the whole six at first but I said to her, well, I said, I'm not going to work for nothing. So I kept a shilling. But with that I bought myself a
 
- a decent suit. I remember a nice blue serge suit. And I generally kept myself in clothes other than that, and also I had a fondness of buying good fruit. In - in those days even a - a banana cost you tuppence you know, they're really cheaper in - in com
parison - with what they were then, because I mean you hadn't got the -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Tuppence was a lot of money then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Yes. You had - well you hadn't got the - sort of supercharged ships then to bring them - bananas over so they were dear. But I used to buy them - you know, good class pears and that sort of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you share the bedroom or bed with anyone?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 I shared one bedroom with - their bedroom with my brother Tom, yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did your mother or anyone else put you to bed at this age?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No. No. No, we were - oh yes, we were both - went and - you know, were quite capable of doing anything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What room did you bath in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh - now that was in a big - tin bath, you know, we didn't have a bathroom, one of these big tin baths you know 
you don't see many of them now but - a handle each end you know, and - used to fill that up with hot water and - and then - have a - do that in the kitchen you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How often would this be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh once a week at least. Yes. Especially in this fish shop because you - the fish smell }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 impregnated}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
 your clothes you know. In fact I had a bit of trouble with some of the other boys in the street, you know, used to call out - what was it - sniffy or something like that. And I had a bit of trouble with them - 
you know, there was no good going for 'em 'cos they were generally in a little groups, but - I countered that by watching everyone of 'em and if one of 'em had a slight limp or something like that of course I called him limpy or something like that, got o
ver that. They soon - stopped doing that then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 You say you lived like in the one room, were there any occasions when you age in another room, did you ever use the parlour for eating?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No - only when - if somebody special came - there were some tim
es when - I don't suppose - I don't suppose you've heard of - the old Lou Lake - company as used to be on the music halls you know. No, a - company that used to have }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 sketches}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  like - and the manager of that, he was a friend of my mother's - 'cos my mother h
ad been on the stage you see, and he used to very often come and - it used to be quite funny you know because - most of the people round that way were - well, just ordinary working chaps, caps and all that sort of thing and - he used to come along and - g
old handled stick, top hat, frock coat and all that and - used to come along there and - he didn't seem to worry about it. He was - manager of this }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 Loud Lake}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  company you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 That would really impress the neighbours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh it did, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 You say your mother had a coal range for cooking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Oh yes, a range for cooking. Oh everybody - cooked by - that's why, I don't know whether it's of interest to you at all but - when they talk about smog in these days it's ridiculous really you know, everybod
y had a fire then and it was all good coal and it wasn't - you know, coal that's supposed to produce no smoke. Every fire was going and - and you didn't get any more smog then, but when you did get a fog you really got a fog and it - a thick pea soupy one
 you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you all have breakfast together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Yes, we did - 'cos he - always got up early. I'll tell you one thing about him, I think I've said in my book that he was always scrupulously clean. He had a - a new, or a clean shirt - nearly everyb
ody then - you know, if they had to have - be - clean - cleanly - used to have white hard stiff collar you know and a stiff front coming down here and - stiff cuffs which stand back. Well he used to have a new - a fresh one of that every day and - they us
e
d to get them done at the laundry which cost tuppence I remember in those days, you know, for all this to be - laundered and that. And that was the case with - most of the shopkeepers, you know, kike butchers. They - they were just the same. They all - al
ways - splendidly clean, and - always wore a straw hat, keep your hair out of the - anything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What time would you have breakfast?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh, about eight o'clock.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What would you usually have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 Oh - well I think it was generally oats - we'd prob
ably have egg and bacon because - well I don't know about bacon, but egg - eggs were very, very cheap, you could get - as many as sixteen - sixteen a shilling of eggs. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
So - eggs were no trouble at all. And - we'd often - but we did always have - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 porridge}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  I remember.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you come home from school for your midday meal?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
For midday meal. Yes. But it - yes, while they were in the - while they were occupying the shop, yes. Yes, we all came - we came home then to a midday meal, 'cos we were only at - the school was only a - not very far away.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Would that be the main cooked meal of the day or would you have that in the evening?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No, that'd be the main meal of the day, but - tea was always a good meal though, in those days, you know people - got 
an idea that - nobody ate much in those days but they used to eat more than they do now really. And - a working man very rarely had his tea without having a large size smoked haddock, of about the largest size which - which cost tuppence, you could get a 
- smaller one for a penny and even a ha'penny but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What sort of things would you have at midday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
What we would have? Oh midday. Oh, generally meat, steak and kidney pudding was a - a great favourite, or a stew. 'Cos meat was - pretty cheap, you 
know, we could get what they called - fourpenny pieces, they used to buy - that means fourpence a pound and they were generally cut in cubes and - well that'd be what they call rump steak now I think.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Would you have a pudding or sweet?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes. Oh, 
afterwards, yes, generally a - you know, a syrup roll or a raisin roll or something of that sort. Oh a good substantial meal, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What would you have in the evening?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh in the evening - generally - tea would be - just bread and butter and jam b
ut there was always bit of supper. Probably - yes, it'd be a bit of fish you see. Although we were in the fish shop we didn't eat all that much fish, I mean we didn't - live on it. But, we used to have it and of course they knew the best parts of the fish
.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did your mother bake her own bread?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Occasionally she did but - not regularly.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How about making jam or bottling fruit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No. No, she didn't do any of that. Well jam was very cheap you know - tell you what, we used to go to a - they - we
 had an uncle who was a schoolmaster and he had six girls, all brilliant girls they were you know, used to embroidery and good musicians and all that, and when - me and my brother used to go there - and it was round about teatime, the thing was - she'd ha
nd one of the girls a cup and say, go and get some jam. Go to the shop and - get ha'porth of - ha'porth of jam in a cup you know. From an oil shop - what they called an oil shop then.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How about any home made wines or beers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did I you have a garden, did you grow any of your own vegetables or fruit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No, no - no garden there, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did they buy vegetables and fruit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh yes. Yes. They bought - vegetables in particular right next door, you know, it was a matter of business really and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you have any tinned or dried vegetables or fruit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
No. No. Very rarely, the only dried stuff you'd have would be in the winter, dried peas. Used to buy those - not in tins then, generally in bags you know, a pound at a time and - Sanders Brothers was the - the main people then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Do you remember seeing your mother have less food so that the family could have more?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No. No, I - well not during that time, no. No. I mean we were all - we weren't really hard up although their 
money by the way was thirty shillings a week, that was their combined money. And the living quarters of course. Living quarters free, yes. So - and they weren't badly off really we - we lived - pretty well. Yes. At the business, yes. Well they used to man
a
ge one day a week to go out for the evening and - they'd go to a music hall and - which'd cost about fourpence I suppose, fourpence each in the - and - then they'd have a bit of supper and a drink or two and - the whole lot could be done on about half a c
rown. Seems strange but it could.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Were you allowed to talk during meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Well, yes - mind you if we talked too much - you would be told off but - no. There was - there was one thing - there was one thing, manners, we had to - have proper manners you know, if you - wanted anything you said, please and all that sort of thing

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 And if you wanted something passed on the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes, want it passed, yes, do you mind passing the - jam or - or - salt or something like that. And another thing - no
body was ever allowed to sit down in their shirt sleeves - to a meal. My mother was adamant on that. No, if you came down to breakfast - you had to put a coat on. Yes, she wouldn't have -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How about ways of sitting or holding your knife and fork, was she as strict on those sort of things?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Well - she - she'd tell you if - she didn't think you were holding 'em right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Could you ask for a second helping?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh yes, if it was there, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Could you choose what you wanted to eat from what was cooked or did you have to have a bit of everything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Oh no, you - you had - it was all cooked for the family like and you had what was there. Oh yes, there was no - you know, not like these sideboards full of - bacon and eggs and - mushrooms and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What was your }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 parent\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  attitude if you left something on your plate and said you didn't want it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Oh well - generally - if it was something that, well, you should have, greens for instance, now nearly all boys for some reason or other don't like 
greens. You - you'd have - you'd get 'em for the next meal. Or the next day. Oh yes, you'd got to eat them. Green - greens were good for you, you'd got to have the greens, yes. Or anything else.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did all the family sit down at the table for a meal together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes. All sat down together, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you always have the same places at table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How was the meal served?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh well, generally the - they generally put into - dishes you know, from the saucepan into tureens, yes, and
 - properly put out but - it was ladled out by my mother you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What order would she serve you in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh, father first. And herself last.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you say grace at meals or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes. Yes, that was always - that was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 compulsory,}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  yes. Just a short one you know.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How did you get on with your mother after this long gap of institutional life, was she an affectionate sort of person?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No. Well she was really, yes, not - you know, didn't sort of dote on you or anything. No -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid201694\charrsid12210835  fawning}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  on you
 like or anything of that sort but - she was there, she'd - see that everything went well with you and - all that sort of thing. I think she was really - you know, really fond of us. In spite of everything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Was she an easy person to talk to would you say?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
To us, yes. Well to anybody really. But she - got a - a real will - will of her own you know and - and she could talk to anybody you know, she could talk to - well - people in much better circumstances than us she'd talk to them as equals and - 
never afraid of anybody. I always remember - I don't know whether you'd like to hear one incident. My elder - oh, my elder brother did live with us for a little while, yes, in the shop. That's right, I remember that now. And on one occasion - breakfast wa
s
 - was bloaters. Bloaters. And - well he by this time was in the - in the offices there and she was - all posh you know with a nice white collar and all that sort of thing and - he - apparently didn't like this - having bloaters for breakfast and - he got
 on a bit and they had words together and - finally he said - something about - oh something - he said something }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 derogatory}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
 you know and - I remember my mother said, well you'll have the bloater whether you like it or not, and sloshed it across - right acro
ss his face and collar. He had to change - before he could go out. Oh she was that type you know, oh yes, no, you couldn't put any old buck over on her, no, no. And she was like that right through her life too. One of her - one of her - thing - when she w
a
s round about sixty and she hadn't got two ha'pennies for a penny, we - I used to give her a little bit, my brother used to give her a bit, and - she got a little bit from somewhere or other but - she used to go to Brighton once - once - once a year for a
 holiday, a fortnight, and at that time you could go to a boarding house for thirty-five shillings a week. And - well she used to go to the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 Metropole}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  Hotel at three guineas you know and - and people used to say, well what do you - what do you pay that for w
hen you can go - and have two holidays for that price? So she says, well I know, there I get four really good meals a day, there's music and - I can get talking to somebody there and they generally treat me to a drink and that. And even go for a walk with
 'em you know. She says, I - I really - but in a boarding house I'm noting you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 If you had any worries as a child could you share them with your mother or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh I could have done, yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How did you get on with your step-father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Well - we got on very well, he was very friendly and all that - rather a peculiar situation in a way, you know, but - yes. Yes. Oh, I - I don't think either of us felt resentful, or any of us felt resentful - 'cos I mean that - well you know, being awa
y from the family so long you hadn't got that family feeling that you get - that - you know, in ordinary families growing up right from a child gets. You }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 hadn\rquote t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  got that, you - you respected 'em and all that but - you hadn't got that - deep feeling for 'em
 I don't think. No, you couldn't. But he was - very good. Unfortunately he and my mother didn't get on well after a time you know, they - were all at loggerheads, oh yes. Yes. Yes. At sixteen once I intervened, I thought he was going to - strike my mother
 you know and I intervened and - I got a black eye over it. He pushed me out of the way and - in doing so - smack in the eye. But that was later.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 So they did try to come together again after they split up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes. Yes they did, they - as I say, the
y didn't get on well together and after about twelve months it got so bad, having rows and they were even having rows during business hours you know and - so their boss who really owned the shop, he said, I'm afraid you'll have to go. And so they }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 finished up}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  there. And then he went off on his own and - we went into a place in Lavinia Grove.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Getting the sack from the shop forced the break more?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh forced the break really, yes. That's it yes. Although they did come together later on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What kind of people do you think your parents hoped you'd grow up to be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Well - I - I think - they expected us to be - pretty good you know, educationally good I think and - and to get on - pretty well.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What sort of things did they consider important in life?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Well, as I say, up to that age we didn't - get much from them and - they used to say - I remember my grandfather, he used to say, what are you going to do, you know, when you're - that was about - when I was round about fourteen. What are you g
oing to do? I said, well I don't know yet. And then me mother got me this job in the - big store - in - in Newgate Street, which - frightened me to death. Blooming great place it was and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Could you tell me what your parents thought of swearing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Oh well they - they didn't like it at all. No, the - no, they would put up with any swearing in the house, not - either from us or - anybody else who came in the place.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 When grown ups were talking were you allowed to join in?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Not really, not a - not - not unless we were invited.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 If you did something your parents disapproved of what would happen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Ah well - we'd probably get - smack across the face or - something of that sort. Yes, but it'd have to be something really bad you know, they never - they never hit us otherwise. No, it'd have to be something really bad.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Would both parents punish you or just one?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No, generally - just my mother. I don't think me father - step-father ever touched us at all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 He more or less left that to your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes, he left that - he - he'd be in a - an awkward position in a way like.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Do you remember any particular occasion when you were punished, anything stand out in your mind at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No, I can't, not - not while - during that period.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 You can't have been punished a great lot then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Would you say that you received the ideas you had about how to behave from both your parents or did one play a more important part?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Well, I should say we - we took our - ou
r - policy of the way we lived I think from mother - mother, I think the mother had an influence all the way through - through our lives I think really. Yes, she was the one you see we - contacted most.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Can you remember Christmas at this place?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
No, not - during the time we were in the shop I don't remember that. But I do remember one - just after when we got in this Lavinia Grove you know, when we'd finished with the shop. Yes. Well that one, we were so hard up that we weren't going to have anyt
h
ing at all, you know, just a - a stew anyway. And - much to our surprise, on the Christmas morning - a man turned up who used to be a lodger with us and - he turned up, he was a - you know, he was a bachelor, hadn't married and - he asked if he could stay
 with us for the Christmas and he'd got a case there and he'd got almost everything in it you know. A chicken, a cake, one thing and another yes. He really transformed it, yes. No, I - we were really - very - poorly off.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 And he lodged with you at Lavinia Grove then?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
He did for a time, yes, and then he left. And then he came back on this Christmas. But during that time we - I don't know whether it's - right to tell you just - this just now - during that time we were in Lavinia Grove of course - I 
looked round for another job because I wanted one - well, 'cos I liked my pocket money and that and - but the only one I could get, I got a job - one - Saturday only - I used to start at nine in the morning 'til ten at night outside a pawnbrokers. The paw
n
broker used to have a - like a sort of - table outside with - tool - secondhand tools you know which had been pledged and not taken up again, and - they were all marked with prices and I used to just stand there and - if anybody came along and wanted some
thing I just sold it to 'em and took the money and - well, for that I got a shilling, for the day. But - what - what was better still, I got a - a really good dinner and tea. And that was more important than the shilling really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 He fed you quite well did he?}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Oh yes, nearly always ham and - a good plate of ham and tomatoes and potatoes. And a bit of pudding of some sort and - and then tea was - well, I think it was a bit of ham again, perhaps an egg with it, bread and butter and all that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you give any of the shilling to your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Oh I used to give her that, the whole shilling, oh yes, oh yes, I didn't keep anything of that, no. Well it was only a shilling all I earnt so - gave her the lot to go towards the rent.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 At the fish shop did you have any musical instruments in the home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 A piano. We had a piano. Yes, we always had a piano.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Who could play it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Well - my mother could play you know in a vamping sort of way. And she liked to get down and play and sing, she ha
d - she had a fine voice. But - none of us could play and - in fact, I don't know that we ever tried really - then. I've messed about with it since, I've got a little one in there now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you make music together as a family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No - except - you k
now, in a - well not in a noncommittal sort of way you know, all the music hall songs, we used to remember them afterwards. It used to be a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 funny}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  thing but you heard a song at the music hall and for about a couple of days you couldn't remember what it was 
and then all of a sudden you'd find yourself whistling it, so we'd - sort of sing it and - do you remember that one? You know and so on. But not real - you know - we did occasionally though sing round the piano, yes, yes, on a - on a - specially on a Sund
ay night. Yes, we'd sing round the piano, mother could - she could sing some very good songs and of course we knew all the old - Clementine and - John Peel and all those. And the old darkie songs, they were - everybody knew those in those days.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did your parents play any games with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Only - only draughts and - that sort of thing. Draughts and cards. We played cards quite a lot, you know, not - not for money but - you know, oh various games like - whist - I learnt whist and that - solo whist, they used to like to play solo whist and -

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Were there any books in the house here?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Yes. There was plenty, well - oh most of them brought in by my brother George though. He was a marvelous reader and - as I - believe I mentioned it before, that by 
the time I was - well by the time I was about twelve I'd read quite a number of the classics, you know, Rider Haggard's stuff, She and - Solomon's Mines and - Dumas books. And - various others. I used to love reading, he - he did and he sort of used to pa
ss the books onto me and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How about newspapers and magazines?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Well - I - I think we used to - have the newspaper there, but I don't know that I read the newspaper much then, I was more inclined to have a look at the - Police Gazette in a newsage
nt - newsagents' shop window, they used to have all the gory details, you know, some - somebody murdering his wife you know, the gory details and pictures and we used to - oh, lap those up as we went to school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did your mother or step-father read much at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Yes, I think me mother read - read - read quite a lot but - I don't think me step-father did, I don't think he was - that way inclined at all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did they ever read out loud?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Do you remember any funerals, I asked you this before didn't I ?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Yes. No, I don't remember one - 'cos I - I can remember that - before I went in the Army I don't think I'd ever seen anybody dead. During the war you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you go away for holidays at all at this time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No. No. But }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 we}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
 did have - outings - yes, I remember my brother George taking me on a - a trip to Skegness. Three shillings return from Kings Cross, by train, took three hours. Now they talk about the trains being fast now, that's a hundred and fifty-three miles I think
 it was to Skegness. They did it dead in three hours - each way. And - as I say it cost three bob. Of course there was nothing there then, there was no holiday camp or anything of that sort. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 
All there was - on the beach was the boats with - some old sharks' teeth in them. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 You know, a bit of a whale and -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Were you ever taken out visiting neighbours or friends or relatives.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Friends and relatives, yes. Oh yes. Relatives in particular. But - mostly we went on our own.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 To visit your relatives?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Yes. 'Cos they were - they were generally occupied in their own way, one - one - one thing with the shop you know, it was a busy shop you know, it was a proper tie. And it was afternoons mainly when we could get out and - go, we used to go quite a lot
 I remember to - as I say from Kings Cross up to the Holloway, Nags Head Holloway, and we used to get a free ride on the tram and - and of course they'd always make us - you know, out come the cakes and all that sort of thing and - yes, oh yes, yes, and -
 
of course they - they thought us something strange too, they thought that we'd be - well I think most people thought anybody who - was in an orphanage was half barmy or something you know, and - when you came out and they saw that you - well set up and - 
looking pretty healthy and all that they were quite surprised.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 In this period Saturday morning was a work morning?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes, that was it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How did you amuse yourself for the rest of Saturday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 The rest of Saturday? Well I think - even as earl
y as that there used to be a - in the winter we used to like going to see a match, a football match, not - not a professional match but smaller ones, you know, on any piece of - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 waste ground}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  there; was and - I used to spend quite a bit of my time on a Satu
rday afternoon, as I say, walking round the City and into the parks, I - I loved to get into the parks at - you know, Hyde Park and all those.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 So you were quite enterprising at this age?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh I was - yes. I was, more so}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 than}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  young Tom was but - I d
id, I had this map, my old - my father's old - cabman's map, a very meticulous sort of map it was, and - I used to walk all round London you know, I used to sort of quarter the map out and - and I'd do that - one part, taking Regents Park and all round th
at way, another time the West End and - Oxford Street and Hyde Park and all that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 So you were quite determined to know the area?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Do you remember what put this idea in your head?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Well I've got an idea that it was - probabl
y hereditary, I mean me father having to know all London like that - probably - although I hadn't known him lot - much, I think it was already there. The same as - later on when I was seventeen I - now he used to mess about with horses a lot with these ha
nsom cabs, at seventeen I had - this urge to get into a - to ride horses, so I joined the - Field Artillery Territorials and - the only way to be able to ride.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How about Sundays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Sundays - oh well, now, Sundays was a - we used to have to go to - church on a Sunday morning. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Was that Church of England?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Yes, Church of England, but we could go to any church we fancied, I mean there was all sorts. I remember there was one - a Methodist church where they had a gallery and - and they use
d to do a lot of singing, you know, apart from hymns they had sort of a - you could all join in, they wanted you to all join in. We used to like that and so we used to go there. And - in between you know when the sermon was on of course you had your Boys 
F
riend, the comic. But - then - oh the late afternoon on a - on a - the afternoon on a Sunday - we weren't really allowed to do anything, we used to sit in the front room, we had a big bay window, we were upstairs in this front room, we used to sit in the 
bay window and - just look out and - nobody did anything, you weren't expected to work or anything of that sort.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Your parents thought it wrong to play on a Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes, they did, and - they didn't - think it was good to go out really - on a Sunda
y. But - we used to get up to a bit of mischief though for all that. We used to sit in this bay window and - down - coming along the road - along this street used to be a - away from Kings Cross, Caledonian Road, going up to Upper Street Islington you see
,
 and couples used to come along there and - as they came along - in the shops then you used to be able to buy two small pieces of metal and put 'em together with a cap in between and an elastic band on tight and we used to wait for these couples to go by 
then you threw one down and it went off bang you know. And they'd look round and of course you'd pop behind the curtains and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you have different clothes for Sunday?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes. Yes. But - well I did anyway, I don't remember young Tom - I expect he
 did. Because I think they - I mean we weren't - one of the - you know, everybody has got the idea that in those days people went about - youngsters went about barefoot and - bottom out of their trousers, all that, but - it wasn't like that really, not wi
th most people. We were quite smart, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did your parents attend a place of worship?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No. No they didn't. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you attend a Sunday school as well as church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Well - I think we did - for a time, but we gave it up and - they didn't press it. Anymore than I did later on when mine stopped it.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Do you remember any Sunday school outings or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No, I never remember any Sunday school outings there. But - as I say we were only there twelve months you see, well about e
ighteen months all told.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you remember any social activities connected with the church at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
No. No, I don't remember any at all. I remember from the school - we used to go swimming in the Caledonian Road baths and there's one point I can -
 tell you there might interest you and - that was - when you were a new boy there and you went in the first time you went in the baths - you had to jump in at the - at the deep end. None of this crawling in at the - two foot end you know, working your way
 up. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 No, they had several boys who - really could swim - swimming about in the - at the deep end and you had to jump in. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
You jumped in, you know, of course went to the bottom, came up again gasping and they got hold of you and took you to the side. And I've
 got an idea that it was a good idea really. Tell you why - you might get one here and there that it upset 'em but - on the main - although you perhaps didn't become a good swimmer - you weren't afraid of the water, and that's what I found in my own case.
 It was a long time before I could swim properly but I - I could float on the water there and - I thought nothing of it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you used to say prayers at night?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 I very much doubt it, we might have done but - I very much doubt it really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Do you know if your step-father took any interest in politics at this time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No, I couldn't tell you really. I - I very much doubt if he did. He might have done but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Or your mother?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh me mother, yes, she was an out and out Tory. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Do you know why she held these views?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Well I think she - originated from a - you know, a fairly good class. Well, when I say a good class I mean - class that wasn't hard up really, well educated and all that and I think she - considered that they were
 the best - runners of the country. In fact she had a very poor opinion of the working man - used to say, the working man is - is a fool, and always will be. And I don't think she's far wrong either. Do you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Do you remember her voting in a general election before 1919?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 You don't know whether she'd vote or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No. No, I don't remember whether she voted or not, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 When your parents were not at work how did they spend their time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Well - well I think in the afternoon, 
you know, they'd just relax - for a few hours and then of course - I mean, they were - they were on the go from about - well about eleven o'clock in the morning 'til about two to two thirty. And then again from six 'til - 'til about - well, 'til about mid
night. So - they didn't have much time, the - the afternoon, what they could - they'd do their best to have a - an hours relax - hour or two's relaxation, just sit and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did your mother have any interests outside the home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Well she was a very goo
d - as I say she was jolly good singer but she didn't sing at any - concerts or anything like that. She was good - good with a needle - needlework and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 So she would mainly do her needlework apart from this one evening a week?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How many evenings a week would your step-father spend at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Well as I say, he'd be in the shop all the time - all the time, and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 So he wouldn't have a chance to go out would he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No. No. His main occupation - during the evening when it was 
- he knew the quiet parts of the evening and he'd float down to the local pub. And - have a few drinks and come back. And - I think mother'd go down - one - now - but she didn't drink a lot really. Well, didn't - not - in a pub. And - then on a Sunday I t
h
ink he spent - well, you know, midday or - practically all - dinner as a rule wasn't 'til three o'clock in those days you know, so - the pubs were open 'til then, well they were open all - open 'til three on a Sunday, that's right and - well he'd spend al
l the time there you know chatting with friends and all that and - come home to - lunch - lunch - dinner and then - of course fall asleep after that probably 'til - it was time for tea.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did he take part in any sports, did he attend the races or have a bet or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No, I never knew him do any betting. And - he certainly didn't - never went to a - a sports meeting.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Do you know if your father or mother belonged to any savings clubs or any of these clothing clubs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes, I think they - I
 think he - me mother belonged to that - what they called the Provident - Provident you know, where you paid a shilling a week or whatever it was and - clothing, yes, and then you could get - things, I mean something cost two or three pound you could get 
it even though you'd only paid about five bob in you see or something like that. Yes, she had - I - I think - I don't think there was any of the working classes who didn't. Belong to the Provident then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How did you get on with your brothers at this time, did you feel particularly close to the one you'd been in the orphanage with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Yes, I felt - I felt closer to the - the one I was in the orphanage with, I - I always felt myself a bit of a protector to him you know. But with my brother George, he wa
s - well he was - what you might call - he used to think - had a starchy nature you know, spoke very precisely and - expected everything done properly and - and - and himself to be respected well, but - he - he did have a real interest in us I think, and 
I'm sure it was him that - put me into the way of reading so much. He read a lot himself and - he passed all the books on to me and told me what I ought to read and - you know, it wasn't much good reading - this }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 tosh}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 .
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 So you think probably he was a reasonable influence?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh I think so, yes, I think he was a good influence on me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 As a child who did you play with mainly, with your brothers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Or did you form new friends at this time?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Well - as I say - I - I used to play with
 a big of a group when I was at school, in the Caledonian Road I remember, you know, once I got over this - they used to call me - what did they used to call me - smelly or some name like that, oh Stinker, Stinker, yes. And - once I - I pinpointed all of 
them you know, if had - one had a - a sort of rabbits teeth I got onto him and - and they soon dropped it then. And-
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What sort of games did you play then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh - now, there was one, I - I thought of that after you went the other day but we hadn't r
eally got to it. There was one - used to be a very good game which was called leg o'wrong you know. It used to be played - you - you had a stone of some sort and you threw it along in the gutter and - then your opponent, he threw his, and if his was withi
n - then you paced it, that's why it's called leg along, if it was one pace that counted two, if it was two paces from his then that counted on. So - and then you go round and you go round }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 
umpteen}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  streets this way you know. Then of course the old peg top, a
s I told you the other - yes, peg top. And - was a hoop, the old hoop, you'd go miles with a hoop you know. You know, either - either an iron or a wooden hoop and - used to have a sort of - thing with a handle and a piece of - thick wire going down like t
hat and then hooked around like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 These were games you hadn't been able to play in the orphanage were they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No, we didn't - we used to play hoops in the orphanage. Yes. But - never leg along, there was no stones there for one thing and - alth
ough you could play that with almost anything. And another thing was - I've never seen that done since - 'course there were marbles, the usual marbles, but there was another one called buttons. And you got - got hold of good buttons, I remember there was 
o
ne button which they called - had - used to have best ring edge on the end of it, and came off trousers I think mainly, and - the idea of those, you - bung - bang them against the wall and came out and if they were within a span you know, you - counted so
 much. Oh yes, plenty of games like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Were you free to play with anyone you pleased?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
What - during this time, while we were at the shop? Oh yes, yes, provided they - approved of them you know, I mean if you - play with somebody and you - they
 saw you and took 'em - if you took 'em home - they'd say whether they approved of them or not, but - I - I never found they disapproved of anybody. Oh I think they would have done, yes, if they - and of course we hadn't got to the girl stage then. Not th
at I know of anyway. Not that I remember.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you belong to any youth organisations?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No. No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How about hobbies, did you keep any pets or collect anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No, I don't remember doing anything of that. No. Well I was more an outdoor - w
alker about, I - I always wanted - wanted the outdoors right from the start and - I got all that I could of it and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 You used to do a lot of walking at this time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you do any bicycling or fishing, you wouldn't get fishing in London would you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
No. No, I hadn't go to the bicycling - yes, later on, yes. No - no, there's walking. One job I had - from the fish shop by the way - was on a Sunday - on a Sunday morning before - before church I used to have to go to a - place on the cana
l at the back of Caledonian Road and - they used to have these - the barges - there used to be ice people, Carlo Geddes, Stephenson and Slater I remember. I've seen their cart - a cart about in London - right up 'til now - and they used to - used to have 
b
ig lumps of ice you know and they'd have a - sort of pony yard and - and drop - well I used to have to go to the barge you know, instead of getting them off the cart, go to the barge and I - we used to get - for fourpence used to get piece about a quarter
 
of this table - for fourpence, and I'd bring that back in a sack you know, and if it was warm weather of course it was - dripping all down me back. But that was through - yes, that was to keep the fish fresh. 'Cos normally their fish came every morning yo
u know, yes, it was only - it was only caught the day before and it used to come by a night train and got to - got to them about ten o'clock in the morning - from Hull.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you start going to cinemas or music halls at this time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Music halls, yes.
 There was no cinemas there. No, no, they hadn't started then. They had what they called the bioscope at the end of - a music hall performance, that was - just a - well I think they were still pictures if I remember - no, no, they - they moved but - how i
t was done I don't know, it wasn't quite like it is now, it wasn't a true movie, no. And that was only just - oh about half a minute I suppose right at the end of - almost every performance.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How about theatres or concerts?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 I went to one or two pl
ays. Yes, 'cos there were theatres and - and of course we weren't far from Sadlers Wells, but - I wasn't very keen on - ballet or anything of that sort. But - music halls, I did know some in the City, the Oxford and - and all sorts, which you could - wher
e you could get in as low as tuppence up in the gallery and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 You'd be comparatively well off as a boy with your shilling?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh a shilling, yes, you were - I mean - once a week you get your tuppence for - you get a - well, cake, if you bought a pi
ece of cake - used to get - a piece of what they called topnem, it was a blooming great cake and you had a wedge about that size you know, blooming great thing like that for eightpence. And there was another one they called mince, and that was two thin sl
ices of - you know, pastry, done hard like, and in between it was - well like bread pudding really. Bread pudding, and it was in a - a big cake like. And that was only a ha'penny, well - I - I often ha that for me dinner.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did anyone outside the home help your mother look after her house or family, any relatives or friends at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No. No, I don't think there was any need for it you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Was she ever ill or confined to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No. No, never - never ill - I never known her to be ill - until she finally finished when she was sixty-seven.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
You had this hard time when you left the fish shop, you went to Lavinia Grove, how did your relatives take this, the one you'd been visiting, did they help out at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No, not really, no. I don't thi
nk they - I don't think they did anything really. If - if you went there they'd - but you know you get sort of too proud yourself and - so you don't go and - and I don't think we went to - any of them during that time. It was only about six months you see
 and then we were off again to the - new home. But they didn't come round and - no, with money or anything of that sort, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 They didn't bring any food round or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No. I don't think the relations do you know. They think you're - you know, you'd better look after yourself.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Did your mother see much of her relatives, you say you and your brother used to go on your own a lot, would your mother keep much contact with them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh yes, she would - she'd got and - of course she never got time to go anywhere but - she would go and see - several of them. }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 She had one particular friend I a Mrs Plyle, marvellous woman she was, and she - her early days she'd been a bare back circus rider, yes, and - at this stage - well, at that stage she'd be aro
und about the fifty mark and - she was blooming great - huge woman you know, voice like thunder. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
And I knew her right 'til she died - I used to write her letters for her, she couldn't read or write. I used to write her letters for her later on and - and I 
used to go and - she used to give me an egg for tea and I'm pretty sure - it was what she'd have had for dinner next day really.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 While you were at the fish shop would your relatives ever be invited into the home, did they ever come round for tea or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh yes, they would, yes. Yes. Oh yes, going and coming like, well visiting and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Would friends call in casually without an invitation?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Sometimes, yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 People often tell us that in those days people made their own amuseme
nts, what do you think your parents did when they got together with their friends or neighbours, did they have any music or games in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Well they would have games. Would have music rather, but I don't know about games, I don't remember - play
ing any games, I think they generally just sat and talked and generally - men turned to cards. Yes. Well cards were - you know, most - everybody did that. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 
And of course there was - everybody had - every house had a piano and generally there was somebody who played, if they only vamped and - so you'd get singing. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
I know at Camberwell, now this would be - it would be after the war though, somewhere about 1921, I used to go over to Camberwell and - when I was courting the wife and - used to go to their house t
here and - and - they have any amount of aunts and - when we went out for a drink on the - on a Saturday evening, one by one these aunts would come in you know and - one of my wife's brothers would say, ay, ay aunt Mary, he said, what are you going to hav
e? You know, and she'd always have a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 Guinness}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
 and - well then afterwards they used to repair to the house and - and the mother - my wife's mother used to get on the piano, she could play it nicely to anything and - and then - her brother and myself used to 
get up and sing various songs and there was another chap there, I remember he used }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 to }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 sing }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 O}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 h Senora, you know, he had a terrible voice but everybody liked it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What was your impression of the different social groups before 1918, a lot of people divide
 society into different classes, what was your impression before 1918?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Different classes, yes. Oh well I think there certainly was - difference in classes, yes, even in - even when I was a messenger and lived at Leyton I know we used to think people 
were very posh who lived in part of Leyton there, they were the first ones to ever have electric light I remember and - and they paid ten and six a week rent for their houses, which - most of the others were about six bob. But - their general attitude was
 
a bit different. Although doctors were very good though. I remember one doctor there, used to ride a - always rode a Peterson bike, you've seen these Peterson bikes have you in - instead of having a - you know, just one bar coming down like that, you know
,
 the V shaped frame, instead of one bar they had two small ones coming like this. Lovely bikes, they cost a lot of money even then and - well he'd - he always went on his rounds on this bike and - he'd talk to anybody and - although he was - you know, muc
h above - what we considered our class.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What would you consider your class in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Well I should say we were the ordinary working people. The ordinary working people. But I think we were a bit educated a little more than some of them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What sort of occupations or people would you put in the same class as yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Well I should say - say - say postmen - and - sorters, that's from the Post Office point of view, and - I should say - teachers and - and even bank clerks. Then - below
 that you'd get - people who worked in packing houses and that, you know, packing goods and all that sort of thing. And in - in the Post Office itself of course there were a lot of ex - ex-Army people who did jobs - which were called porter - porter and -
 what's the other one now - cleaner. Porter and cleaner. Well they were reckoned lower jobs and much lower paid, oh only about half the money of the rest.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Where would you put shop assistants?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Now shop assistants - I should very low in the scale I should think. Yes, very low in the scale.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 With the porters and cleaners?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 The average shop assistant - even managers - I remember how - surprised we were, the manager of a big }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 gramophone}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  place in - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 Paternoster}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  Road, just off the City, just in the City near St Paul}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
s, and - all the City girls and that used to go in there for their }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 gramophone}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
 records and all that, and he was manager there and - we were amazed to find that the was getting about thirty bob a week less than us. When - when we were get
ting about five pound a week he was getting about three pound ten, he was manager of the place. This would be after the war though. Yes, pre-war - well - as I say - oh some of the lower paid and - what I suppose you would call 'em the lower classes - was 
on the railway. Now on the railway there - they got as low as sixteen bob a week a lot of 'em. Fifteen shillings a week.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How about say building workers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Ah - building workers. Well - I think they got - fairly good money. I'll tell you why. You of
ten saw - a navy in the road - 'course nearly all - you know - any - everything had to be dug out then, there were no machines, and - you'd often see a navy - clean his spade - well and put a lump of steak on it, put it over the fire, for his dinner.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 You seem to be dividing classes mainly on their income, is this your impression?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Well, no, not only that - because a teacher really had a very good income, but he was - no, I should say the lower ones were - lower on education really, because I think
 the reason they were - would consider them lower was because they hadn't tried to get a better job, I mean there were better jobs to be had if you - made an attempt to get 'em. I - I - I come up from nothing, never }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 had}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  any money, I had to buy me own books
 to - when I went in for the exam for the sorter. I had to buy me own books and I paid to go to a - well, like a sort of - classes, which were run by a Clerks College man who'd - who'd retired. Yes, a private tutor. And he did us and - like several other 
people, and we nearly all succeeded.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What about the classes above yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Oh - well - well I should say people in business. You wouldn't come in contact much with - other than people in business like publicans and shopkeepers and - although of
 course not all shopkeepers not very - wealthy, but - that's about all you would come into - really at that age, see, at this time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Can you remember being brought up to treat people of one sort differently from people of another?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Were you ever taught to touch your cap or call anyone madam?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No, you were - you were told to - you know, to call anybody sir or - mister and - and also not to speak to your }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 eldest}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  until the spoke to you. But - there was never anything of that touching the 
cap, I was never told to do it, no, I think that was just a country - you know, country business really. To the Squire, you know, the Squire knew everybody and he really controlled everybody.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Do you remember anyone showing respect to your parents in this way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 Oh yes, I think most people did respect their parents very, very much - and right away 'til they were old. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 I mean, it was - it was a -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 I'm thinking about people more outside the family.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh yes, they were respectful to each other I
 think most people, yes. But the family - people did - you know, they regarded - I think it was like some of these foreign countries where the - the - old people are the people like, and they did, they - they looked after their people, and - it was quite 
c
ommon, when anybody got a bit old and - they were old at fifty then very often - the younger - the younger people who were working, they'd - buy 'em tobacco and all that sort of thing. Now it's the other way round, they expect you to buy them something no
w. You've found that I suppose haven't you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 In that district who were considered the most important people?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Well I should say the schoolteachers and schoolmasters for one lot. The shopkeepers. And - I don't know of any other people who you would regard as - you know - wealthy or well-to-do.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Do you know who these various groups associate with, would schoolteachers - who would they mix with in those days, were they separate in any way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 I think they were, yes, out of school they - I think
 they mixed more with themselves than - see, there wasn't so much house buying in those days and - they would be very much like - like any ordinary person, probably in a small flat or rooms even. 'Cos there wasn't a lot of house buying, you had to be pret
ty well off to - to buy a house although you could buy one very cheap.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How about the clergy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Oh the clergy. Well - I don't know, I should think they'd - associate more or less amongst themselves. Their nearest friends and that - would be people o
f a certain amount of intelligence and that would be schoolteachers again and possibly if there were any well-to-do people in the neighbourhood it would be those as well. But in a place like Kings Cross and Caledonian Road, weren't many - well-to-do peopl
e there, mostly of the working class.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What sort of people would you say went to church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Well I'd say almost everybody. It was a - it was reckoned a - a thing that you must do. Every - family - brought their children up to go to church. I think to
 a great extent apart from - trying to bring them up well it was also a way of getting rid of them, especially the Sunday school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What about the chapel people, would you notice any difference between the church congregation and a chapel congregation?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
No, I don't think - I don't think you would as - as a boy, or up to that age, up to, say, twenty, I don't think you would - take that much notice.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Where you lived in the Kings Cross area did all the people in the working class have the same stan
dard of living or would you say there were different groups, you have said something about this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Yes, well there would be different groups, yes, there'd be some who - well found - found it very - very hard to feed a family, keep a family going and feeding them. But others - could do it quite nicely.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Were some families thought of as rough and others as respectable?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Could you describe a family from each group?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes, well - I'll tell you one thing about it then. Generally 
the rough element got into two or three different streets like. They sort of - separated - or I suppose what it was really, the better - the people who - wanted to behave properly, they moved away from those streets see and so - they - that happened in Le
y
ton, there was three streets there that - they were all rather rough - rough element you know. Mind you, a lot of the rough element was - very much over rated. Pools used to be rather frightened of them because they - you know - bit boastful and - told ev
e
rybody what they were going to do and all that sort of thing, but - if you just looked at 'em and stood up to 'em - there was nothing to them as a rule. But they were - they were - there was a rough element and - they generally used to - sort of segregate
 themselves. That was the chief trouble at Dagenham when they built it, everybody was parked in together, you know, good and bad.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What do you think would cause a family to become rough?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Well I think - mainly on the parents themselves. I mean if t
he parents were rough you know - well - and in those days so many people drank a lot you know and drink was very cheap - you could get a - for tuppence ha'penny get a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 quarter}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  of whisky - gin it was. There was a good bit of drinking but that wasn't only the
re 'cos I've known plenty of people who drank a lot and were quite decent people. But; a lot of cases though - for one thing they're pretty ignorant and - and they try to bring up their children into the same as they'd lived themselves which was pretty ro
ugh, bad language and all that sort of thing. But - you could be as poor as anything and yet you'd see families that were as poor as anything and yet they'd be brought up well and fine.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Do you remember a distinction of this kind between craftsmen and labourers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Ah - well, yes. But - I don't know that you'd notice it much. And I couldn't say really - there was plenty of good craftsmen I think then who didn't really didn't get much money out of it. Not like now, if you're a good craftsman you can - 
get a good wage, but I don't think they could get much out of it then. But there were, of course, a lot of craftsmen then, you know really carpenters and - I don't know whether you're interested but I saw one business in - when I was a messenger at Bow, u
s
ed to be a place called Robinson King and they used to make the - you know these public house doors, well perhaps you won't see so many of them now but - they're all fancy figures on them and cut into the glass, well I see - used to see them doing it ther
e
, they have a - big pane of glass on - on a - on a table like this and they'd have a hammer and chisel cutting away - they'd etched first you know then they were cutting away and then - they'd put a sort of buffing thing on it to - to buff it to - soften 
it down. You know, just ordinary - common or garden workmen, I don't suppose they got more than thirty shillings a week.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Do you think your mother saw herself as belonging to a particular social group?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh yes, I think she though herself well abov
e the working - ordinary working people. In fact it was one of her sayings that - the working people are not worth worrying about. They're the biggest enemies to themselves.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Why do you think she felt this strong sense of distinction?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Well I thin
k she came from a good family in the first place. She was born - she was born round Lancaster Gate you know, Kensington way and - and her father, as she always told me, was a - a jeweler from Dublin. And - and then one of her brothers was a schoolmaster. 
You know, a headmaster. And all the family - and - and we were all pretty bright at school, except my brother Tom, he was not quite so good but - all the rest were very good.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Was it possible at that time to move from one class to another?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes, it
 was. Providing - you know, it's a question of money then really isn't it. And a lot of people - you know, really do - try to be different don't they then they're - if they get more money you know, they try to be - they try to alter their talk for one thi
n
g, which I think is a mistake, because I think if you're - well I know one man who - who - well he used to mix with all the best people, his - top grade in the Masons and all that and yet he'd always say rahnd and abaht and shaht and all that. But nobody 
-
 nobody dis - you know, felt any disrespect for him on that account. On the other hand I knew another bloke who used to - when he used to talk to - embassies, one of our - my jobs really was talking to embassies in London, all foreign embassies, he used t
o put on a - a real - high class talk.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Can you remember anyone who changed their social class before 1918?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Before 1918. Well, in a way I should say my brother. I mean we - my mother certainly - considered herself at least two stages up - but my b
rother George, he - he was a very - as I said earlier on I said rather a starchy sort of person but he wasn't - he used to give some wonderful parties, but - he had a sort of a - well, you remember - Chamberlain, you know, who - with the umbrella, well he
 wasn't unlike him. A high collar and all that you know and - and he'd speak very - you almost without a smile always, and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 he read}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  a lot and he was very - very brainy really, but - he mixed with - all top people at the finish you know and - I certainly think he went up. Well he would have done in any case I think, whatever - whatever happened.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Do you remember anyone being described as a real gentleman or a real lady?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No, not in that period I would say, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Do you remember seeing a policeman around where you lived as a child?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Well yes. Oh yes. No, yes, oh yes. Policemen, yes, they'd - and - well do you want to know how they treated anybody?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How do you think they treated people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Well I think they treated them very well, they - 
you know, they were there and they looked round, their - their job was to walk round the streets and that and - I've seen them go up to a couple of drunks you know, here, what's going on here, you know, and all that sort of thing and - they'd be ready to 
stand in, on - on the other hand they didn't walk into it you know, they waited to see how things were going. But - also - if you were doing a - you know, a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 misdemeanor}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 , you know, a youngster doing a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 misdemeanor}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
 they'd think nothing of - clipping - getting you by the ear you know, here, what are you up to, you know, or giving you a clip round the ear, but that was it, that was the finish. They didn't take you to court or anything like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How did you feel about them as a schoolboy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Well I - I - 
I had no fear of them at all and - actually I didn't go for anything really that was - liable to fetch me out into the law, the only thing I ever did was pour - coachman's whips, used to have a whip hanging down. You know, they put a whip in a - sort of c
up and the thing'd be hanging down and we used to like to - as he was going along near the curb, give it a pull you know. And before - of course he - he didn't have time to get it out and give a - slash round. He was on the way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Your home there was rented wasn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you see anything of the landlord?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
No. Not that I know, I never saw a landlord when we were in - well actually I suppose we could have seen the landlord when we were in the fish shop. But - oh - well - let's see now,
 when - that would be after the war, I was thinking of the Landlord in Leyton, but - that was after the war so that wouldn't - operate. Well I don't think I ever knew one. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Do you remember feeling that your parents had to struggle to make ends meet at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh yes. Yes. I was conscious of that, yes. Yes, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What did you think about that at the time, do you remember how you felt about it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Well I - I think what I thought mostly was that - we'd got to try and pull together an
d - try and - help - help me mother out and - that's why I took the job on, you know, first of all at the fish shop, six bob a week and then did that Saturday job at a shilling a week. I'd have done anything if I could have done it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 This job at six bob a week, this was extra to your parents thirty bob?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Yes, that's right. Yes. Yes. That was - they would have had - had to have had an assistant you see, but they thought well - I could do it, so - so that wags it. And incidentally that six bob a wee
k wasn't bad really at that age because - I've heard since, now as a messenger I got seven shillings a week at fourteen. But I've heard people say that they only got five shillings a week when they started at fourteen. Yes. It always amazes me how some of
 them - got on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you ever get any help from the Guardians or the parish or any charity at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No. No. Of course the very fact that we were taken in the home would be considered - a bit of charity I suppose. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 You must have notic
ed a terrific difference when your mother and step-father broke up and you went to live with your mother in Lavinia Grove?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes, Lavinia Grove, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 You say the nuns were quite helpful to your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Well - they had been before, but not - 
I never - never saw anything of them afterwards. I think they had been before, you know, during the time we were in the other home I suppose. She - they had - probably spoken to her and helped her because there was a lot of places there you know, particul
a
rly - there was one at Bow but I was a messenger there, where - the - there was a place just by Bow church where any tramp or anybody could go along there and get a huge cup of cocoa and a couple of thick slices of bread and dripping, no matter who they w
ere, what religion or anything. They were - she may have got in touch with them - in some way like that you see, and - or they may have some system of - knowing when - of a woman - when a woman becomes a widow.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 My impression was that after you left the
 chip shop you were in rather dire straits and you got in contact with the nuns in some way at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh no. No. No, she had known them before, that's why - she eventually was in a - Catholic place.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What religion would you have classed yourself as in 1918?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Oh - Church of England. Yes, I never changed me religion. I fancy I was baptized again in the - in the Catholic religion, but I never changed it. No, none - none of us did.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Do you remember in Kings Cross when there was someone i
n the district whom the people disapproved of very strongly, was there any way in which they showed it? Have you heard of anything called rough music, where people, if they disapprove of a family they perhaps beat tins and things and drive them out?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No. No I never came across that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 We didn't talk about your schooldays outside of the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 orphanage}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 ?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No. Outside, no. Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 You were eleven when you first went to outside school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes. That's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What were the hours, do you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 If I remember rightly - nine 'til four. With a break at midday. Probably a two hour break, I'm not certain about that though.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you go home for midday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What kind of school was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh, the ordinary elementary school - a brick built place you know, with -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Do you remember if it was a church school or a board school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh a board school, no - there wasn't a church school, no. No, it was the - run by the Guardians you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Was this boys only or mixed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 All boys this was, yes, all boys.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How far away from where you lived?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 From home? Oh, not more than about five minutes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 So you walked it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes. Used to go - we were in the Caledonian Road - school, and then we used to - of woodwork - or
 carpentry, we used to go up to Rising Hill Street School.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 There was Rising Hill school was there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 But what was your main school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Main - main school was Caledonian Road school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What did you think of school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Well - I t
hought it was very good and they thought I was - well ahead. And - the - the - teacher treated me very well because - although we got a good education in this first home, for some reason or other they didn't teach us grammar. Which I've found very - very 
-
 you know, a bit of a nuisance since. They didn't teach us grammar - and - when I got to this Caledonian Road school they used to have - you know, he used to give out grammar lessons, parse and all that a sentence and - they'd put 'em out in a - round in 
a
 circle, he'd stand in the middle and he'd - ask - so and so, parse so and so, you know, if a chap made a mistake he got a hander you know, put a hand up like that. And everybody - you know - go the habit of - putting their hands right up there because it
's not far to - for a cane to go then. But every now and again he'd say, all right, a bit lower than that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 You'd get a whack for every mistake would you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes. But as I didn't know the - had never been taught grammar he didn't try and take it out 
of me at all, I just stood by and watched all this. He was very good that way and - I mean he could have - he could have taken it out of me really but - he didn't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How did you feel about the teachers on the whole?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Well I thought they were very g
ood. You know, their - their great desire I think was to teach you, you know, teach you the three r's, I mean, I don't know what schooling is now, they say it's better than it was but - on the other hand a lot of business people say that they don't get su
c
h good - subjects when they want to start. But - I think they had a genuine desire to - turn you out as - as a pretty good pupil. Able to pass - a normal exam - without - without languages and that of course. And - well I think they did it to the best of 
their ability, but of course they had the added - help of being able to give you a - socking if you -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did they emphasise other things as important in life, besides the three r's, how about manners or cleanliness?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh yes, they'd teach - yes, they'
d teach you that. Oh the manners, yes, and - and cleanliness, yes, that was - grilled into everybody that was. It was necessary too because a lot of the - houses you know were - a bit buggy and that you know and - people had long hair they - were liable t
o get a bit nitty and - so that was - everybody was impressed on - being as clean as possible and - or as clean as you possibly could.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How about ways of speaking, did they try and change the Londoner's accent?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No. No. No. They'd try and stop'em 
from saying rahnd and abaht and that sort of thing you know but - they wouldn't - they didn't try and - take the accent out of it, if there is an accent. Well people have told me sometimes, you come from London don't you? I said, I'm by no mans a Cockney 
type I shouldn't think.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
You say this particular teacher used to whack you for your grammar, how about if you did something teachers disapproved of, what was the normal punishment?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh well you - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 they}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  could either give you - you know, one or two or three on the hands or they could - you know - do the bend down and give you one or two - across the behind.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 The class teachers used to do this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Class teachers could do that, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 They didn't have to send you to the head?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No. No, they
 had to put it in the book. Yes? But they used to make you go and get it, go and get the books - book and stick. You had to get it yourself - to get a whacking. But they didn't - it wasn't overdone, not in my own opinion, no. No, I mean there were some wh
o - well - some - there are youngsters you know, I daresay you've been a teacher, young - some youngsters who can't help being - it's in their nature isn't it - to be awkward like.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Would you say there was more or less punishment at the orphanages?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No, there wasn't a lot at the orphanage, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Less than here or about the same?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh - well, I should say there was less in the orphanage than in the - the ordinary Caledonian Road school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 You thought perhaps they had some more difficult boys in the school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Yes. Yes, I thought so. You see, in the home - well boys were all - well they had to behave you see, they had to behave and - no, they didn't have the parents to distracting them or anything, it was all - discipline you know right fr
om the time even when they were playing there was discipline. And so - they couldn't play truant at any time so - they were - a bit - in Caledonian Road school of course it was a fairly - what you might call a poorish area and - there were some rather rou
ghish sort of kids there.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did most of the other children come from similar types of home to your own or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes. Yes they did, yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did - your parents show an interest in your schoolwork?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh yes. They did. She did. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 Would}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  they ask you what you did at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Oh yes, they'd ask you and - also you know we took home homework and - they'd look at it. Well, mother would. She'd look at it and - see whether you were going on. I think that she had a pretty good idea that w
e were - pretty good at school you know But we - but I'd say we thoroughly enjoyed it but we - you know, we didn't dislike it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did the parents go up to the school or meet the teachers at any time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No. Not that I know of, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did the teachers single cut some children for different }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 treatment}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  from the others?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
I don't think so, no. No - they'd - automatically - notice who the - backward ones were. And - there was nothing - much they could do about it really, they - they'd tray and push them on a bit but - you know, you can't very well with a - }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 pretty}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  big class.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Do you remember how many children there were in a class at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes, there were about forty.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Were there any gangs or groups in the school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes, they did used to gang up - some of them, you know, you get a bully and - a few toadies round him and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Nothing based on streets?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No, not really based on streets. No, just - well just something to do I think as much as anything. Wherever you are you get th
e one, the bully, you know, trying to be a bully anyway.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Were there any children left out of things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Left out? No, I don't think there were, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 You left this school when you went back into the orphanage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Into the orphanage.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 And you left the orphanage to start work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 That's right, yes. So that actually my schooling finished at twelve - twelve and a half.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 When did you actually leave the orphanage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Just over fourteen, be just about fourteen and a month.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 But you didn't have any formal schooling in that one?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No, no school during that time, I was in the office right from the - start.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 You didn't get paid for that though did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No. No. No, only what you made yourself.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Would you have stayed on longer at school if you'd had the opportunity?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 I think I would have done, yes. Providing you could see - see ahead, you know, that there was something worth - stopping for, yes.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you attend any part time education afterwards?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes. For -
 for instance, well - as a matter of fact, in the telegraph, you know, as a telegraph boy you had to attend twice a week - at evening classes, during the evening classes time, that was, you know, about the same as now, September to about - April or May.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Your evening class was usually connected with your work was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Well no, not really, no, no, you'd - go to evening classes and you'd - sort of continue - you know, geography and - all that sort of thing, you know, general subjects.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Do you have any regrets about your education?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Well not really, no. I - I would have liked - to have had a more - full education like - especially to have - got a - a knowledge of grammar because I tried to - at sixteen I was trying to - learn German, with a v
iew to going in for - the customs - Customs and Excise job and - I found it very difficult because, you know, before you can learn a language you've got to know - know - what the neuter gender is and all that sort of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Do you think you }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 benefited}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  from attending school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
I think so, yes. Yes, I think - most of our family - or - well all the family I think were - you know, potential pretty good subjects at school but - without school, well you don't know what could have happened. Oh no, I think 
school certainly did benefit us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
You told me earlier about working at the chip shop and working Saturdays at the pawnshop, the chip shop job you got through your parents, how did you get this job at the pawnshop?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Well I - I looked around you kno
w, when we found we were so very hard up and of course missing the other job - partly to help with the home and partly for my own - benefit you know, I'd got used to this - six shillings a week - well, the shilling a week and able to buy things and so I l
ooked around and - I asked at various shops if they wanted a boy and - eventually I approached this pawnbroker. And he said, yes, we can do with a boy, and - he took me on for Saturday only.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How did you feel about him as an employer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Well I thoug
ht he was very - very - good and just I think. And I suppose the shilling for one day was - more or less about right for those days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What sort of hours did you work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 From nine in the morning 'til ten at night. Yes, all the time except for about 
half an hour to go down and have dinner, you see, down in the basement I remember. Me dinner and - and then again for tea but - yes, it was a long day but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Do you think having these part time jobs altered your attitude to school in any way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No, I don't think so. No. No, I didn't make - make me dislike it or like it any more I don't think. It just - matter of course I think.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 You left the orphanage at fourteen then, what was your first full time job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh - my mother had got me this job in - the - as an office boy in the Counting House of a large store in Newgate Street - London, E.C.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 And you weren't there long?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No, I - it petrified me, the size of the place, you know it was a huge place with four floors and - 'cos this was a l
ot then, and - of course everybody dashing about you know, phones going and all that sort of thing, I - well it petrified me and - I thought to myself, well I don't think I'm going to like it here so any way in the meantime I had applied for the - job as 
- telegraph boy. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you apply for this on your own initiative?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
On me own initiative and - without the consent of my mother as a matter of fact, it's a wonder they took me on really. But - anyway they did take me on, my mother was absolutel
y furious, you know, she'd gone to all the trouble of trying to get me a job there, and - she was mad but - well, I said - if you don't let me take this messenger job, I said, I'm not going to stop here. I was very - determined then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What exactly did you have to do as a messenger?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Oh - as a messenger. Well at that - that time I went to an office in Leyton and - there were five boys there, but only three cycles, so the junior - two junior ones had to walk all the time. Well you - you were on vario
us duties there, sometimes - sometimes you'd be on eight 'til about - four twenty I think it was. Sometimes ten twenty to eight I remember. Ten twenty in the morning 'til eight at night. And - there were various - but eight o'clock was the last - the late
st you worked, except if there was any special reason for doing overtime. And your main - your main job was to deliver telegrams which were only sixpence each then and - there was quite a lot of them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How long were you a messenger boy before you were promoted or changed jobs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Well - the - the - the routine was that - you started at fourteen or - or soon after fourteen but at sixteen they weeded out most of them, they didn't want them all you see so - most of them got the sack. And - when I became 
sixteen I went up with - there was fifteen of us went up there and they only kept four. Fortunately I was one. I think that was where my mother came in again because I told her I might get the sack at sixteen you know and she wrote in - to the head of - p
lace and said, what's the good of me keeping my boy there if he's going to get the sack at sixteen? And they said, don't you worry, you - he won't get the sack at sixteen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 So your mother would take some initiative?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 She'd taken some initiative, ye
s, she was that way inclined you know. She didn't mind who she wrote to. And - as I say, at sixteen - that was the general run. There was only about a quarter kept. And then from that time you were - you were all right until you had to undergo a - at roun
d
 about seventeen, you went - under - went a small examination - well an examination, to become a postman. And - it wasn't a terrific examination, but a postman was a good job in those days you know Their top money was about two pound ten, where as the ave
r
age - were very lucky if the got thirty shillings. So it was really a good job. And - as I say, at seventeen - you - you passed this - you know, comparatively small exam and went in, you got the job as a postman. Well then it was up to you after that, if 
y
ou wanted to remain a postman all your life that was it, you were all right. Not likely to get the sack unless - there was something - you know, done - did something wrong. But there was always this opening - to - through the Civil Service Commission to g
et a job as a sorter. That's what most people were after. That's what I was after. I didn't want a uniformed job all me life for one thing and - I wanted to get on and get more money.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 So you went as a postman at seventeen?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 So I went - yes, at se
venteen I went - first as what they called an assistant postman. That is you go to a - a postman office and you do - at that time there used - there used to be eight deliveries a day you know. The first one was from six to eight. Yes, you started at six, 
y
ou did all the sorting by about seven and then seven to eight you did the actual delivery and - at eight o'clock. Oh, and then you did that six to eight and then you didn't go on again 'til eight to ten at night. So that's four hours a day - for which you
 got eleven and ninepence a week. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 
But - actually it was a really good job because - in - there was very little newspaper advertising in those days and all these big firms like Barker's, Harding's and Hobbs and all those used to advertise by circulars. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 They'
d go through the post, there was a ban on - you know, there was none of this door to door selling like there is now, or delivering rather, and - that all come through the post, got to be paid for, and we used to - go and deliver them, see, well - they're 
a
ll door to door stuff you see, you just - I mean you delivered one door, hopped over the railings and the next and - they were allowanced out at - sixty to the hour, hundred and twenty for two hours and - as we had ten hours in between my job I often did 
t
en hours overtime and - used to fetch me in over two pound a week - you know, with me - with me - money. Then about thirty shillings a week I'd make in overtime, which was - stupendous for a boy of seventeen. Picking up about two pound odd a week - two po
und one and nine a week. Yes. Yes, that'd be 19 - 1911. Yes, oh yes, and - and yet I - threw that in, I was asked if I'd take a full time - when I was still only about seventeen and a half I was asked if I'd take a full time }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 postman\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  job at - at Chingford 
and - well I weighed it up, I knew I was going to lose money on it because I would only get a pound a week see. Nineteen bob as a matter of fact. And I'd got to cycle all the way to Chingford from Leyton. But - I looked at it in the - you know, I took the
 
log view of it and thought it would be to - in my interest so I took it on and - went and did this job at Chingford. There - they're talking about people don't walk now - there I was on from six - yes, six to eight in the morning and then two o'clock to e
i
ght in the afternoon, which meant I got a - I got threequarters of an hours ride to get there. Same coming back to breakfast. And then - going there at - in the afternoon and back again in the evening. Well in the afternoon I was due to - of course was on
 
at two o'clock, well the few letters that I had was all round Chingford Plane there you know, and - sort them out in about ten minutes, go outside and I was due to be walking then until six o'clock. From about quarter - ten past two up 'til six o'clock wh
ere I'd be}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835  doing}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  a few collection}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 . But - I had my bike. So I went round on the bike and it gave me time to - have about an hour or - hour or more at - at a teashop, I used to sit there.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How about weekend work, you worked Saturdays presumably?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 You worked Saturdays, yes, then we were off Sunday. Yes, Saturday was a full day as a postman, yes. Full day. A six day week, yes.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you have holidays with pay?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes. Yes. And pretty good holidays for those days - a postman got - fourteen - four
teen working days which meant that he had - two weeks - fourteen working days is twelve - well two weeks and two days. Yes. And a sorter got three - twenty-one working days. So that was three weeks and three days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 It must have been a really good job in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
It was a good job. Oh it was, yes, it was worth going for. That's why, when I was saying these - these tradesmen's sons and that used to go to special schools they - that was the idea, to get them into a Civil Service job. Like not a - 
not a postman but a sorter. Which they had a - much more difficult exam and of course the competition was fierce. And - that was the idea, to get into the Civil Service 'cos it was about the only decent job - apart from university men - that a chap of tha
t caliber could get into you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 You were living at Leyton at this time, while you were assistant postman?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes, yes, I was living at Leyton then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 With your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 That was with my mother, yes, she set up - set up home again then, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Was your step-father back with you at this time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Yes. For a time, yes. Yes. Yes. Well as a matter of fact I never had a - a settled home 'til I got married. Even during the war I had to go to other people, 'cos me mother was away working. Yes,
 he - well he left you see at the - when they had - had to get out of this fish shop, he left and then - during the time we were in the other home he came - they came together again and when we came away from there where were they living - we were at Leyt
on, yes, yes, we were at Leyton and they were together you know. Nice - quite a nice }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 flat}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  in }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 Murchison}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
 Road Leyton I remember. And - it was very good, things were going along very nicely really. Then - well I think he got - he got another job as a - a fishm
onger somewhere, 'cos he was a real tip-top fishmonger and poulterer, you know, he knew his job properly. Wasn't like - you know, just a salesman - and he could get a job anywhere, but he did have this - drawback that he liked his drink a bit too much and
 - you know, people were a bit dubious about him.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you give any of your wages to your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Yes. This - well when I was getting about seven bob a week - I gave her six bob and kept a shilling. And - of course we used to get a few tips on th
at - as a messenger you know, used to get pennies and tuppences and - but when I got more money, you know I used to give her so much I remember, and I'd always give her a bit extra when I was earning well.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How did you feel about your employer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 W
hat the Post Office employer? Oh I thought they were very good - very - I thought they were very good. I'll tell you - I'll tell you one thing that - makes me say that, and that is - well I - I became a sorter on the thirteenth of February 1913, and I wen
t
 up to Mount Pleasant and I was only there about a couple of months when it was announced that we'd got a five shilling rise, it was - instead of three pound two and six a week it was three pound seven and six, on the maximum. Of course you didn't get tha
t on - for about fourteen or fifteen years.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How much did you start at?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 I started at - about a pound - a pound.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 As a sorter?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How did this go up, how frequently?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh it went up so much a year, yes, until - the time the war
 started - 1914 war started I think - somewhere about two pound ten. It had gone up that much.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you get any chance of overtime there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh yes. Overtime galore always in the Post Office. Made my fortune that way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How much do you reckon you were earning then, before the war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Before the war? Before the '14 war? Well I should say roughly about two pound ten Yes. That was pretty big wage. Yes, we used to - oh you could get overtime, yes, and we used to - well - now, I'd better not put thi
s on - well - we used to do - every Friday night there was a - we - I was on night work then and - we used to do twelve - twelve midnight 'til seven a.m., well about twenty to twelve 'til seven a.m. And on the Friday night we went in at eight o'clock, did
 
four hours overtime see. But - in those days you had to make out a docket to say you were on and - you'd put it straight in the box, you know, well - some of used to - buzz off about quarter to nine - come back again. And - with a wad of letters in your h
and you know. Yes, never got caught at that - fortunately.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How did you get on with the people you worked with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh the - the people. Now this - well, as a postman or - or as a sorter. Well, as a postman, oh very good, very good. Yes, I had - I'd 
already got a - a pal - you know I paled up with as a - as a messenger and we used to do a - a lot of cycling together and I was - taken well into their family and - the father there was a postman, so I knew him in the office and of course he'd - plenty o
f
 friends and - yes, got on very - very well there, in fact I used to - help 'em out with a bit of cricket and that. They had a good cricket team there. And one chap - was a racing cyclist. By gosh I never - never known a man to - cycle like he did. We wer
e
 coming down the road from Hoddesden once - to - to the Waltham Cross and - I had a cyclometer on and we - estimated we were doing about eighteen miles and hour. Well the roads weren't as good as they are now you know. But we were doing eighteen miles and
 
hour and - suddenly he said to us, he said, are you chaps going - just going to potter along like this? We said, well if you think this is pottering you can buzz off. And - he went right like a - and he'd think nothing of going to Brighton and back and th
en going to Southend and back, all in the same day, yes. Marvellous chap he was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 You stayed at the post office all your life after that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes. Yes. I went from - from postman - after that Chingford job I was transferred to Walthamstow where I real
ly - passed the exam to be a postman but I was only a postman a few months when I'd got through the exam and became a sorter. I was about eighteen and - well - I was about eighteen and nine months. And I stayed as a sorter right 'til I retired you know.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Which was when?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
11th of May 18 - 1954. But - now - oh well, you ask - well what I was going to say was, the curious thing was - that - as I say there was thirty vacancies when I went in for this exam for a sorter, out of - there were three thousan
d entries and - this thirty, we all went to Mount Pleasant and - we kept in a sort of a group all the way from eighteen right up to - some died during the war you know and others - various things happened to them but the majority - they were there when I 
r
etired, some retired just before me, some just after, but they were there and you still knew them as a boy like. It was one - one - on thing that possibly doesn't happen in any jobs, you knew them right from fourteen - from eighteen for forty-two years yo
u
 know them. And - they never seemed any different. Remember old Percy Tutt who I went on holiday with - in 1914 down to Hastings, when he retired he - he seemed - he was a dark chap, you know, the girls all used to fall for him and - piercing sort of eyes
 he - looked just the same to me as - he did when - in 1914. Yes. And we all kept very friendly together. There was one chap, he had four initials, A.E. - A.E.G.W. Wonder his name was, and we christened him Alphabetical Wonder.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Would you have preferred another type of occupation?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
No, I don't think I would, once I got into it - you know, I got so - embedded into it that - it suited me no end. But I - I will say that I was very - unsettled after the war, after the first world war, yes, very unsettl
ed then - well I'd had this offer to go to - join my brother in the Congo and I couldn't go because I was on the Z Reserve, the War Office wouldn't let me, I went up to the War Office and asked them. They wouldn't let me go because I was on the Reserve. I
f
 I hadn't had a job they would have done but as I had a job they wouldn't. And by the time - I was released from the Z Reserve I'd - got married and - my brother said, well no use - no place to bring a woman out so - that was it. But - that was the only t
ime. But once I'd settled down again after that - I think I enjoyed it all through my life really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you belong to any trade union or professional organisation?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 
Belonged to the trade union, the first one - who got us this five bob without a lot of - hoo-hah and bally-hood - when I first joined in 1913 was called the Fawcett Association. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Fawcett. Fawcett. I think it was named after - one of our Post Masters I think. You know, the general Post Master.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 This was the first time you joined a union?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
That was when I first joined, yes. Oh yes, you all - you all had - well, you didn't have to but - it was - understood and - and you also - all - all took out an insurance. Hundred pound insurance. That was - you know, that wasn't - you weren'
t bound to do it but, you know, it wasn't done to refuse to do it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Was that separate from the union?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh separate from the union, yes. Yes. Yes, the union didn't take up any - insurance like 'til many years later.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you take part in any of the union activities?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you feel that employers and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 workers}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  had the same interests or different?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Well I - I don't think }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 they}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  did in those days, I think the - think the workers felt that - without the bosses there would be no job. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 
And so it was up to them to - do their best and to sort of - sort of esprit de corps in it you know that - got most people to - to really take an interest in their job and try and do it properly. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 I often noticed with - when boys came in as telegraph boy
s you know they were rough and ready at first but after about six months they were different types of boy altogether. Going to classes and - and getting into the football - football - club and all that. They had two football clubs, two cricket clubs, rifl
e clubs, everything you can think of. Two rowing clubs, I belonged to one.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Did you feel that there were divisions of interest amongst the workers, you know, same people say there was a big division between trained craftsmen and labourers, did you feel that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Well, yes, there was really. You felt that - with the senior men when you go to - when I got to Mount Pleasant. The senior men - I remember looking at them 'cos most - most people got bald - more so in the Post Office than anywhere I think. The
y used to put it down to the - strong electric lights. And - when I looked around - good God, I - hope I'm not like them at their age. I was though. But - now what was I going to say - yes, I think - I think there was - they used to - you know, like to ta
ke the rise out of us and - and they had a certain amount of - way of doing it too because - they used to do what was called the important jobs and you did the - rough and ready jobs you know, like - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 tying}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  up - bags and sacks and all that sort of thing and 
- they could - they could tell you to do a certain thing and - they'd watch you sometimes if - if it - you know - was very busy, like you'd get on - what they call the Liverpool Road well there'd about - twenty or thirty bags all to be tied up and - put r
eady for porters to take away and all that, possibly it was a much bigger night than normal and - you'd be sweating like a - like a bull you know to get the job done but they'd just stand and watch. Wouldn't - wouldn't step in.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Would you say that full time work changed your general attitude to life in any way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
No, I don't think so. Although, I must say that I was - there were times when I was very annoyed at the hours that I had to do - not the - not the length of the hours but the time of day whe
n I had to work. For instance we had a - when you were first up at Mount Pleasant there, well first of all you went on the twelve 'til eight, you were in what they called the school. But that was about six weeks. But then you went on a - four thirty in th
e afternoon 'til midnight. Lovely that was. And - very often on a Saturday afternoon, when all the football crowds were coming out of the matches and struggling to get to the trains you'd be just }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 trying}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  to force your way through them to get to work. And Sat
urday was just the same, it was a six. No half days and - anytime. Well I used to get very annoyed at that you know because it - destroyed all social activity. That's why there was so much sports you see I think because you'd got all the mornings you see 
to - to do it. They've always been pretty good, the civil service. Got a lovely ground at - Chiswick.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you continue to live at home after you left school and started work, you did for a while didn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes. Yes. We lived at home - when did 
we - yes, 'til I was - oh, 'til I was about seventeen and a half, that's it. No, must have been 'til eighteen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Until you got the sorters job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes. Well, I didn't get the sorters job you see until - about eighteen and threequarters. At least I di
dn't start on it, 'cos I couldn't take the first exam - that was on May the tenth and I was eighteen May the eleventh and - although I applied they wouldn't let me take it. So I had to wait 'til the November one, six months later and it was then. Now in t
hat meantime we -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you continue to live at home after you left school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes. Yes, we - lived at home - with - me mother was at home then. And - running a flat in Leytonstone.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How long were you in Leytonstone, eventually you got digs in Islington?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Oh Leyton rather. In Islington, yes, that was later on. That was - oh, that wasn't 'til I was about - nineteen. Directly after we left that - that second - second home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Well we'll talk about Leyton first and then we'll talk about Islington afterwards?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did starting full time work change your relationship - with your parents at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh I don't think so, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Or with your brother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No. No, you got a lot of - I got a lot of satisfaction out of it, you know, earn
ing a bit and helping and - felt more independent in - and relaxed like.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How about Sundays at this time, did you go to church or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No. No, I didn't go to church at that time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you take any interest in politics at all?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you take any interest in politics before the first world war at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Before the first world war? Not really, no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How about when there was the first election after the war in 1918, did you vote then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 1918 - I'd be twenty-four then. Well I probably did but I - I - I really can't remember anything about it. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How did you spend your spare time when you were at Leyton?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Well - of course as a - as a telegraph boy like you were walking all day so - and I 
was - I was pretty keen on cycling then, even though - at that age and - we used to do some - runs on a weekend. As far as - very often as far as - Brighton and back. And places like that. Generally a group of about five of us used to go down.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Was this a cycling club?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
No, wasn't a club, just - individuals. No. My friend and I - who were - I'd known as a messenger, he - I generally cycled with him and - we joined a club once, the Mansfield at Plaistow and - we didn't like it, you know, you were to
o restricted. Where as we were able to make up our minds during the week - and towards the weekend, we'd go by the weather and what - which way the wind was and we'd make a journey - you see, I mean if it was a north wind we'd probably go out - up on the 
n
orth - Great North Road - outwards, knowing that we're going to get the wind coming back. And so it was easier. And - in the club - they - you know, used to make their arrangements sometimes beforehand and the consequence was you'd get a lovely day like t
his perhaps and - they'd only booked to - somewhere about ten or fifteen miles out and then they'd go into a caf\'e9
 and - you know, get all messing about, putting the music on and one thing and another. Well we didn't want that. Wanted a whole day out, fresh 
air was what we were after. And we'd make it a whole day. Well that was one - one way of - we also used to do a tidy bit of rowing up on - there was a place they called Hollow Pond at Leytonstone, up on - Whipps Cross, Leytonstone There was a big - they'd
 
evidently dig some sandpits there - ages ago, and - that - there was two big ponds there, one was for boating and you used to be able to get one of these little outriggers, you know, sliding seats. Used to go up and - have a go at that, on a - specially o
n
 a Sunday morning. Go round there for an hour, used to be about - about a shilling an hour I think or something like that. And - and we'd do a lot of walking too. You know, if we weren't rowing like that we'd go out and have a really good walk, perhaps te
n mile walk before dinner. It was the - well I won't say it was exactly the custom but - - you know there weren't a lot of other distractions.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How about evenings, did you go to pictures or theatre or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes, used to go to music 
hall regularly once a week. Oh yes. Well when we were at Leyton mostly the Stratford Empire. That was a music hall - music hall there. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 
Which you could get in very cheap, tuppence - fourpence - fourpence in the balcony - tuppence in the gallery, fourpence in the balcony, sixpence in the pit. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
And then there was a theatre, the Borough Theatre Stratford. I don't know if you know Stratford at all but - no. Well this was a real theatre and they used to put on some very good plays there. I remember seeing Sherlock Holmes, the Speckled }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 Band}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
 you know - and one or two like that, and some really good - artists used to be on there. Well then there was another theatre in Angel Lane, Stratford. And that was a - well I suppose you could call it a repertory theatre. They us
ed to have plays there that the - you know, the rather romantic type. Remember one we saw was about - it was called Angel Face and it was about a - a girl who eventually - strangled her grandmother. The funny part about those though, you used to get some 
f
un out of those you know because - oranges were very cheap and everybody - used to buy 'em if they went in a theatre like that, nuts weren't - they didn't used to buy nuts like they do now but - they'd buy oranges and - just during a very romantic passage
 or dramatic passage you'd hear somebody - hhhhhh - with an orange. But that was - there used to be - you know, we always went regularly to a - music halls and - from that is where I got my knowledge of some of these songs.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you go to the music hall with a group of friends, or was this a different group?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No, generally - just two of us, I palled up with two, I never - I never went in groups you know, any gangs or anything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 But these were the same friends you went cycling with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Same - same - yes, same one as I went cycling with. We'd go there, we'd make a - an arrangement and go there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Where did you meet these new friends, you didn't spend your childhood there did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 Well - this particular one was - I first met him when
 I became a telegraph boy He was one of them, he was about - he was about six months older than me and - we palled up nicely and I - used to go to his home and everything and - we were really great, great friends. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Unfortunately he got killed in the - first world war.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you have any girl friends at this stage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Not at that age, no, not at - in fact - well we had a - any amount of cousins, as I say, there was this family, my - my mother's brother, he was a schoolmaster, he had a family of six girl
s and one boy and the girls were - well really talented sort of girls you know and they were vivacious and that and we used to go there quite a lot and - in the -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 So you'd have your female company?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes, have plenty of female company yes. Nothin
g - nothing - nothing very serious I'm afraid. But I used to get - I used to have some - serious conversation with the father - their father. He was - he wouldn't have anybody else in his room, when he came home of an evening he'd had his tea and then he'
d go into his own room - and he - nobody dared go in there, but - he used to ask me to go in and - we used to have a good old chat about this, that and the other.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 You say the girls were talented, was this musically?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh, musically and - they used to do, you know, this - crochet work and embroidery and - do almost anything in the art - art class.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What would you do when you went round there, would this be a musical evening?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes, generally talking and you can just imagine what it was like with six girls. Their brother used to clear - couldn't stand them.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you used to take your friends round there with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 No. Generally - generally just my brother. Well my brother, my brother Tom, yes. Generally just us would go round there and
 - sometimes my elder brother'd come.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you take any of your cycling friends home at this time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Oh yes, I took - just this one, 'cos - he was really the only one, except for these sometimes on the weekend with - about five boys. But - I didn't
 used to take the rest of them you know. That was very interesting there was one boy who - he really hadn't got the stamina you know for - I mean - from Leyton down to Brighton for instance was about - I suppose about seventy mile by the time you get to -
 
through to Croydon and that way. Seventy miles each way, that's a hundred and forty, and we used to do a bit of rowing when we were down there, and - he hadn't - really hadn't got the stamina, he used to tell him you ought to pack it in but - he kept on c
oming. And he died - he died from - well I - just worn out I think. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Cycling was quite a common thing then was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh - it was the thing really I mean, yes, it was - it was really the only means of transport apart - the buses only went a shor
t way you see. I mean a bus - the buses coming this way, well they wouldn't have gone more than about eight or nine miles. And - there - the next thing to that was horse brakes. Well they were only for - special occasions, taking an outing of - schoolchil
d
ren, that sort of thing. And - the cycle was the fastest and best thing on the road really. And you could - well I say - even though the roads weren't nearly as good as they are now, they weren't bad mind you, but they were - made up of stones and tar as 
a
 rule and when they got a bit loose - they could be a bit dangerous. And you - a lot of dust on them too. Yes, dust used to come up in clouds. I remember going to Southend once and - I wanted to look nice when I got there, I was meeting somebody there, an
d I put on a blue serge suit and when I got there it was white.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did you have to be home by a certain time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Oh yes. Yes, my mother was - very particular about being home by - ten o'clock at the latest. And so was my - my friend, his - he was - as
 I say, six months older than me. He'd got several brothers and sisters, but - they said that he should be in by ten o'clock and he was always there and he'd be - he'd be - you know, he'd make sure that he did get there whatever we were doing. We were on 
a long run - out - he'd make sure that he got back, you know, before ten.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Did your mother expect to know where you were going when you left home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes - well she'd ask - whether we were going to be out all day you know, and - wouldn't be home to d
inner and - all that. And we very often were - well, weekends in the summer we were nearly always away - all day Sunday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 After a while you got transferred to work in London at Mount Pleasant?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How old were you then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh I was about eighteen and a - eighteen and a half - eighteen and threequarters to tell you the truth.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 And you found lodgings in Islington?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes. What happened really there was that - now I got this job at - I think it was Leytonstone in a - in a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 children\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  home it was, I said it was an old peoples before, but it was a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 
children\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
 home. And - got that and - well she gave up the flat she said, see, well I'm not at home - for - for a time she kept it on and then she decided that it was better to give it up. So we
 went first of all to my brother George's place at Poplar and lived with him. And then he - well after a time he moved to a different place and - there wasn't really room then for - Tom and I. And so - this lady up at Islington found us this place, we wen
t into - into lodgings there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 You were both together were you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Both together, yes. At first, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How about your leisure time there, did the pattern change very much?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 Well, it did yes, to any certain extent, for one thing - I was on -
 I went on night work then and I was on twelve - well, about twenty to twelve midnight and - 'til seven o'clock in the morning and - 'course I used to go home, have me - have me breakfast, the old couple, the others had gone to work as a rule by that - no
, sometimes they were there. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Anyrate, we had - I had me breakfast and then I used to get to - bed about - eight to half past and I used to fall straight off to sleep and - and get up about four o'clock. Well then I had - either - go out on a cycle run on me
 own - or - I knew one or two girls there and - well, actually I did start - I wouldn't say courting a girl but there's a girl - she was the daughter of an old couple who kept a dairy in Holloway, and - started going out with her and we used to go out pra
c
tically every evening, and stroll over - Hampstead Heath. It was very close you know, all round there, yes. Yes, we used to go over there and - I always remember she used to send me letters - with envelopes about that size. Yes. They used to get tied up w
ith other letters sometimes you know, they were so small. But I - you know, there was a possibility that this might become - permanent, but - I think I - came to the - point that I - didn't particularly want to get married at that time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 How about music halls and cinemas, you still kept on with those?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Oh - still kept those up yes, and we used to go to the - Islington - there was the Islington Empire and then there was the Grand, what they called the Grand theater at Islington, where - you know - wh
ere they had plays and - that sort of thing. And then of course there were several music halls - within easy reach - of there, like the Oxford, the Oxford in Oxford Street. And - the Paragon, I remember that - but the Oxford was a particularly good one. A
n
d just about that time too the Palladium had just been built and was opening, and we used to - we - ah, now with a - a relation of mine, a cousin who lived in Bow - we used to arrange it and go there to the Palladium, we used to book on a Tuesday and - we
'd get in the circle at the Palladium on a Saturday night for one and threepence. Yes, getting a bit together.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 On your wage as a soldier and a single man you were quite a wealthy young man?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Well - yes. Oh yes, wasn't hard up and that. You - you l
ooked - you looked wealthy you know what I mean, they all used to dress well and they all - what you might call reasonably educated and that. I know when we went on our holidays, you know, used to have to take our holidays early and - I had mine - two }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 years}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
 before the fourteen war, well, including the '14 war, in March. And - when we went down there, when we were down at Hastings, all the girls down there - thought we were students. 'Cos we were all you know, pretty well dressed and - sort of confident of o
urselves like and that and - that's what they used to think we were at first.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Could you tell me about hour holidays at this period, did you usually used to go away?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh yes. Yes. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 
The first time I was - I don't think I ever had a holiday except when I was in a - that first home, you know, to go to the seaside - I used to go there occasionally, 'cos - it was very, very cheap. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 But - I think the first real holiday I had was in 1913, my first year as a sorter and - I went with this my pal of mine who 
I used to cycle with - he had a lot of relations in Peterborough. So we cycled up there, and had a week - a fortnight up there, in - during which we cycled all over the place, you know, Lincoln and places like that. And - had a really good time. Thoroughl
y
 enjoyed it. Well then the following year, 1914 - three of us decided to go to Hastings, we fixed up at a place - a little pub called the Dripping Spring - in Bohemia, Hastings - and - we went there and - I must tell you the - it cost us sixteen shillings
 
a week full board, sixteen bob a week. It was lovely, a great place it was. The lady - lady, a big buxom woman you know, liked young chaps I think, you know, was amused with their talk and that and - she really made a fuss of us. Her husband was a very sm
a
ll man and he was - you know, the back - the backmarker. But - we had a wonderful time there, as I say, it was sixteen bob a week and then about - well there was - us three went there, but there was ten others in the town all from Mount Pleasant, all at d
i
fferent places. And - we used to - used to gather during the day, and - you know, go and have a drink and - rowing and all that sort of thing and - well about twice a week this - this lady at the pub, she used to say, fetch some of your - fetch your boys 
up to tea. So - we'd say, what, all ten of 'em? Yes, that's all right, bring the ten up, she says, bring 'em up to tea tonight and - there's - and she was born locally at a village called S}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 e}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 ttlestone and I'll get some - some girls from there and -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12210835  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 see}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  we us
ed to have these girls in you know, these ten, there were thirteen of us and about - dozen girls. Had 'em all round the table there, a jolly good tea and then we used to get up in the room upstairs and - one of 'em get on a - one of our chaps'd get on the
 
piano and - used to have - girls sing a song and - they had a flat - lead roof coming out in front - you know bay window was back here, this came out in a sort of pyramid and - we'd get out - get out there dancing you know. Oh a great time that was. And w
e had - in a - in a way almost a better one still in 1919.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What happened then then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Well we'd come out - we'd come out the Army then and - my old pal he'd got killed and - so he - he was gone, but - I palled up with another chap, another Charlie by the way and - well, he said, we'll go to this same pub, the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 D}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
ripping Spring. Any rate we - we had a preliminary run down there and we found that - the old - the lady who we were with - the people who were with before had gone and there were some new peo
ple there and they didn't do accommodation. But they said, the lady next door will do it. Young - well the young woman, well - about thirty odd I think she was, her husband was a baker on night work and - any rate we went and saw her and she - said, yes, 
I
'll put you up all right, and - so we went there, well it - as I say, he was on night work and she was also an instructress at the skating rink. They had a skating rink on the end of - you know, roller skating - on the end of the pier. And - so we used to
 
go and do a lot of roller skating there and - we did pretty well there. I forget what we paid but it wasn't much more than we paid before. And - we had a jolly good time. Then on a Friday night, she and three other - instructresses used to go down to the 
r
ink - to help those, you know, a lot of them, you know, finished their weeks work and used to get a crowd there and help the beginners and that you see. So - we used to - go there as well and have a bit of fun, we were getting pretty good you know, got to
 
the pint where we could do a dance like. And - but afterwards, us - three - two rather and the - four - instructresses used to go to a local and - they were lad - they were laddoes you see. They used to - I remember - the one that we used to live with, sh
e - she used to say to - give - so and so - plenty of Port!
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Was this anticipating the permissive society?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
It was, yes. And it was there too. I was going to say for the first time in my life I think I had to refuse something - it was there for th
e asking more or less. But the next day my - I was courting then and my girl came down and - to spend the weekend see. I thought to myself, oh no, I'd better keep out of it because - you know, if I do probably some - remark'll be made you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What about Bank Holidays at this time, what would you usually do on Bank Holidays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh Bank Holiday? Oh - well - generally - well probably go to }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 Hampstead}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835  Heath and - you know, partake in the fair and festivities there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 You've got down about a cycling weekend?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 About how much it cost you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh yes, down to Chesham in Bucks, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Can you tell me about that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes. Well it started off that - I - I - you know, this - this pal of mine as I say just before - this was before the
 war - this pal of mine at - Leyton, as I was living at Islington we didn't meet quite so much then and sometimes, you know, rather than - try and make some arrangement beforehand I just took the bull by the horns and went on a ride myself and - I did qui
t
e a number of rides like that. Well on one occasion - I looked up the map and I thought where shall I go, and - I - oh Chesham in Bucks, about thirty miles. So - I started off and I got down - I got as far - oh - just the other side of Rickmansworth and t
h
ere was a sort of - one or two turnings and a - a signboard wasn't very clear, and the same time as I was looking a in, place called Cheynes it was - time - same time as I was looking at it this chap-another chap was looking up and - we got talking, I sai
d
, you know, signboard's not clear or something of that sort and then we both found we were both going - to Chesham, so he said, oh we'll ride along together then. Well when we got down there he said, well I know a nice little pub, go - where we can get a 
g
ood tea. If you like you can come along. So we went to this place, it was called the - the Black Horse. And - nice trout stream right in front of it, yes. And - we went in there well we had a jolly good tea, and - then he said - have you got to go back to
n
ight? So I said, well, I said, I'm in lodgings, they'll wonder where I am I suppose but it's not all that important. So - I stopped for the night and - well they - it - then he said, well I know a girl in the town, he says, and I'll get her to bring a fri
e
nd along and - and we'll have a - a lounge round with them. And so that's what we did and - then from that time we went every weekend. But - what - what I want to tell you was all this cost us was five shillings. We used to get down there, we left about t
w
o o'clock on a Saturday, 'cos I'd, you know, been to work, had to have some sleep in the morning, have some dinner. Left there at two o'clock We'd get there for tea. Have a really good tea, everything was put on the sideboard you know, ham and - large che
e
se and all that sort of thing, and - have that tea when you came in for supper it was the same thing again - ham and cheese was there and always a - a big fruit pie. Then the Monday morning - on the Sunday morning, break - it was bacon or whatever you wan
t
ed. And dinnertime was always chicken or duck and they used to put the whole bird on the sideboard and cut it yourself and - 'cos they used to breed Aylesbury ducks and - oh it was absolutely marvelous, and - the whole cost of that was five shillings. We 
u
sed to buy one bottle of beer - each, which used to cost threepence. We didn't really want it, but - had to make some contribution to the pub. 'Cos we weren't drinking on the Saturday night, we hardly ever thought about drinking you know really, 'cos we w
ere both keen on cycling}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 .}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12210835  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Drinking wasn't in our makeup really then.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 You used to keep fit more?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Oh yes. Yes. Yes, I mean, I - what with the cycling and I used to do a lot of walking as well, did a bit of rowing and - used to keep fine and fit really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Your joined the Territorials at some time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Ah - seventeen, yes, 1911. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 And you used to go on annual camps?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes, we used to go on annual camp, the first one we did was 1911. That was at - Lydd in Kent for one week and then th
e second week it was - they had a - a big Divisional camp at - That ford in Norfolk. And we went up there. Oh Lord Ivy's estate you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Were these in addition to your annual holidays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh yes. Yes, that - that was the holiday.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 You'd have two weeks holiday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Oh - I used to get three weeks and a half. But if you were in the Terriers you got - you were allowed an extra week. See one week of the two was free, you needn't - but the other week, you had to take it off your holiday. Off your 
normal holiday. Well I really got a fortnight and - two weeks - two weeks and a half and two weeks and a half as well.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 So you had about five weeks holiday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Yes. One reason why I joined - well, I wanted to get mixed up with horses you know but - 
of course the camp as well was a big attraction.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 What do you mean get mixed up with horses?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Well - I wanted to ride horses you see and - there was no other way I could do it except joining the - it was the Field Artillery I joined you see and - 
they had thirty horses there, there was always - riding instruction and all that you know. Used to have it every week, yes, you went once or twice a week and - now and again they'd have a weekend going to one of - practically all the officers were farmers
 you know and - we'd go to one their farms and have a - sort of - bivouac out and all that sort of thing, it was very nice.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 So you had quite a full life?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Oh a full life there, yes. Yes, that's - that's what - what I always think if you only look 
for these things you - they are there for you to take. I mean those days you could - I mean you hadn't got radio and television and that sort of thing but - you had got the bike - and you could - something like the Terriers. I nearly crashed and - got int
o
 the Infantry instead but - I went round to the - the Artillery place and - in Stratford - which was at Stratford and - while I was standing there talking there was a young chap next to me and - when I said I wanted to join, you know, just or ride horses,
 
oh, he said, you have to buy your own horse you see. And keep it. Coo, dear, I said, I can't do that. I was keen on having - made a the start like I was keen on joining something and - I walked round to the Sixth Essex in - West Ham, Port Lane, West Ham. 
T
he Sixth Essex Infantry and - while I was there - waiting to see somebody and a - another - I spoke to another chap there and he said, no, he said, they're having you on, he says, go back and - if you want to be in it. So I went back and I enrolled the sa
me day.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Can you tell us about these camps?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Oh yes, they were - very good, well the first one, as I say, was at Lydd in Kent and - we went down there, the object was to - you know, to fire the guns and - race about on the - well, practice, you kno
w, getting into action quickly, everything was done at the gallop then. Six horse team, you know, like you see them on the - the Kings troop. And you go down there, we set up - oh first of all - to get down there, they only had these thirty horses at the 
-
 at the depot at Stratford. Well - they'd go and commandeer other horses - for - of course - before the war - at these camps they could very often get them with good will from the part of the wonders because - at that time there was any amount of - you kn
o
w, the far famed cake company used to have a lot of - lot of - little horse vans, you know, used to - you know, they used to take a great interest in the old horses you know - running about like this, feet up - well, they'd have spares and - they'd loan o
u
t some of these you see and then if they wanted some bigger horses they'd get them from the corporation or somewhere like that. But - at wartime of course they used - just used to go and take them. Well that was the first thing, they had to get those and 
t
hen - we'd - entrain them and - go down to the - the camp. And - when they were entrained they used to - different to - what they were like in the - on the Continent. When they were entrained they went - say that was the length of - say this was the lengt
h
 of the carriage, they'd go in one there, one, one, until there was eight. Eight there like that. Yes well, as I say these horses used to go in eight - eight to the carriage, across it to the - you know, you got the door there and the door the other side.
 
Well the last one had to go in and the chap who took that in he had to go in with it, and - tie it up, tie the head rope up on the opposite side, then he had to climb over the top of it and come out and - drop down onto the - the - below the carriage. And
 
of course the carriages generally were - I don't know if you've ever stepped - tried to step into a carriage, yes, I used to have to do a lot of that at the Post Office later on, and - of course he'd have to drop down off of that and sometimes the horse'd
 
decide to have a last kick. But - anyway it went off all right. But that was it - and then - you know, you go down and when we got down there well the whole camp would be set up, a bell tents, marquees, this that and the other and the guns laid out, horse
s
 on a horse line, all tied up with head ropes. Were never put under cover as a rule and - and that is - you're all set. Well then the General runs you up at - half past five in the morning, six o'clock was - stables, mucking out the horses and all that. T
h
ere were two lots of people, there was the what they call the drivers and the gunners. But the drivers had to help with the mucking out in the morning of the stables, and - well then - after breakfast which was jolly good, they used to dish out a really g
o
od breakfast you know, eggs and bacon and - a mess of - these tinned tomatoes. We used to love them you know. These tinned tomatoes and - and out of that - that and getting plenty of bread. Well when after breakfast there'd be a general cleaning up and th
e
n a parade about nine o'clock and then you go off and - practice, either gun laying - what they call gun laying in those days. You put the gun - you - you generally, on - see, the rating founders, we were rating founders, they generally had to be out of s
i
ght if you're with me so that in the - this side of a ridge of some sort. Therefore you can't see your target. So you pick up, to get the range, you've got somebody who an observation post and you pick up your target from his directions but you have to ha
ve an aiming point at the back. I always remember as I reckoned it used to be the church steeple you know, we often used to - we often used to say I wouldn't half like to turn it round and have a pot shot at that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10625749 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Was there something of a holiday air about it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12600992 CW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 
Oh there was a holiday air, yes, you were, you know, walking about and - and of course there you were near the sea, although - four miles. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid201694\charrsid12210835 It's a marvellous place that Lydd you know, or was. }
{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10690491\charrsid12210835 Four miles of shingle there. Just - just near Dun
geness see. And - the fishermen there, they used to leave boards with a strap over them, flat board about eighteen inch - eighteen inches long and just a strap across like that and you - pushed your foot into it and nearly shuffled over instead of - walki
n
g in, it was easier. But we - in the afternoon, if you weren't on any special work, we very often went down and - had a swim. Shuffled this four and half mile - or fours miles down there. But the - there was a - a regular battery down there of artillery a
n
d they used - they had targets just in front of the sea like, very near the sea, and that four miles gave them a good target you see. And they used to do a lot of - firing there then we used to fire as well and - they used to have a sort of competition. O
h we used to look at it as a holiday, oh yes. Yes. Used to come back feeling jolly fine and - brown and - in fact the first one, 1911, it was so hot that - a lot of the chaps got - swollen arms you know, from the heat.
\par }}