{\rtf1\adeflang1025\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\adeff0\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang2057\deflangfe2057{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}{\f38\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f39\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f41\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f42\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f43\fbidi \froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}
{\f44\fbidi \froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f45\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f46\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f48\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}
{\f49\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f51\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f52\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f53\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f54\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}
{\f55\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f56\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden 
Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs20 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{
\s15\qj \li0\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext15 Body Text;}}
{\*\latentstyles\lsdstimax156\lsdlockeddef0}{\*\revtbl {Unknown;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid1334943\rsid2979937\rsid4399113\rsid4617723\rsid5112414\rsid6301576\rsid6840067\rsid8407077\rsid9911385\rsid10768088\rsid12086796\rsid12987527\rsid13853716\rsid14039999\rsid14505167
\rsid14878678\rsid15204605\rsid15820647\rsid15994928\rsid16006220\rsid16141294\rsid16337627}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 11.0.0000;}{\info{\title  Int 198}{\author PRASAD3}{\operator lhorto}{\creatim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min8}
{\revtim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min8}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords48241}{\nofchars274977}{\nofcharsws322573}{\vern24613}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 http://schemas.microsoft.com/office/word/2003/wordml}}
\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1800\margr1800\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0\ltrsect 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\donotembedsysfont0\donotembedlingdata0\grfdocevents0\validatexml1\showplaceholdtext0\ignoremixedcontent0\saveinvalidxml0\showxmlerrors1\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace180
\dgvspace180\dghorigin1800\dgvorigin1440\dghshow1\dgvshow1\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\splytwnine\ftnlytwnine\htmautsp\nolnhtadjtbl\useltbaln\alntblind\lytcalctblwd\lyttblrtgr\lnbrkrule\nojkernpunct\rsidroot4617723 \fet0
{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}\ilfomacatclnup0\ltrpar \sectd \ltrsect\linex0\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ltrpar
\ql \fi-461\li461\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid8407077 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\ul\insrsid8407077\charrsid16072257 Information about interviewee}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid8407077 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid8407077\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\ql \fi-461\li461\ri0\widctlpar\tx2057\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid8407077 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8407077\charrsid16072257 Date of birth}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid8407077    \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8407077\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8407077  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid15820647 1898}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid8407077\charrsid16072257 
\par Gender}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8407077           \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8407077\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8407077  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid15820647 F}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8407077 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8407077\charrsid16072257 Marital status}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8407077 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8407077\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8407077  
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid15820647 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8407077\charrsid16544153 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8407077\charrsid16072257 Occupation}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8407077 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8407077\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8407077  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid15820647 Swiss embroidery mender}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8407077\charrsid16072257 
\par Geographic region}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8407077 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8407077\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8407077  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid15820647 Norttingham}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8407077\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\qj \fi-461\li461\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid8407077 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Could you tell me where you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13853716\charrsid14039999 It was - they used to call it 
- the Bottoms - it was Brook Street, a lot of little back to back houses and - it came to the bottom of Heathcote Street when you came out there.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How many years did you live in the house where you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 I'd be a very little child, we moved quite a few times as the family grew bigger you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Can you remember how many times you moved and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13853716\charrsid14039999 why}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  you moved, was it every time because the family was getting bigger?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 We wanted - yes, there were some very tiny ones and - by the time - mother
 had thirteen children so you can imagine she had to - get a bit bigger house. I can remember - living - on Gordon Road. I went to school from there. And I can also remember - I think even before Gordon Road it was - Silv}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid13853716\charrsid14039999 erwood}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  Place, Bellagate, which come
s off the lace market, you see, I lived there quite a long while, I should think I should be getting on for eight or nine when we moved from there. I went to St Mary's church school there. And - we moved again and this time we went to Gordon Road because 
there was another bedroom, my brothers were growing up you see. And then we moved to - from there to Union Terrace. And - then we moved across from Union Terrace, their backs were together but - backs in }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid13853716\charrsid14039999 Heatherly}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  Street this side, they had another bedroom so we had to move again. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13853716\charrsid14039999 
And - mother was at fourteen - four Heatherly Street and I was ten when - just over ten I should think I'd be when I went to Bath Street school first and then I got a scholarship and went to Huntingdon Street school, which was a pa
ying school in those days you know, and actually I was married from mother's and I lived in her two rooms - over four years before I got a house, and then that was further up the street. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
It was far too big for me but I was so pleased to get a house. And then I moved to Sherwood.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Which house would you have lived in the longest as a child do you think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
I can remember the longest - I was quite a big girl when I went to Bath Street school I can - I'm taking it more from my own age you see, don't know exactly the years.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Which one were you in the longest?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well it lays between Gordon Road and Union Terrace and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13853716\charrsid14039999 Headley}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  Street. Union Terrace and Headley Street were sort of one street, back to back like. It lays within those and I was just about 
ten when I first went there and I was married from there, see. That's the longest I can remember.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How many brothers and sisters did you have and their birth order and spacing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh - now you've set me a problem. I wish I'd got father's Bible here
. I did try to ask - my daughter came last week and - thought I had - did I mention to you this great big wonderful Bible from the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13853716\charrsid14039999 Ragged}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  School. It was calf bound and gold lettering on, from when he was a boy attending this school. And - ready - put all our }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13853716\charrsid14039999 births}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  in the Bible, as soon as the new baby was born the - the date - I can - I can }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13853716\charrsid14039999 only}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  judge by - my own age from the others.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Where did you come in the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13853716\charrsid14039999 Well actually I'm the seventh girl. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
And I have - up and down - yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What is your Christian name?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Annie. Mother didn't believe in fancy names, you got one name. We - I had - the eldest one, sister was Elizabeth. These were married, these first three before I can remember anything you see. Jemima, the next one, was appr
oximately two - sometimes three years between them. Julia. Alice. And she had a girl, Harriet, that died. So the next one happened to be a boy and she called him Albert. Then the next one she had was a girls she got Harriet because of - the - the poor Har
riet had died.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 This happened a lot didn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Very much so.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Do you think people minded being called after somebody who had died?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh no, they loved it. And we were all somehow or other - all we sisters, we sort of thought a special lot 
of Harriet. I don't know why - mind she was a lovely girl, but we did. I used to think she was wonderful. You see, she was so much older than I and she - be - I was the one that was in - little toddler, she wanted something, go on you go. And she - but sh
e
 was very kind to me when I was ill. She'd take me to bed and sing me to sleep and I've never forgotten it. And she - she - you know, she was more kind to the others was too grown up and she would tag me about and I - I said to her, did you want to go by 
yourself Harriet? No, she said, you're quiet so I don't mind. I loved her. I - I loved them all but that one I think in particular.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You never felt that she felt she was replacing somebody else?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No. Mother made her take me you see, I was the one 
that was - she'd two babies after that and - she couldn't put the babies on to Harriet as well, somebody else had to have the baby.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You were after Harriet then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No, Grace. And then me. Annie. And then my brother John. And then I had another litt
le sister Ruth. These two both died in infancy but I can remember then quite well. And then Arthur. He was the last one that I can remember but - mother's told me since, she used to often tell me bits, that she'd miscarried twins or something all along th
is line which made that she'd had actually thirteen children you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How did the boys come out of this, you were a very feminine family weren't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh I was sorry for my older brother. Because mother and dad and all the girls treated him as a g
irl. Yes. Used to make him wash up. He was terrified of dad, he wasn't cruel to him, but - you get that dish cloth and you wipe up while the girls'll wash. And he used to look like this. But he was very kind to me. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid13853716\charrsid14039999 He'd give me rides on his shoulders and in this Silverwood place where we lived - you won't know about the burials, there were three distinct burial grounds, and our yard came to the end of one. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 There was a brick wall and railings. And I'd say, go on Albert, just be my horse, just up and down. He
'd ride me up on his shoulders and he'd let me hang on to the railings and look right over Nottingham. I thought he was wonderful. And - and then once he got me up there and he says, oh look, he says, there's a fire. He could see it over Cartergate way - 
q
uite a long way. I said, oh yes. He says, if you promise not to tell your dad I'll take you. It was evening time. And he did - took me on his shoulders, he galloped along, he let me - pretend to - whip him and - I thought he was wonderful. And - it was De
a
con Street factory on Congleton Road, it was absolutely gutted. And of course Albert was so interested in it all, he'd no idea of the time and of course I was too young to know. And I'll always remember dad was a little man. I said, Albert how's it going 
o
n? And dad patted him on the shoulder - it's one o'clock in the morning. What do you mean he said, by keeping this child out like this? There was crowds of people there though, of course Albert was one of the crowd. I've never forgotten that. And he - I'l
l
 give you a whipping I get you home my lad. He says this poor child's falling asleep. I said, I'm not dad. I said, I like to see it. You be quiet. Because we were the young ones, weren't supposed to be heard in that little crowd. And of course the - he wa
s - he was only like dad, dad liked to go an see a fire. He did. But - it was so wonderful to me, the experience, I said, never been up as a late as that in my life have I? He said, no dear you haven't and you'll not be again, he says, he said to me.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You say there were }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13853716\charrsid14039999 roughly}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  two or three years between you all?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
There was - yes. We were - we were quite contented family. We had very little. 'Cos father never earned any money really. Not a - however they lived I don't know. It was mother's churning
 and - what bit he could - we didn't go without food and - she was such a wonderful needlewoman. She could make any old thing look nice you know. Oh she was wonderful. I wished I could have done what she did but - of course I wasn't clever enough.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Can you remember how old your father was when you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
When I was born? No, I don't but I do - I've heard me eldest sister saying, from time to time, mother was only seventeen when she got married, and he was eighteen. And dad was only a year olde
r than her. But I don't know - the - the - I used to know the - the month they were born in but I've forgotten it. And it's - it's in the old Bible but of course I haven't got it. Joyce has taken it to Boots to be repaired for me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Do you know why they married so young, it was very young to marry for those days wasn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13853716\charrsid14039999 Yes, very, very - yes, it was very young. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
They lived near each other, dad lived at the back of Batlock on Coltham Street, one of the streets that ran off there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Do you know where your father came from, where he was born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well - Nottingham people born and bred all of them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 When he was married what was his occupation?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well - his - in those days the - the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13853716\charrsid14039999 hand frames}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  were doing the hosiery, the - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13853716\charrsid14039999 power frames}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  ha
dn't been invested in those days and in these little tine back to back houses there were two bedrooms one above the other, then what we called the shop with windows all the way along - yes - and you - they're all pulled down now but they're out - there's 
quite a lot left out in the countryside, Keyworth and all round there where they did a lot of this work, and - they used to hire the frames from - Nine or }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13853716\charrsid14039999 Morley\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  and several more hosiery places, and all the boys would walk up - the father sort of was the 
foreman and he taught them all to do this, but it was shockingly paid. They made this hosiery by hand on these - it was a sort of knitting machine really, made ever such a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13853716\charrsid14039999  funny}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  noise and - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13853716\charrsid14039999 grandad}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 lived to be quite old and - but his other brothers - struck against it. They were - grand}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13853716\charrsid14039999 d}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
ad was a very - a martinet, you know what I mean and - dad was the only one who'd put up with it, so he used to say, you'll have to take over the shop when I go. But - unfortunately, when he died grandma said she'd had quite
 enough of the shop and she sent the frames back so me dad had nothing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What would he be then then?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Well I - I - I could read and write and I'd gone to school so I should be approximately - perhaps ten or twelve - more like twelve I think.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 So what happened then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
So - anyway we were talking it over and I said, it was unkind of gran to do that wasn't it dad? You haven't nothing have you? He said, no. I said, well - you used to take the work into Hine Ormeleys for grandfather, should I d
raft you a letter out and you copy it and ask them -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 So you did the writing for him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Yes. In this time, 'cos he couldn't write. That's when I began to teach him to write you see. So he said - won't be any good. Oh, I said, don't be downhearted, 
it may be. I said, if they only gave you just one frame for yourself you'd be something. So he took a lot of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13853716\charrsid14039999 persuading}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
, he wasn't a man who could - you know, force himself. So mother says, well it's no - no harm in giving a - try, she could write.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You were what age then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 About twelve I should think.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You were taking the initiative in the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Well I wouldn't say initiative, I was thinking for dad because he was so unhappy and I tried to think of away because I thought it was unkind 
of gran to have - taken his livelihood away from him. We used to talk it over with me eldest sister, the one next to me, Grace. She used to say, go on, I dare you to do it. I said, well I can't - I'm not going to do anything wrong, Grace, just ask this ma
n
 if he could give dad a frame just to bring a - for himself. So she says, does he know his name? I said, yes, he does. Can't remember it now but anyway - and I wrote this letter for him and I - guided his hand to sign his name at the bottom. I said, now y
o
u take it dad, and don't give it to anybody, this was the man who gave the work out sort of. And he came back and he said - I was - oh - you know, so excited. Well what did they say to you? And mother says, you be quiet. I said - well I want to know. He's
 
going to give it his - he tried to think how to say it - he thought - I think it was, careful consideration, what does it mean, he says. 'Cos he'd had no education whatsoever, except these few hours at the Ragged School on a Sunday afternoon, so of course
 
- wasn't many days and this letter came and it was printed and I taught him how to read print first. And it says, will you please call at there and we will arrange for a frame. Have you room at hour home for it? - And all this. And it was fixed up in no t
i
me. And we got a bedroom, we never used it, no furniture in it, it was a cellar kitchen house, have you ever seen one of them? Well - your living room - opened onto the back yard. And then there was a sort of pantry place underneath the front room, went u
p
 the first stairs to the front room and then you was an a garden, you see, but there was a door to go up it. But - it was - over - it was sort of along with the first bedroom and the kitchen was sort of underneath, that's why they called them cellar kitch
ens.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Could you get down to the kitchen from the outside as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Yes. Yes. With a little backyard. That was for the - the back entrance. And we had a - fair size living room and scullery. And then this big pantry we used to call it, with stone s
labs all round. And this - all that kind of thing. But - this front room was empty so - we scrubbed it out, we worked so hard and we got it really nice. Bare boards with nothing on. And of course we were all fascinated when it came but we didn't like it w
hen we heard the noise it made.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13853716\charrsid14039999 Was it very, very noisy?}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Well it - he - it wasn't - it went sssssh. That was when he was running the thread along and then it was worked by a sort of - with his feet underneath to move the thing. It went t-pop-pop-
pop-pop, and we used to be - playing around but it did - it wasn't - mind you didn't have enough work to - keep it long, but - he kept that up until - they - these - all these old people who worked for them all these years, they used to give them little p
e
nsion. My grandad had five shilling - five shillings I think it was, yes, and grandmother when grandad died, they gave it to her. And - well - when - they had - dad hadn't been the having the frame at home ever so long when he came home very disheartened,
 
he said, they can't find me any more work. It was such expensive stuff to do by hand. It was like hand knitting you see. And they only did bit broads and ladies and that kind of thing. I mean now they'd got these things that went by steam and they could d
o
 hundreds of dozens. And they'd got this big factory on Newark Street, still there today, and - they said that they'd have to fetch the machines back, they were - this machine that dad had, it - they couldn't give him any more work. So that - so I said, w
ell did you not ask if they could find you a little job in the factory?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You again?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Me. Because I - I knew how worried mum'd be you see. So he said, well if it comes to that I could. He said, well I've got to go on Friday to fetch what bit was due
 to him. He said, and I'll - I said, don't go and ask for nothing - other than you ask that man who let you have the machine dad. He came back beaming. I said, well what happened? He said, yes. Oh, we had quite a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid13853716\charrsid14039999 jubilation}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 . They said all they could find him was a sweeping up job at the factory. But it was more money than he'd ever earned in his life.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Sweeping up compared with the skilled work he was doing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Than he was doing on that hand frame, that's absolute true. And again they used to have to
 do winding the yarn and it was just like a - an old fashioned spindle thing, but it had to be oiled and they had something to hold in their hands and it was only neatsfoot oil they could put on this sort of material, I don't know what it was, }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13853716\charrsid14039999 merino}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  and all - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13853716\charrsid14039999 botany}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
, all those kinds, and they said, you could do some winding in your spare time. And - any little odd job that came along. And he said - hours were from six in the morning 'til six at night and it was thirty shillings a week. I thought he would n
ever get over it. He said, fancy it, he said, thirty bob a week. He'd been getting about ten shillings on this for years. And he - but it's quite true. Yes, absolutely. And it really gave him new life. Of course, when it - when - after he was - what was i
t
 - I - they used to have to be seventy-four they got an old age pension then - in those days, I've forgotten his age when he got that. It was seventy wasn't it. And he - he - I've heard him telling me mum you see. When I'm - shan't be long before I'm seve
nty I'm - he said, I'll get me old age pension and - Morley's will give me a pension, they always do, and - he said, we shall be all right. He was so - elated you know. Then of course we got the letter to say how }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid13853716\charrsid14039999 Morley\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  were so very sorry - they'd brought
 in this - where men paid so much towards a pension if they'd worked at a factory and dad just fell flat before. And of course he'd never paid any-thing towards it. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13853716\charrsid14039999 
They said, we're very, very sorry but we've had to discontinue it. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 And he was the first man
 that - didn't get it. Of course we - Grace and Harriet and I and - we knew mum had been crying, she wouldn't like us to see her but Harriet says, well couldn't we do something for them. She went out to work, Julia went out to work, Grace went out to work
.
 We didn't earn much, we were all in the lace market. So our Harriet says, there's ten of us. If we each gave them a shilling surely we could that. It'd give him his independence. So we did. Decided - we went to the married ones, never told them anything 
'
til we were sure. And it - it was worth everything. There was one or two who lived out of Nottingham and they used to send it to them. It was about ten shillings. But we got these ten - the shilling a week. We all gave it, and then if we got a raise we'd 
give him an extra threepence, he thought it was wonderful.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 So when did he actually retire?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 I was trying to remember.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did he work until he was seventy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 He must have done because the - the question of the pension wouldn't have arisen. No. Can't just remember exactly.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 When he was working for himself and only getting ten bob a week how many hours a week did he work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Not very many you see. They gave him so much yarn and they knew exactly what it would do and they - they paid - pe
rhaps he'd have to say - you must make four vests out of this. Or - you must make two }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13853716\charrsid14039999 vests}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 and two pairs those long pants men wore those days. Or even only one pair. And it all depended on the yarn that they could give him for the - the more he turned out
 he got a few shillings more, you see. But it got so bad because, you see, they got it to the - where they could get it - could make half a dozen while dad was doing one. Yes. And I believe - I'll tell you this, perhaps you'd like to go and see - I'm quit
e sure there's a - a hand frame in - in the castle. And I believe - I believe once he took us. I said, did you fit in there dad? Sit on it and do this, you know. Kids.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did your father have a job before this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well he - mostly worked as a lad you see in his father's shop.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 From what age was he doing that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Oh they never went to school. Nine or ten I believe I've heard him say, but I couldn't be sure of that exactly, but they never went to school. So as soon as they could use their hands th
ey'd got to do - running errands and this winding. And anything they could, do, and I did - mother did - was telling me once that after they'd got married she felt he wasn't - grandma was a bit of a martinet and - and - she felt - mother felt that she did
n
't - wasn't quite fair to dad. She says, I should look round for some kind of a job and not be dependant on the old people. You see. And he did go for a while as a - steel rod - he trained for a steel rod maker, somewhere on Ashforth Street, off Hartford 
S
treet, I remember that quite well. And she - he was there for quite a while. But then there was a slump in the trade as there often is and dad was one of the last to go and the one that be most inexperienced so of course he went. He had to go. There was n
o more for him. And - then he went - he had a brother }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13853716\charrsid14039999 who\rquote d}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 gone to Yorkshire in a mine and he wrote and said, well I think you can get a job down here if you can come. And we all scratched up the train fare for him to go. But he - he couldn't - he - he wen
t and he went down below but - he was - not well, he didn't - and that, so - he came - he wasn't long away, he came back again. And - that was sort of the end of it until he got this frame for himself at home, you see, after grandad died. We were - seemed
 to be very much better.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Was he actually out of work for long in these periods when he changed jobs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well I couldn't say. To me, as a child you don't - you - how long, it seemed a long while to us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Because you were all worried?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes, we
 were. Because, you know - we thought it was awful because he used to go so regularly to grandad's to be there - he'd have to be there by eight o'clock in the morning. And we lived - before they'd any children, they lived up Beverley Street, St }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13853716\charrsid14039999 Anne\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  Road, they'd a room - they just had one room. Mother told me.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did your father do any casual jobs or part time jobs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No. Nothing at all. He was - he hadn't a hobby or owt. The only hobby you could call it a hobby - he could always do clock, whatever
 went wrong with the clock add could make it right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Do you remember how old your mother was when you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You'll have to work - work it out roughly. But I can't remember - I know }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid13853716\charrsid14039999 who}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  told}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13853716\charrsid14039999  me}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
; she told me herself she was only seventeen when she was married.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Where did she come from, the same area?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. She lived - I believe she lived in the very next street to where dad lived.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Had she any jobs before she was married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No, it was - she hadn't - she said she started at chebon}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5112414\charrsid14039999 ning as}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  a little girl, nearly - only quite young, her mother taught her and she was only allowed to play for a little while in the evenings, she'd got to }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5112414\charrsid14039999 go}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  back home and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 She started this at what age?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Quite - oh - 'cos she'd never been to sc
hool, she was like dad. And as - I've heard her say that from a tiny little girl - her mother did it. Her sister did it. Before her. And - well it - in those days - round there if they didn't do lace work from the factories, the drawing and scalloping, th
ey did chebonning. Or hairnet spreading. But most - more women than men did because the men couldn't get the work.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Could you explain what chebonning means?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. Well, you yourself I suppose have bought your husband socks with - embroidery on like
 that on here and up there on the point. Well you'd never dream it's all done by hand but it is. And they can do it on the machine up to where the top is. I've put spots on by the hour by hand because they can't do them on the machines. No. And - but when
 
mother was little - and - the ladies all had - all - all beautiful little forget-me-nots, little sprays of lilies. The whole filed on top of stockings. Fine cashmere stockings - right up to the knee. About five or six rows. Oh I was fascinated by them. An
d there wasn't a - one - you couldn't go out, you'd got to keep it to the whales so as it was perfect. And talk about embroidery looks.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did they make up their designs?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No, they were given a design. A pattern of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4399113\charrsid14039999 hose}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  they called it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How was the design given to them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
One hose - or stocking that somebody - more experienced inside the factory had done it and it was sent out and they'd give you a dozen - either stockings or socks, whichever it was, and you do it and you had the silk to work with and you would do this -

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 It was done in silk was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Some was done in - most of it was done in silk, yes, and you had to do five or six threads, it was so very fine, thread it up and make it lay nice and flat. And - they had middle women wh
o fetch - well they used to send them hampers full of it, and then the people like mother have to go to her and pick up what she could - she'd spread it out amongst as many as she could, this lady. A dozen or two dozen. You see. And you'd got to get it do
ne by a certain time. And you do all sorts of patterns. We had more }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5112414\charrsid14039999 men\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 socks than - the fancy fronts went out after that. I'm ever so sorry I destroyed them now but mother had a big bundle, she always believed in making a copy in case the - they wanted t
he pattern back before she'd sort of got it into her brain as she used to say. And I remember a long while after she says, 'ere, she says, you're the only one as can do it, you'd better take these. Scruffy bits of hose, the patterns was there all on them.
 Yes. I don't want them. I said. She said, go on you have them. And then once when I was spring leaning I said, I won't keep them any longer. It's dead, it's died out. Mind you I've done it - I've done - I've done a dozen }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5112414\charrsid14039999 men\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  socks with these on - two on each sock, that's twenty-four in a dozen - for one and six a dozen. Imagine.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How long did it take you to do it for your one and six?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well you - you - after a while you get very quick. You have got to go in every time. it - ordinary cashmere, it 
was not - never silk of course. But you'd have to go in every one, you mustn't miss one, or your line wouldn't be straight, do you see. Oh it took a long while. Mind you, when - I was fascinated, I was always watching her, let me look - do - let me see if
 I - any my eldest sister she was a - she says, you're not going to do it. She says, you're pale faced enough as it is, you want to run and play the same as the other children. I says, I should just love to do -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You wanted to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. Because - I us
ed to think it was wonderful. I watched her. She always sat and - in the evenings when - especially in the winter you couldn't see them, they had gas lights you know and dad - there was a - looked like a cake tin to me - and he lit a globe like a - a - fi
sh - goldfish bowl and that had to g}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5112414\charrsid14039999 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
t in it and standing at the back of this was full of something - I once asked dad what it - It looked like green water to me. And was this little - lamp.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You mean a magnifying glass?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes, he called it - he said it was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5112414\charrsid14039999 aciplotus (?)}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 and water, I've always remembered it but it was I don't know. But - the lamp threw the light through the water. She'd get the hose on her hand and would keep it like that and she could like go - like this all the way, like lightenin
g. Yes. And we always used to say, we've got to be quiet, the lamps coming out. Because she - you see, if she was counting - you often had to count the stitches. You see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 This was an oil lamp she used?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes, you can by them today - that hang o
n the wall with a - a round - silver plating at the back of it you see. That was in addition to the - we had gas - mantles you know didn't we, no electricity then. And - we were - we all liked to - and sometimes she'd sing to us. If she - it was me that s
he was familiar with. And stitch it. 'Course there was no television or anything like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 So she went on doing this all her life?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did she ever retire?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Not really. No. But - that died out too - you see. They did it by machiner
y what they could. And what they couldn't do - they used to train little girls in the factories to do. They didn't want to send it out. If they could possibly help it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 When this worked stopped did your mother mind, did she miss the money?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh she
 did miss the money but of course, there was quite a few of them then, there was - there was Julia, Alice, Harriet, Grace, myself - four - five - John, we were all paying our board. She would never take all our money, you must pay for your board as you ca
lled it, you see, and - the rents were so }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5112414\charrsid14039999 shockingly}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 low in those days, it was really - those houses although they were very - poor, they were - I think it was - nine shillings a week and there was four bedrooms, of course there was no bathroom - or anythin
g like that. Still we had a huge bath and - the boys had the bath one night and we had to go and sit upstairs while they bathed. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What sort of hours did your mother work on this chebonning?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well - she cooked the dinner - we did all the washi
ng up, it was - see, we all had - from the biggest to the littlest you'd all got your job to do. And she cooked the meal for the ten of us, quite sufficient to last her the morning. You had to fit it in before we went to school, we had to go to the butche
r
s and the greengrocers and - we got into the way of going and we - didn't mind it. Those that were at school and she'd cook it and it was all ready when we got home from school and she'd stack everything up in the sink and then when we'd had our tea in th
e
 evening we'd all the washing up to do and that kind of thing, and then she had to rest and - I don't - I never thought that she was ever so strong because she always told me - if I don't have that little rest on the afternoon I'm no good. And I - my litt
le mind couldn't take it. And yet she always seemed robust.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Didn't you tell me she did Queen Mary's ....?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. Princess Mary's wedding - pure silk stockings for her wedding.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 She wore them on the wedding day did she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. Well I couldn't say for sure that but I know }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5112414\charrsid14039999 Morley\rquote s}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 sent her a dozen pairs - whether it was for a wedding present - oh we were so proud of her. And this lady - this dear old lady who used to give the work out and she came to mother's with this parcel, she said, I wan
t you to be sure to put a white - a clean white apron on when you do these. So mother said, I don't work anything if it's light without my clean white apron. She's got an apron for every job, mother had, oh yes. And she said - these are for Princess Mary.
 
You know, the one that's going to be married. And she had to put - H.R.H. - Her Royal Highness Princess Mary in cross stitching. And they were fine silk. When she showed her the pattern - I said, can I look mum? Oh, she said, you are nosey. So when Mrs Ha
llam had gone we let - she says, well now you can look. And it was cross stitching - not plain - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5112414\charrsid14039999 stitches}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 for figures or letters. Oh but you couldn't tell a hand had touched them when she'd done them. And I really think she got a thrill out of it. She - eve
ry - it was - each stocking as she was doing it was rolled up in this white cloth so that nothing but just the part that she was doing - and she paid - forget how much she paid - I think double what she got for an ordinary job. Oh but no one would have th
o
ught it was worth the deed. It was - we were all just as excited as she was. Don't - keep your dirty fingers off - don't you dare touch them - if we went anywhere near it. Can't remember the date of that, and it was funny that - years after I went to Quee
nsmead from the British Legion and Princess Mary's home at Hull Dawes which is not far from there, we used to go a little walk down there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Which house are you going to tell us about?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 It'd be number seven Union Terrace where I can remember most.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How many rooms were there in the house at Union Terrace, was this the one with the basement kitchen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Yes. The - the - cellar kitchen, that was the - cellar kitchen. There's the living room. Scullery and then this - it was quite a bit room but cam
e under the garden at the front. That was - I think that's why they called it a cellar. The coal place was one half of it, where you stored the coal, and in the other - there was - stone slabs round to put your food. You see. And then there was the - fron
t
 room on the first flight of stairs up and the back bedroom went off together like that and there were two more bedrooms above there, quite big bedrooms. And then above that was a big attic that went across the whole of the house. There were - there were 
- plenty of room in for a family. You see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 So the big room at the top was a bedroom?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 That was the room people would have used for the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5112414\charrsid14039999 frames}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 ?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 They would have had for the shops. For the hand frames. They called them the shops.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What else did the word shop mean then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Oh well, you all - the little shop at the corner we always called it the shop. But these were - I should think it was an abbreviation of - workshop, you see. From what I could gather. But dad always calle
d it the shop. And when I've gone to take a message to me grandma's I can remember quite well going down - Cotham Street and I used to look up at the houses and used to say that's the living room, that's the other - oh and all those widows all up at the t
o
p and I asked me dad once, what's all those - he said, oh that's the shop love, where all the frames are. Else I didn't know. Yes, oh and he once took us to Kever, there was a lot of these little villages - I believe some of it's still done. Yes. And dad 
showed me, he says, they don't have to go up three flights to their shop.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 So you used your front room for the machines?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. While dad needed it and of course when they took it from - well we never really used it because there was no furniture in
 it. But we played in it, but we - rainy days you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 But it wouldn't count as a reception room?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh no. Not by any means.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How many living rooms were there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Only the one.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What did you call it?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 The kitchen. That was the ki
tchen. Yes, one living room, one scullery. One that had the sink in, and the copper. You know, one that you used to light the coal underneath with and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Only your family was in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes. Wasn't room for any more. Of course the - one - e
ach time the - one sister got married there was always a bit more room for the rest of us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Your mother wouldn't have had anyone to help in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh no. Oh we - children - as soon as you could do little jobs, you'd each one got a job to do. 
The big girls - used to come home from work on a Friday, we had to blacklead the grate, there was a little old chimney fireplaces. Steel fender, oh and I loathed them. And if a spot of water dropped on it, it rusted, it would take you hours to do this. Bu
t it had got to be just so. Red tiled floors that were scrubbed. They had to be scrubbed Saturday and Sunday. We had white tablecloths on but we'd never any polished top. We had to scrub the top - everything had to be scrubbed. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5112414\charrsid14039999 We used to have to scrub the stairs down, plain wood, that had to be white.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you have a job each?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Yes. Well - we shared them if there was one got rather more than another, of if one got done first - and you sort of got a plan you wanted to get done quick and go out - they'd say - oh I'll help you to do that, you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Was it that the oldest had a certain job and they changed or did she stick to her job for life?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well mostly. But they did all - work together. Mother did the washing but - you - we wore lost of blo
uses in those days. And - needleworkers we used to call it - underwear and - oh, the ironing. Hours and hours of it. If you wanted to go anywhere in particular and wanted to iron a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5112414\charrsid14039999 blouse}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 , you'd got to do it yourself you see, and we always made the bed. Mo
ther only made her own bed. But when we were cleaning our bedrooms we cleaned mothers in with it because she - how could she. We didn't mind it, we didn't think we were hard done to.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Your mother did the washing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 And cooking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Imag
ine washing for ten. Look at the - oh - in an old dolly tub - well it was a dolly - it was a dolly tub and a ponch and she'd count them - you'd got - if you said, I'll dolly you for you mum. Yes, but just remember how many times I want it turning and you 
had got to remember. Old fashioned wringers, we used to fold them and turn the wheel. But I learned - we did - in fact we enjoyed life.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did your mother or father mend or make the family's clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes, she did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did she make all your clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No, not all of them. But - what she used to do - where we lived first in this Silverwood Place and we used to go to St }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5112414\charrsid14039999 Mary\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  church, they were very good to us there. And there was always jumble sales or something. And mother made a point of going 
and whatever she could find, she'd a got a - a knowing }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5112414\charrsid14039999 eye}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
, and she would look them over - and they came from better class people. Well I could just give you an example - I haven't got a - and being the littlest I never got a new dress, I had to have one t
urned up a bit from me sisters you see and oh she was a - grey flannel dressing gown, a long one, it was in good condition. She washed it, cut it - undid all the - unpicked it, turned it inside out and pressed it and she made me the most wonderful frock I
 ever had - for Sunday. Well that was the kind of woman she was. And - down Hockley, it was still there then, the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5112414\charrsid14039999 cheapest}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 of the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5112414\charrsid14039999 drapers\rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 shops were, she used to say, only wish I'd got fourpence to spare. I said, what for? She said, you want some new }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5112414\charrsid14039999 vests}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
. You could get calico - for two three a yard she called it. I said, what does two three mean mum? }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5112414\charrsid14039999 Just twopence three farthings a yard.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Not two and threepence?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No. That was the - the - and she'd cut the neck out and would crochet it, she - she taught me how to crochet too, and would crochet}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5112414\charrsid14039999  round}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 the neck and the armholes, always wore these white - and she could boil them. And then - when we wanted to be ever so fine - we were posh you know, we decided - our dresses, won't it look nice with some
 - needlework. You could buy it from one of the shops, ever so - just about that width you know and sew it on by hand.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Would it be what we call }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5112414\charrsid14039999 B}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 roderie Anglaise?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5112414\charrsid14039999 But it's not - Broderie Anglaise is like heavy stuff. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 That's }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5112414\charrsid14039999 Broderie}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  Anglaise but
 this is - really Swiss embroidery. That's most expensive you see how thick it is on that. But - this was - made on cotton.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Could you tell me about the shoe situation when you were little at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. It was the - I can always remember they used to take us round Sme}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5112414\charrsid14039999 d}
{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
don market when you could barely walk and there was always a stall that sold secondhand ones, and for a few coppers - I never had a pair of new shoes. None of us did. Mother had to pay just what she could, until we began to grow up
 and one or two of the elder ones went out to work. And there was a little shop when we lived on Union Road that - on St Ansell Road - and mother - I was sent with a message to her and she looked at me feet, this lady did. She says, they're poor shoes, th
e
y don't even fit you. And of course I was so proud you know. I said, my mother bought them me. So she said, who is your mother? So I said - I told her. She said, have you lived here long? I said - oh quite a while now. She said, ask mummy to come and have
 
a word with me will you? And I've never forgotten this, this has stuck in my mind. Form a little shop. So mother went, she said, what do you want to see me for? The shoe shop. And elderly lady and just her. She says, you're crippling that child, and in so
m
ebody else's shoes if you don't mind me saying so. So mother says, it's not intentional I can assures. She says, but - needs must. She says, we can't afford to buy them new ones, there's so many of them. So she said, well I'd like to make a bargain with y
o
u. She says, if you pay me so much a week, and I won't be hard on you, you can have - I'll refit them all out. And we all had new shoes. And until my mother - just before my mother died she paid the last money off that shoe bill. And I had to fit on for m
ine - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5112414\charrsid14039999 I\rquote d}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 got four little ones coming up and I could go there any time until she had to - they've pulled the shop down now and it's gone.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How old were you when this shoe club started?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 I was quite young. I'd started school but I just can't rememb
er exactly how old I was. Oh yes, it must be ten because she'd have been in Union Road, I went there when we were ten. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Do you know how much your mother paid a week for it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 It wasn't a lot, perhaps five shillings, perhaps less than that some
times, and she'd perhaps finish one off before she'd have another but - if that lady saw our shoes were getting shabby she said, you'll have to have a new pair. Or if me brother went she'd look - see about you John, she said. She was such a sweet woman.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 She took it terribly seriously didn't she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Yes, she - of course - all the people she dealt with were - were all in the same - boat you see. But she couldn't bear to see - the - I've never had a pair of shoes to fit, none of us had. They'd had had to buy them at Smeddon market, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5112414\charrsid14039999 seconds}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
. Somebody else - and when the treads in - your foot's not right is it. You see, and she knew all about this, this lady did. I used to run messages for her sometimes too when I couldn't pay the bill, she said, can you 
just go to so and so for me? And I'd say, yes of course I can, I won't be long. Used to run like the wind, it just suited me you know.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did your father help with anything to do with your clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Could he mend shoes or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No. I tell you the only thing father ever mended was the clock.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 But your mother was very good?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes. Yes, yes. Could she do things.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did your father help your mother with any of the jobs in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 He always got up first, made the 
fire and took her a cup of tea. He used to think it was wonderful. But it wasn't really wonderful considering all she did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 So that was all he did?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 As long as I can ever remember father always made the fire - in the morning.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did he do anything about decorating?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Oh no. No. He didn't do any - just the clock and making the fire and taking her a cup of tea. And as for - me brother grew older and - one of the girls got married young, and she and my brother and her husband would a say, oh it 
does want wallpapering mum, can you afford a bit of cheap wallpaper, we'll come down and do it for you one weekend. And they always did that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Before then your mother would have done it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 My mother did - she couldn't do wallpapering. Because she had - she hadn't the time It wasn't done.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did your father help with the children at all, did he bath you or undress you or dress you or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 That was thought to be woman's work was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 That was, yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did he tell you stories?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
No, not - he used to tell us about the men he worked with, which I thought was so funny. And mother used to rib at me for laughing. They all had funny names. This man came to the door one day and mother said, see who that is. And thi
s man said - is Enoch in? Well I'd never heard me father's Christian name. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You didn't know it was Enoch?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No. And I - he said - I'm Defan, I'd like to speak to him. And all the way in I thought - I'd never heard this name, so I went and I s
aid, Mr Defan wants to speak to you. And I thought me dad'd never stop laughing. He said, say it again Annie. I says, Mr Defan. Me dad shouts at the top of - come in Defan. So the man said, why do you shout dad. He says - he's deaf. I says, but that's his
 name, he said he was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5112414\charrsid14039999 D}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 efan. No my child, it's not his name, it's what we call him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Can you remember any of the others?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 And then there was another - one with a big head and his - one of his eyes used to be in the corner. Well - I got - giggling f
its, we all did, I wasn't the only one, grace as well, and my mother said, oh my goodness, he's coming across the yard again. Wed got this backyard. Dad says, I shall give you one if any of you start and laugh. Don't giggle. And he would send me to the do
o
r. And this man would look at me, I never knew whether he was looking at - me or not - great big head on a thin body. He says, is your dad in? I said, yes. I said, do you want to see him. He says, yes. He says, tell him it's poor Joe. So - pushed the midd
l
e door open, I said, dad, it's poor Joe. He sent us all - up to bed. Go on, off you go. And I had to get the explanation right, he was such a poor old thing. His name in the workshop was poor Joe. It wasn't his name, eh'd got this wandering eye, but if yo
u'd have seen the cut he made, you would never - laugh, oh dear.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did your father ever take you out without your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. Only on one occasion in his life - only - oh two occasions - every good fair, he took us down Saturday afternoon and let 
us see - you know how - when Bostock and Rumbolds used to be there and they'd bring - there was one animal or something chained up on the front, so that you could see it. Then we had to go in. But you see - we'll go and see Bostock and Rumbold. We - we qu
i
te happily enough, we thought we'd see all there was. And the band and that. And then he'd take us to the sat all and for very few coppers he bought us all one of those little sticks of brandy snaps. It was Grace, John and I. I can remember most of, becau
se Harriet had gone to work, so of course she didn't come. And then he bought a pound of russet apples. He never ate an apple himself. But if he bought one for us we must have a russet. And - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5112414\charrsid14039999 he\rquote d}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  take you there and just bring you round on the outskirts and take you back. Well we thought we were queens and everything else.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What was the animal thing you mentioned?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Bostock and Rumbolds. They always had a big menagerie and it - when - no - when the old Exchange was there, not as it is now, the front
age came at the bottom of - where was it - along - it was - you've seen the pictures of it, well it was always drawn up there, there was a brass on the front and there was either a couple of monkeys or a bear or something all chained up, that you - oh you
 used to stand fascinated. But it was wonderful.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did he ever take you to anything simpler?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 We walked round - slowly round. But it - that was the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5112414\charrsid14039999 key point}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 . We loved it. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did he ever take you out in between whiles?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 And then - no, no
t dad. But mother took us twice with an auntie of mine - to - Wifford Roundhouse. One summer. She put some tea and - bottles and bread and butter, packed it up in sandwiches and we crossed - I'd never been across the toll bridge before. It was quite a -

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 There was a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5112414\charrsid14039999 toll bridge}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Yes. And - it was me auntie who kidded mother on, she said, go on take 'em out, they never get out with you. Oh and it was wonderful. There was this - walked along this lane after we'd cross the bridge and - into a sort of a farmhouse yard, there }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5112414\charrsid14039999 were long trestle tables}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  and the lady - fetched - came round and asked us if we'd like hot water. If we'd got the tea with us.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You were expected to take your own tea?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh - yes. Or anything else we wanted. Oh it was 
lovely. It was out of doors. You see, it was such an exception to anything we'd done before. And - yes - and she did take us at least once a year, in the summer. And dad took us to see the Goose Fair.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did your father ever look after you when your mother was out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
She never went out. Not - she would not leave us. I once asked her if he'd got a hat. So she said, yes, of course I've got a hat. I said, oh but I've never seen you with it on. So - I says, show it me will you? And she'd got quite a nice 
hat. And telling me who bought it her - how many years - I said, and don't - and don't you never go out. No, she says, I don't. I only - only for shopping. Well - once when this aunt came to live just round the corner form us, she'd sent me to this aunt's
 with a message once and this aunt said, tell your mother it's about time she came to see me. I said, mother auntie says, she'd like to see you. Oh, she says, one day I'll go - I'll go. But I had to keep on about it }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid4399113\charrsid14039999 you}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  know, and then one day I said, come o
n mum, go and take me to see auntie. And she did go. But open for all. I never went again with her. I went myself. I used to go there quite a lot. But - I don't think she wanted anything else. 'Cos I said to her, it's a lonely life, what pleasure do you h
a
ve? Oh and - when the Hippodrome first started there used to be - was it ninepence in the gods, and we girls were getting a bit more money as we got a bit older and - Grace said to me one Friday night, we'd drawn our wages and we felt like millionaires yo
u
 know, she says, I wish we could take our mum. I'm sure she'd love it. I says, she wouldn't come. She says, well we haven't tried it proper yet. We've got to sort of see what we can do. Well we went on and on and on. I says, I want to see you in that new 
hat. She says, it isn't new. I said, never you mind, I'd like to see it. Well Grace says, go on, she'd give you }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6840067\charrsid14039999 no}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 peace you know. 'Cos they called me the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6840067\charrsid14039999 n}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 atter}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6840067\charrsid14039999 er}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 , I was always on about something. Natterer. Well she - we took her. In the gods. She said, oh
 my God, when she saw the stairs. Oh now she loved - was - you know, just a - turns. Nothing very serious. We }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6840067\charrsid14039999 laughed}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 to the - but she said she never knew - she was laughing out loud in the wrong places. And Grace said, mum, you wait 'til he's done before you start to laugh. Well - and then when we came - coming home -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Were you expected to go to bed at a certain time in your schooldays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What sort of time would it have been?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well, it just depended - she didn't stick to any hard an
d fast rules. But if the other grown up ones were going to go out, then get these children to bed before you go sort of business. And - oh we wouldn't think it was any hardship. We used to lay and talk to each other if we didn't go to sleep.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did your mother or anyone else put you to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
No, not mother, she never did, it was - the other children or sometimes dad did. When I was young dad always carried me to bed and I loved that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 At what age did you put yourselves to bed, can you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Oh we never stayed up late, not ever so late - when we were old enough to go to work and go out for a little while you had to be in at ten on Saturdays on without fail and nine on Sundays. And of course we were - we had to just have whatever there was
, a cup of cocoa or something and go straight to bed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You shared the bedroom with the others?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Oh - well this - there was a great big room, it was along with the original shop, yes, there was two double beds and a single bed, we all used to sleep - all the girls did. Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 All the girls slept at the top?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. That's it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Who did you sleep with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Grace, my sister - the next sister to me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 There was a bedroom down belong was there for the boys?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Mother kept - there was o
ne a bit smaller and - me brother Albert slept in that one. And then when John came along - for a long while he slept with me while he was a little boy. And then mother said, it's high time you slept with your brother and then of course they moved him out
.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Which room did you have this bath in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6840067\charrsid14039999 in}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 the kitchen. Yes, we got one down - a long one.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How often did you bath?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh - once a week. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Which was your night?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Some - she varied it, it depended how she was for her work an
d she said - you - you two had better be in the bath tonight, or - you two you see. She sort of - to save the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6840067\charrsid14039999 water}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 it was a big heavy thing to drag and empty you see. And it'd all got to be carried out into the yard, we had no tap in the house. There was 
a tap in the middle of the yard. And you see you'd got to empty it down a big drain there. Dad did do that. He would - do that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 When did you put clean clothes on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh always Sunday night. Yes. She tried to fit -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Not Sunday morning?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No,
 Sunday night. She didn't have time Sunday morning when she was preparing the dinner, you see. And - she was a beautiful washer. I'm ashamed to say I'm nothing like washing. Did everything so thorough, you know. And she taught - when I first got married s
he said, and I'll teach you to wash properly my girl.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Where did the family have their meals?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 In the living room. Well we'd only the room. And we had everything in there you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Were there any occasions when you ate in another room?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well - you see we never had any furniture in that front room.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Where did your mother cook?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
In the kitchen. Oh no, in - this was in the basement, the cellar kitchen, there was assort of place off there, one half was where the coal was stored and the half - the other half was stone slabs along and the gas stove, so she did her cooking -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 She cooked by gas did she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes, we'd got gas, yes. Some people had them in the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6840067\charrsid14039999 scullery}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  but they were so tiny - if - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6840067\charrsid14039999 every time}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 you opened the door the gas blew out or something like - mother said, I like mine in there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 When was breakfast eaten?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Well - when the - the older ones were going to work, they had to be there - usually about eight in the morning or half past. And - they'd be out by - b
efore eight. And dad used to generally - there'd be some - make some tea and we'd have bread and butter, we never had anything else. And it - if we were a bit lagging, if we were going to school, come on you lot, you'll be late for school. So it wouldn't 
be much after eight. Before we'd time to get us up to wash and then have a cup of tea and bread and butter.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Were you always having breakfast at eight?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well it was relays you see, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6840067\charrsid14039999 according}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  to the time you had to be at school and at work.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you have anything different on certain days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. Always - always Sunday, mother always bought the very best }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6840067\charrsid14039999 Hartley
\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6840067\charrsid14039999 Blackcurrant}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 jam, we thought it was wonderful. And a very - oh it would be a party for ever we had a tin of salmon. But it was mostly this blackcurrant jam and she would insist that - she wouldn't buy margarine. We'll have a little less and we'll have - best butter.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Every day of the week?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes, we always had - always best butter.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What did you usually have for a midday meal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Well - she did cook lovely midday - we'd have broth, you know - root vegetables and perhaps a bit of breast of mutton, made a good one. Then she'd make us meat and potato pie, we loved those. And - a rice pudding was delicious, she would make 
a lovely rice pudding or a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6840067\charrsid14039999 Yorkshire}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  pudding. But }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6840067\charrsid14039999 Yorkshire}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 puddings were saved for Sunday. They were a treat you see. And - think what else - sometimes she'd make us a steamed pudding and - with currants in you know or jam on, and we all loved the treacle
 ones but she said it was too messy some days and - and she wouldn't do it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What about after school, what sort of meal did you have then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh just bread and butter - for tea. And - sometime you'd - you'd bet a bit of jam, but not the best jam. Sh
e'd have some other sort for you, for in the week.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Blackcurrant jam on Sundays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Only on Sundays, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you have anything else }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6840067\charrsid14039999 before}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  you went to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Just a drink. She'd give us a - a drink of cocoa. It was very fashionable in thos
e days. Just some small cups she kept and - you had that, but nothing else.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did your mother or father bake bread?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Mother baked. But not always. It depended of course if she'd got a lot of chebonning she hadn't time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did she make jam?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Never.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Bottle fruit or vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No, nothing like that. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did she make }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4399113\charrsid14039999 pickles?}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Or wines?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did she have any homemade medicines?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes, she'd got - oh she'd some wonderful recipes for - little accidents 
in the home. And I - me sister once - she was chopping some coal and she chopped her finger and I thought it was hanging off. She said, hold on to that and found - me brother found her a - a clean cobweb, I'd never heard of such a thing before, but there 
was no dust on it, she - clean cobwebs, and she laid it in the cut, then put it down and bound it up and my sister hadn't a scar of any description.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did she often use this cobweb?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes, it was the regular thing. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6840067\charrsid14039999 And - for a burn or a scald you kno
w we had pipe clay hearths, stone hearths and there was white pipeclay on them and - mum had accidentally run into me brother with a ladle full of hot water out of this little side boiler and I got it all down me back, I was only very little, and of cours
e it blistered up and that and I - I was in a great deal of pain and she said - put a clean tea cloth round me, she says, you just stay there. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
And I - I remember her saying to herself as if she was reminding herself, pure home rendered lard, mixed with this
 pipeclay, and she made it into a sort of - emulsion. And she spread it on some plain linen and then got it from the back of my neck to my waist. And she kept changing it and I had to lay on me tummy. All the time. But - I haven't a scar. It healed up lov
e
ly. That was another one. Yes. Oh that was - she'd got some wonderful ideas. And if ever we got - she thought you'd got a cold coming on - when you started sniffing, we don't want the whole house on - she'd say, just go to - I think it was Riley's the che
m
ist - twopennyworth of antimanial wine and twopennyworth of sweet nitre. And there'd only be a tiny crop in the bottle of - medicine bottle. You filled it up with water, and she gave you a teaspoonful each. Antimanial wine. I never - I don't know what it 
-
 that's a new one on me but I can remember it, I fetched it so often and sweet nitre. But it was - such a - tiny drop. And for your cough she always had the fourha'porths as she called them. I can't remember it properly. Oil of - not oil of cloves - that 
was for something - that was when you had the toothache. Can't - \{ILLEGIBLE\} wine and something else. Was four things. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6840067\charrsid14039999 And you could get twopenn'orth - four hap'orths she called it. }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 And it - that - you had to fill that up with water. But my word, it did it - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Was any beer }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4399113\charrsid14039999 brewed}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  in the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Your mother and father didn't grow their own fruit and vegetables, did they buy any?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Fruit and veg? She bought - we only had green vegetables on Sunday. The rest of the week we had pot
atoes or she'd buy carrots and - for - for the stew pot and the broth and that but we didn't have green vegetables at all until Sunday, they were a luxury.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you have fruit?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Not very often.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Dried vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Like peas and things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes, odd times she'd get some peas to soak.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Tinned vegetables or fruit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No, there weren't - they weren't so popular in those days. In fact I never saw them - I was quite grown up.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How many times a week would you eat meat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Practically every day.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Was that ever tinned?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No, never out of tins.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you ever get any extra meat like rabbit from poaching?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well now you say, there used to be a funny old man'd come round sometime and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6840067\charrsid14039999 he\rquote d}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  got a couple of rabbits, you know how }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6840067\charrsid14039999 they}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 hook them together on their shoulder and he said, give me so much for these ma. And of course she was very knowing and she wanted to see if they were all right, and she smelt of them and all, and if she'd got the money she would buy 
two. Oh she made the most glorious - she stuffed one rabbit and the other went in the stewpot.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You don't really know where they came from?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 On no. I've no idea. But I had me - she used to say, me mother, I've heard mother say sometimes, he's neve
r bought those off the wholesale market. I did hear her say that. But of course - we - at the time it didn't register.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How often did this happen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh - only very few and far between.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Do you remember seeing your mother having less food so the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4399113\charrsid14039999 cagily}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  could have more?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Well I used to say, well you don't eat much mother. This is the only thing I can recall. I used to think, well she doesn't eat half as much as our dad. When I was looking round the table, 'cos I had to set the ten plates out 
and mother's plate was smaller. And - that's the only thing I an ever recall about it that - she had - gave herself less. Or didn't want it you see. And she never had any more than we had at breakfast or tea, cup of tea and a bit - bit of bread and butter
. And for their suppers, dad and mum, they had suppers we never had any, we just had the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4399113\charrsid14039999 cocoa}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
, but mother and father, they had a slice of dried bread, no buyer on it, and a tiny little bit of cheese. And that was a real luxury to them.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did your father have more than you did to eat, you noticed he had more than your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes, he had more than mother but she seemed to give the boys more. Because I - I'd be looking on John's plate, I used to }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6840067\charrsid14039999 think,}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  he's got more. I said to mother once, he has more than me. Oh, she says, men do have more than the women. And I didn't query it any }
{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4399113\charrsid14039999 more}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  you see, didn't take any notice, so I had sufficient. We weren't she -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You weren't ever hungry?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh we were times - there were times when we were hungry but
 - not in the usual run, it was just if - things went wrong or something. That we were hungry.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Were you allowed to talk at meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No. I used to get sent from the table times mainly for giggling.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Could you choose what you wanted to eat from what was cooked or did you have to eat a bit of everything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Well mother served it out - I have all visions of her behind the huge stewpot and your plate - she picked up each plate and served all round the table and - if she saw you looking she said, 
that's all you'll get. You see - but we were satisfied. It was good food - wholesome food.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 If there were carrots and one of you didn't like carrots would they have that to hay a bit of carrot?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 I can't remember her insisting because - we seemed to - to - we seemed to eat what - ever was going. You know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What was your parents}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6840067\charrsid14039999 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  attitude if you}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6840067\charrsid14039999  left}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  something?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh it was very wrong thing to do that was. You won't get so much next time she'd say. We were saucy, that's what she - don't leave 
saucy plates, you see. And of course - there wasn't so much that you ever overfed. You could always have eaten a bit more but you knew it wasn't there and you - it's surprising how you get used to that kind of thing.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 If there was something on the tab
le you wanted like the salt, could you ask someone to pass it to you or did you have to wait until it was offered to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes. Oh no, no. You could ask.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Could you ask for a second helping?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well we have done but it wasn't there she'd say
, I'm sorry dear, I haven't any more. But you didn't ask if you could possibly help. You see, because we knew that - pretty well.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Were you expected to hold your knife and fork in a certain way or did in a certain way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes, you had to have good manners, she was - she was great stickler for that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Could you bring toys or a book to the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No. Oh - one of the worst crimes in the book.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 When could you leave the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 We had to ask. When we'd finished, dad said he couldn't h
ave us all jumping op and down together. If you finished first - I want to get down - I want to go out and play - and another one he was a bit slower than I was, or the other sister the other side - and when the plates were finished we put our knives and 
forks by the side of the plate then we'd look at mother, may we get down mother please? Have you finished? Yes. Yes, you can get down.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You had to wait for the others?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did your family sit at the table for a meal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Mostly. Unless - i
t was a big one, yes. Unless one of the girls were invited out to tea or - but we could get round it. And you'd all got your own place, woe beside you if you sat in anybody else's chair.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 And your mother served out the food?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Mother always served out.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What order were you served in?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well I've got a feeling she started with the little ones. I once heard her say they're }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6840067\charrsid14039999 slower}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  than the rest of you. I don't know whether - I'm right about this but I - I've got a recollection in me mind it was the little ones you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Where did the younger brothers and sisters sit before they could feed themselves?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 We had a high chair.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Who fed them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Mostly the one next to them, if she could wedge them in between one of the others she'd sa
y, you look after the little ones, if you were a bit older. Mind you - you wouldn't be asked to do that until we were sort of - ten or so, you were supposed to be getting quite on by then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Was your mother an easy person to talk to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did she show affection?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
No. We - we were - all used to say - I said - we all said the same thing, you don't kiss us goodnight mother do you, you ask - we always kiss you. So she says, but I think of you just the same. And - she'd say to us - but you coul
dn't sort of - she'd got no patience. With - well of course after all that I wonder that she'd got any }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6840067\charrsid14039999 left}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 at all. She was really - a marvel.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 If you had any worries could you share them with your mother or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 We had to be careful, if it was a
nything you don't want her to tell the family you couldn't do because - the first time you did anything that she didn't like - out it would all come. And you did say, oh mum you wouldn't tell them. But I went I must tell you that funny little bit. I'd had
 bronchitis, oh I went and I }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6840067\charrsid14039999 was}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 - wanted to pass me test at the swimming at school. And she says, you're not going to go to those swimming baths, every time you got to the swimming baths you get cold. Me teacher was saying, you've only two more lessons for
 your test. And you'll be all right. Well I had to get that bathing costume, I didn't know what to do, and our Grace says to me, put it underneath your clothes. She'll not know. That was all. Well - I passed the test, and I was so bubbling in good spirits
 
but of course I - I daren't tell her. And by the time I got home with - with a wet bathing costume and all me clothes, I was shaking from head to foot. You've got another cold coming on and that's after I warned you. Now my girl you'll go to bed. And I sa
i
d, please mother, don't come upstairs, let me get un - up here. But then - I got away with it, she never knew. No. Because I got Grace to take me bathing - me bathing costume and run round the street with it to dry. Oh we've laughed over this many a time.
 But anyway - the kibosh was on the swimming from then on. You don't go. I passed me test. And I loved it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Was your father an easy person to talk to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well he was very - how can I say - jolly. Either he was morose and wouldn't speak at all to you
, and had to sort of look to see what his face looked like. But sometimes - he'd be very funny. 'Specially when he talked about these funny old men he worked with. And - he made us die with laughing. But you - you were 1 you weren't allowed to act in - th
at'll be quite enough, you see, sort of.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did he show affection?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 If you had any worries could you share them with him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh no. I was scared of him in a - in a way. And I think we all - because - he didn't never hit us, or he did me, 
but not the others but of course - but he shouted at us. And it was his voice that did it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How did your parents expect you to behave towards them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Be good and obedient, do as you're told. And that kind of thing. Yes. I once grumbled about washin
g pots up, I wanted to go out - when I'd been to school, and I said, always got the damned pots to wash up. Me father says, you should be very grateful to be able to do it for your mother. I said, well it's not right. I want to go - I wanted to go somewhe
re you see. And he said - I said, well if you don't let me I shall leave home. And of course, he said, yes, you think you will.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How old were you then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 I should be - just before I left school - I was only about thirteen. But, you see, I'd had a ba
d example set me. Four of me sisters had left home, because mother was going to have another baby, and they'd had }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6840067\charrsid14039999 too}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 much, I could quite see their point of view. They said, it's nothing but babies and kiddies and you're expected to do this and expected to
 do the other and they were quite young and they wanted to get on and - got good jobs and all the money had to be tipped up and so on 'til they got so fed up - when I knew the true facts of it I realized why. And yet I though it was awful hard on mother. 
Y
ou see. And I wanted to. I didn't - I tried when I was just turned fifteen, me boss gave me a raise and I thought well I think I could manage on this. And I went to one of me sisters. And she said, your mother won't like it but, she said, if you've - real
l
y keen on coming, she says, I'll have you. Well I'd only got a little cardboard box affair, stuffed in what few bits of things I'd got - very little - and I had to pack it in the morning so that when I went home at night I could pick it up and shift out a
s I thought. Of course, when I went upstairs me box wasn't there. And when I came down and dad gave me such a - it's no good looking for it, you're not going. I said, but dad, I said, I'm not happy, I said, you get onto me, I can't do anymore than I }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6840067\charrsid14039999 did}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  do.
 So he said - I said, I want to leave home. Before the words - you're not going. And I broke my heart about it. Because I thought - well I could have been better, you see, because - you always felt you'd got so much of the responsibility. You - you -

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 From quite young?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Oh yes. Always. As soon as ever I could run about the street I had to shop. In - before we went to school in the morning we'd got to go and get the vegetables or the bread or the meat or whatever it was. And then you've got to go t
o take mother's work back or fetch her some. You seemed as if you - your time was always spoken for. You didn't get very little time to yourself you see. And I resented it. Well we all did. But it wasn't their fault. It was the - circumstances. In fact I 
t
hink they did wonders to see, now that I can look back at it with an adult mind. I couldn't then. And - and they - what really threw the spanner in the works and made me decide was going to leave home was that - when I went to this place at Redgate and I 
was an ordering clerk there and the boss said to me, you know, you could improve yourself Anne, he said, why don't you go to night school? I said, I would love to.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You were fifteen then were you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Just turned. Between fifteen - fifteen and sixteen
. And so I went to Huntingdon Street night school, I looked in the paper and it - when it said there was the - you'd to go and, you know, sort of register. And they said the fee would be half a crown. 'Cos Huntingdon Street was quite near we lived - where
 
we lived. Well I never dream it was going to cost any money because I'd never paid money to go to the other school. But I thought, well - I can do chebonning for that half crown. And I had got some money, so I gave it to - I paid it and of course gave me 
this receipt. I never even thought - I was so pleased to tell them, I thought they'd be pleased. And I said, look mum, I'm going to go two nights a week to Huntingdon }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6840067\charrsid14039999 Street}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  night school. I'm going to take English and shorthand and typing. So - I saw father looking }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6840067\charrsid14039999 thunderclouds}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 at me, so I said, what's the matter with that? He said, and what did that cost you? Oh, I said, we had to pay half a crown entrance fee. He said, yes, and your mother could well have done with that for some dinner. Oh I never felt so
 guilty in my life. I ought to have given it to her, he said.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 The best half crown you ever spent?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Yes, I suppose so really. And of course I was very incensed. I said, well I do try to - I want to do something better in the world, dad, I want to 
get a good job with some money attached to it. He said, you always did. He said, you're all right as you are, you're getting a good money now and you've got a good boss. I said, yes I know I have, but - I said - I want to get on. He said, you stop where y
ou are my girl, you're better there. Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What job were you actually doing then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 I was order room clerk. In a lace warehouse.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 And that was your second job was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 That was me second job. Went from errand girl - to this job. Yes. And I loved it but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How long were you an order room clerk for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Seven years.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 So how old would you have been then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 I got married from - Redgates, I got married when I was nineteen. So I was there quite a long while. Four years or five years
 perhaps. I forget exactly. But I still went to work 'cos it the war was on, and I went to work - right until - about five months before Joyce was born.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What job were you actually doing in 1911?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 1911? Well war didn't break out 'til '14. I was - 
I should have still been an Redgates, 'cos I was at Redgates when the war broke out, so I'd be there. Because - I was there - well over seven years.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did your parents bring you up to behave towards your brothers and sisters in a certain way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes.
 We weren't allowed - sometimes you know you get a bit rough and start the - and they'd let it go on just for a bit - that's quite sufficient. A word from them and we just have to - stop it. And I used to }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6840067\charrsid14039999 threaten}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  me brother, you wait 'til I get at you out
side, I said, I shall pinch you. Because he would make me laugh, I've got sent from the table from a meal because he's been pulling facts at me, dad couldn't see him, and I was giggling and father said - I taught you manners and if you can't keep them at 
the table you'll go. Go on, get out. And I used to have to go in the yard. Of course he had his dinner and I used to - go out there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did your parents say you should hit back or not if another child hurt you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 They were very fair in our dealings as
 far as I can see, but they wouldn't encourage us to tell tales. If I go in and say somebody's hit me, well what did you do to them? That was mother's first question. I said, oh, I hit her. Oh well, if there's two of you you're equal. You see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 If the other child hit you first what would you have been advised to do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 She'd say - I'll tell his mother when I see him, or I'll tell her mother. But of course she never did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Because she didn't go out for one thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No. She went out to the toil
et and it was across the yard and if another lady was passing she'd speak to - through the entry sort of business but - she made no special effort.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What kind of people do you think your parents hoped you would grow up to be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 I don't really think
 - they never passed any opinion. Father thought all book learning was piffle. But mother seemed to - think. She said, well - they really can't learn too much. But they didn't - they didn't know that - there'd be such a - a - you know, like it is today. Y
o
u're something lacking if you haven't had some kind of training aren't you. Well that never occurred, you see. When you left school at thirteen you got any job you could get because you was going to take five shillings home and it was gold to you. But - t
h
ey wanted you to be - you always got to be clean and tidy. At night before you went to bed your shoes were - oh they were - they'd got to be cleaned ready for school in the morning. They'd got a wonderful standard, you know, from that. And - if you tore a
 
- a pinafore or anything when you'd been playing, and you tried to hide it from them, you know, sort of business, she's say, get the needle and cotton, just mend that. She would not have you - or a button off. Oh it was a crime to have a button off. But s
he wouldn't do it, she'd make you - show you how to do it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did the boys sew their own buttons on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh no, she did the boys.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 They were treated quite differently?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Quite different, yes. My young brother were - could get away with murder I used to say.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did your parents bring you up to consider certain things important in life?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Yes, clean and tidy. And they couldn't a bear a lie. My father used to say, whatever you've done you speak the truth. Mother would too. And if you - when yo
u were trying to evade something and you didn't say quite what was true, mother would say, it's no good, I know you're lying to me. That'-l do. Now you - when you're prepared to tell me the truth I'll listen.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What did they think of swearing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well - father did occasionally. But mother - yes, odd times she did. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6840067\charrsid14039999 
She was very, very angry if she swore at you. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 If you did what would have happened?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh crikey. The balloon went up. No, we never did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 When grown ups were talking were you allowed to join in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Not always, it just depended - and if they were talking - when the girls grown up see, I'd got three sisters who were quite - getting on, and if they were talking mother said, little pigs has got big ears, go on, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6840067\charrsid14039999 get}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  out to pla
y. And I always knew she didn't want me to listen to what they were saying. But I - I wasn't interested. Although I read a lot of books on the sly, I did - will tell you that. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Where did you get hold of them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Borrowed them from school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What sort of books do you mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Oh I - I remember one and I shall never forget it. The - what - what a was - it was all about a farm and this family, about how they all - I can't remember the title. And I had to hide it, because you see reading was a
 vice, you've got something better to do than put your nose in a book, that was the expression you see. But I did love it. And if me sisters - they - when they went to the musical }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15204605\charrsid14039999 comedy}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  once at the theatre}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15204605\charrsid14039999 ,}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 they bought the pictures in a big book and this - oh I devoured them. They gave them to me. And I used to know - they'd hum the tune and I knew the words from these books. Oh I did love it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You'd have to work in the bedrooms and she used to read under the bed and every now and then she'd thump the 
brush to make it sound as if you were working?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Working. Yes. Then you see, we - we were allowed a candle, we'd no - we'd no lights upstairs and - she'd open the stair foot door periodically - that candle's been on a long while, just put it out, it's time you were asleep, sort of business.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 If you did something your parents disapproved of what would happen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well - oh they'd make your life such a misery.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How would they do this?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 I don't - I can't - sort of make you feel that - make 
you feel that you'd done something over so wrong, which it was only perhaps a prank. It was when - what I principally remember - this - George that I married, well he was an orphan boy, my elder brother }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15204605\charrsid14039999 Albert}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  ran away into the Army. I knew he'd gone, he t
old me he should, he'd had just sufficient he said. He wasn't treated like a man. And he was turned eighteen. And then one day when we got home from school mother was crying, and Albert was coming home at five for his tea. I said, where's Albert, he's lat
e
? She says, he's not coming home, he's run away. Oh, I thought that was the biggest tragedy I ever met. And - it was quite a long while before we found out he'd joined the Army and he was in Ireland. And he wrote to one of me older sisters. And mother was
 furious because he wrote to - why couldn't he write to me? She couldn't have read the letter if he'd have written it to her. You see. But - it was taking mother's place. But anyway - they smoothed things over. And }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14505167\charrsid14039999 with}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  mother. And then he asked could he br
ing this orphan boy home. They had a - a month's furlough every so often. So - one of your lot, that's all she could say, not to be - me dad says, well it - it be a pal for Albert to go out with. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6840067\charrsid14039999 He remembered Albert was one of all those girls see, 'cos John was too tiny to count. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
And of course George came with him. He was a Londoner. I was fascinated by his London speech, we all tried to do it. Have you come all the way from London}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6840067\charrsid14039999 , George.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  Oh he was furious. Yes. He said, I speak just as well a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6840067\charrsid14039999 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  you. I sa
id, you don't, you can't say salt. He said, I can. Salt. I said, that's not it. Oh. And do you know, he - when my eldest daughter first went to school - in those days they'd take them at three and a half, and - when I first took her, it was a little churc
h
 school we lived nearby and she puts - I said, she can speak quite well. They said, can she speak all right? I said, yes. But she was fairly - clear speaking. I said, but - I'm afraid some of her expressions aren't very nice, she's grandad's fellow and of
 
course you can imagine all the things he'd say to her. When I went up on some occasions, she said - are you Nottingham people Mrs Williams? You sound like a Nottingham woman but that child's definitely London. I said, she can't be, she was born in Notting
ham and she's had - she's never been to London. And - several words that - and still to this day Joyce can't say them. She says them like you, salt and there's two - what was the other word? The - the expressions and the way she phrase}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14505167\charrsid14039999 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  things are quite - London. Although she's never been - she'd been now to London but she hadn't - not 'til long after she left school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 When did you meet your husband, do you remember the year?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. Well of course he stayed in our house. For a month. And then - he di
d say once when we were all sitting talking you know, he says - I never had a letter. And we thought he was an awful - mind you he was telling us a lie, we didn't realize 'til afterwards, 'til we found out. I said, never had a letter? He said, no. Well if
 
it comes to that I don't think I have. I said, but you'll have - I'll send you one every day when you get back. 'Course we was only doing it for fun but he believed me. I said, no, not every day, George, can't have that. But I did write to him. Well of co
u
rse when the latter came home, it was delivered while I was at work, and I'd never seen has handwriting. I said, who's the letter for? Mum says, it's yours. And when I opened it, of course, I'm too impulsive, I couldn't keep it in me own mind, I said, oh 
it's from George. That's going to stop.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How old were you then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
I should only be - not much more than sixteen. And - she wrote to me brother - she got one of me sisters to write to me brother and tell him. I was only a kid and she wasn't going to have no nonsense. He wasn't to write to me again. But }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4399113\charrsid14039999 anyway}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 he did write to me. And he'd - I'd taken him once to a girlfriend who I worked with home and she says, I'll take your letters for you. And that was the first big thing I did wrong, you see, I - 
George used to write to this girl in - under cover for me. And that's how we kept it up, they didn't know for ages and ages, 'cos I never told them. You see. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4399113\charrsid14039999 
But I was very, very fond of him. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 I was. But after a while - I told her once, George wants to get 
engaged to me. She says, you're only a child. Oh I shouldn't be eighteen I don't think, no. So she }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4399113\charrsid14039999 says,}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 plenty of time enough. I said, no, the war on. And he was always saying he wanted a home. He'd never been in a house like ours with all our family, and he'd enjoyed}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4399113\charrsid14039999  it}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  I think }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4399113\charrsid14039999 as}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  we did have }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid4399113\charrsid14039999 lots}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  of fun. We did. Strange as it may seem, but we did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You say he wasn't an orphan really?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No. It was quite by chance that we found out. He}{\rtlch\fcs1 \ab\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \b\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 came for a few days, he asked mother, he used to be very polite
, wrote and asked mother if he may come, he got a few days leave and he came. Grandma, father's mother, she was a - a stern old lady, we was all scared of her. But she came and - says, hm, who are you me lad? You know, the sort of way they treated childre
n
. And mother went out somewhere and I - he says, I have got a mother. My father and brother and sister don't want me and I don't want them. And of course grandma crowed, she says, ha ha ha, so we found out he'd got parents but they won't have him, he's be
e
n - he's been a naughty lad and they'll not have him. You see. And I - when I asked George quietly, is that true George, have you got parents? Oh yes, he says, I run away from them a long while ago. You see. So that was - my big sin. I deceived me mother 
and father. And at the bottom she never forgave me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 When you were a little girl and did naughty things how did they punish you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well - the worst was a slap across your - ears, sort of side of your head oh and sent to bed. But nothing anymore. Or -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Who did this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Mother mostly. Dad very rarely touched you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How often would this happen?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Oh I was always in mischief, I was. But - she wasn't - I wouldn't say it was too often. The worst - when she was chebonning she always had a ste
el thimble on and if I got on her nerves to such an extent or the others, we were skylarking about and - she'd probably be counting those stitches, I wouldn't know about then but I do now, and she'd whack - oh mum, I said, that's my head. I intended it to
 hurt you, she said, now you've got to be quiet. But we weren't cruelly treated in any way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What would have happened if you'd told a lie?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh - yes - yes, that was the worst thing of all. You'd have got a good clout. Nothing more than that. And sent to bed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14505167\charrsid14039999 stick}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Oh no. She used to have a cane and the mere threat of the cane, we never - we stopped and didn't do it - she - I'll get that cane down to you, but it was only a threat, it never - never did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did the boys get the cane?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes, just the same.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 They actually got it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Yes, she'd give them - if John was - or - I can think most of John because he was so near my age, he was two years younger than I and Albert was almost a young man }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14505167\charrsid14039999 before}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  I - I can remember all about him, you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You say you were always in trouble, were you by far the brightest in the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh no, I shouldn't think so. Well I mean - I don't know. Well Grace was with me - Grace was - Grace was wonderful, the next sister. We u
sed to talk these things over together mostly and - and - you know - she felt as much about it, because we both were very sensitive, we could feel how this }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15204605\charrsid14039999 trouble}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  was upsetting them. And when I said, well there's ten of us. And she - she - of course there is. And she said, half'll not pay him. If we - if we do, she says, he'll not get it from all of them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Do you remember any particular occasion when you were punished?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. I do. Oh it was funny. I believe this was before I went to work we wasn't
 at school. And - in this back kitchen where I'm speaking - where I've told you of the slabs and the stove and mother had a great big box and a great big clothes basket and when the clothes were all washed they were all folded ready to put - ready for us 
t
o iron you see. And she - she'd been to this box for something and forgotten to put the basket back and it was on the floor. It was raining. And our John said, oh I want to go out to play. I says, well we can't - look at it. He said, I've got to go out, g
o
ing to lavatory. I said, in that case then don't get your feet wet, wipe them on the mat before you come in. And of course you know what boys are. He never wiped his feet on the mat. I man, instead of walking round to where I was, walked over the tall bas
k
et - the basket of clothes were all muddy feet all wet. I said, John look. Put it at the bottom, turn it up, don't let her see it. So of course we tipped the clothes over as neatly as we could hoping she wouldn't find it, but of course she did. But she'd 
n
ever blame John, it was always me, you see, so - we thought we'd got away with it, we were sort of chuckling. We came in one day, no tea for you. I said, what? I'm hungry. Yes, she says, and it'll perhaps teach you to do right, which is right, if you're h
ungry for a bit. She wouldn't stop it altogether, she'd keep me waiting. So she said, and - and you walked over that basket of clean clothing with your dirty fee didn't you? And I was just going to say, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14505167\charrsid14039999 no}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 , it wasn't me. And I though well, she's not going t
o catch me. I said, I - are you sure it was me? She says, I'm quite sure. Oh and she fetched me such a clout. My ear rang - for days. And then I - I was cross then. I wouldn't say it was me brother. But when I got him outside I got hold him by the neck, h
e
 was much less than I. I said, why didn't you tell mother it was you? He said, well what was the good of her hitting me as well. He says, you had it, I couldn't take it off you. And then they wouldn't speak to you except to give you orders to do this and 
do that. Oh and you felt such an outsider. That was the worst I can ever remember. Took - she took a long while forgetting - well I should have done if I'd had to wash them again.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did she ever know that she punished you wrongley?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well - I wouldn
't let John - he says, I'll tell her. I says, you won't. I said, why hit you as well as me. I said, you didn't realize what you were doing. I knew the clean was there, I could have perhaps stopped you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Would you say you received the ideas of about how you had to }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15204605\charrsid14039999 behave}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  from both your parents or did one play a more important part than the other?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh mother all the time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 When you had a birthday would it be different from any other day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Very very rarely. If it - when the girls grew up and 
were older and went to work they've had a little bit of a birthday party and perhaps bought their current friend with them. But we never had any real parties - not until we were grown up.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you have any little presents on your birthdays at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 New clothes or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Nothing special to eat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 There would have been so many birthdays in your family wouldn't there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well there would have been, there'd be one nearly every week.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Can you remember anything you did with your mother or father together on Christmas Day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Yes, now we all loved Christmas Day. We never - we always hang our stockings up and we always have the same thing in every year, but to us thing were gold. There was always a new penn
y - and a - a orange and an apple, these were luxuries alone. And a little tin of sweets and probably a little new handkerchief. An - oh we couldn't wait to - get up in the morning to find them. And then at teatime she - I don't know what it - there was a
l
ways a - she'd make some nice cakes or something like that. We always had a bit of a party at tea - and the married sisters, when me sisters were married and that when they were - got homes of their own - they'd usually come down and of course - we did se
em to have a bit of a party - nothing extravagant at all but just a party. All together.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you have any musical instruments in the home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes, John blew a mouth organ. Poor kid. I've seen him blue with cold when she sent him up in the attic, she
 couldn't stand it any longer.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Was there anyone in the family who sang?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Oh yes, Julia. Yes, she used to sing in the choir at the chapel where they attended I've been - I've been and heard her, she had a lovely voice.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you ever sing together as a family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Oh yes. If ever - you know, if we could get - most of the girls. One of them especially is music - musical comedies. We used to know nearly all those songs and one would start up and - then presently we'd join in. We loved singing, all of us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did your parents play any games with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Were there any books in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Only - only that we'd got in - there - there was the Bible. Mother and dad's bible that I told you about. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14505167\charrsid14039999 They}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  were on the sideboard. And - sh
e paid for one paper-Home Companion or something or Sunday Circle, I forget exactly. But - and they had the Evening Post, but there was no proper - reading. Unless -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 They had the Evening Post regularly did they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Not always regularly. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Do you remember your mother or father reading?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No. You see, at first they could not read. Grace and "between us - we taught them both -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You taught them both?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes, 'cos mother couldn't even sign her a name when they did get a ten shilling 
pension from the state, mother couldn't sign the name Elizabeth Parker. She - I said, well you can put a cross}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14505167\charrsid14039999 .}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 mum. But that didn't - that wasn't right to her. I guided her hand for a long while, showing her how.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you manage to teach her to read?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Yes. But she want - she wanted to read - there was a story in this book - Sunday - you know, the - Sunday Companion or something like that - and she said to me one day, I should love to read it. So I said, well you can soon read it if you try hard. O
ur Grace said, I'll help you. Where I - I'd perhaps start it off and Grace would take - take it over when she came in and by the end they could both read the bits in - the big headlines in the Post. And they could read this story. And she lived for the da
y
 when that book come, I believe it was the highlight of her life. Yes. And she could sign her name. I taught her how to put Elizabeth Parker. I wish - I - I did ask Joyce when she was here last week. I said - she took the Bible because somebody at - Boots
 was going to - it's lovely calf, l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14505167\charrsid14039999 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
ather bound and clipped, inlaid leather, I says, try and bring grandad's Bible book will you, I'd like to show it to a friend of mine. So she - I says, did you get it bac}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14505167\charrsid14039999 k}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  from - some friend of Boots}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14505167\charrsid14039999  who}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  was going to take
 it in and do it, but they left and of course }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14505167\charrsid14039999 it\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 still not - well bring me that Bible. Well I thought she'd have been in Friday but she did - told me that she couldn't come 'til Tuesday. I should have loved to have shown it you. Because it says on it from the Ragged School.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did they ever read aloud when they'd learnt how to read?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 I don't - I read to mother. Oh yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did they read aloud?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Just when they were learning?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Do you remember a funeral in the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. I remember the last two babies. The funeral.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Was it a sort of real funeral?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Well it was very - no. One was eighteen months, that was Ruth, she was next to John. And the other little one died at about - he wasn't over - very small. But I
 was pleased about it because the lady - next door gave me a piece of cake. I said, to mother once, I was only very young myself, I said, do you think we could have another funeral and the lady would give me some cake? She was furious.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Who attended these funerals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Only just the family. And the - the sisters - those that were married and away, some of those didn't come.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you wear mourning clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh no. Well mother had a black dress, she never had anything else but - either a black 
shawl or a black coat, they all wore black didn't they in those days. But there was no money for mourning or anything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did she have a coat as she hardly ever went out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 She - always the shawl. Big - big black shawl.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 A crocheted one was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
No, it was - no it was a - not material, it was wool. With a fringe on. But - I never saw in a coat for - oh I couldn't remember how long.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Were you taken out visiting neighbours, friends or relations?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Just to that aunt. I went there. I thin
k it was mother's brother, that lived in Carrington in a little cottage in Jenner Street and once mother said to Harriet, the next but one to me, take them for a walk this morning - this Sunday morning. Take them up to see - uncle Sam and want somebody, I
've forgotten the names now. And they lived in this little cottage in Jenner Street. And I - that was mother's brother. And then I went to see this other aunt who lived near us. Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did your father ever take you visiting?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No. I went to see father's brother. Uncle }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14505167\charrsid14039999 Herbert}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 , dad's brother, used to }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14505167\charrsid14039999 come}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 sometime, and he was - I liked him, he - he was a man who talked to children and I used to tell me dad I liked it - and me dad didn't like it. And then one of his daughters came one day and said that
 her - her dad was very poorly and he'd like to see dad. So - he looked round at mother, he says, I'd better take her with me hadn't I. And I was thrilled because he took me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Who taught you about the shopping?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Mother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 So she did take you when you were little and then you took over?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
No, she - there was a little shop on the corner, every - nobody went in town shopping in those days you know - on the corner of our terrace was - was this kind of fish shop and as she wanted anything - you g
o to so and so and just fetch me this. And then at the weekend she told me to write down - or Grace - whichever of us were sitting - we were the last two at school to do anything like that. And she'd tell us what how wanted and we'd write it down in a lis
t
 and she'd give us the money and we had to go there. And when we came home from work, out the lace market, she liked Maypole and butter and Chinaman tea, there was a place on Hockley that used to sell this Chinaman tea she called it, something like - and 
be sure and ask him for a bit of caper, I don't know what that was. Still don't know. And we had to call on at - we came that way home and we called and brought the tea. And we went in the Maypole and got the butter. She - because she liked it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 She knew about this from previous years back?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh she must have done. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Your father took you to Goose Fair didn't he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Always to Goose Fair. Just on Saturday afternoon.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Do you remember any other outings with your parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes, he took
 us to - there was a King - I - I was in the infants school when - King Edward came to the throne, I was in four reigns - and - and - I think it was King George the VI, we were at school and there was going to be a big celebration on the Forest and - I sa
id, wouldn't like to come dad, take us? I don't want to go, he said. Come on. And Grace and John and Dad, mother wouldn't come. But he took us on to the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14505167\charrsid14039999 Forest}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  and we heard the bands playing and - we were quite thrilled with it. We'd been from the school but that wasn't quite like going with - your own people.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You told me about going to Wilford with your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh lovely. Wilford Round House. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Do you remember any other outings with your parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Our usual walk was up Clifton Grove on a Sunday night, we walked all that when we were growing up.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 But your mother didn't go I suppose?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No, not mother, no, she didn't. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you ever go away for a holiday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Not while we were little, they'd never had any money but - wh
en my - sister Harriet, she would be about - four or five, perhaps six years older than I, she started courting the boy next door, the policeman's son, and he - he used to ask me to go errands for him, he said, go and - I think it was threepence he used t
o
 send to the Post Office savings bank, go and take me this threepence up - up to the bank. Right Off then I'd go. I treated him like a brother because he lived next door to us. And then - he was talking to me when I got back and gave him his book and that
 and he says, I'm going to the seaside. I said, are you? Yes. He said, aren't you allowed to come. Oh no, I said, I - I can't come. Why not? Well I says, me mum and dad couldn't afford it }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14505167\charrsid14039999 
luv}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 . So he says, oh - well, he says, we're only going to Skegness, it was half crown trip in the evening. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you go?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 That was your only holiday was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 The - the only time I'd seen the sea. And the only holiday - you know, like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How old would you have been then roughly?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 We
ll I was at school. Yes. I couldn't just tell you exactly. But mind you I used to take him his - this boy's - he used to save threepence a week in the Post Office and he used to always say to me, you'll go for me won't you? And I love it. I loved running 
a
bout. And of course - he came - he would - came and asked mother - they only lived next door - and she was always very careful. She said, you'll take care of her won't you? And he said - he said, yes, of course mother I will. And you know - have you been 
t
o Skegness recently? Have you see it at all? Oh. Well this - well I wouldn't - I might have been twelve or something like that, but the clock tower is the key point and he sat me with my back up against this clock tower - and the water - the sea - dabbled
 
at my feet and I was terrified of it. I said, oh look at it Arthur. It doesn't stop. I couldn't imagine where this water all went. Well he says, I bring you all this way to see the sea and you're frightened of it. He - he tried to ask me - he said, come o
n
, paddle. Oh no. I'll stop here. And - in those years - the last time I went, be about four or five years ago, it's about two miles, it's receded two miles nearly the sea. Yes. There's shops and - everything right down there and I - I wonder how - well I 
t
hought the sea was up against the sea tower. It was when I - yes. Washed right up at the bottom. It's a - lovely place really but of course it's Nottingham by the sea so - if you are - yes. Yes, but Mablethorpe was my favourite. Such glorious sands for th
e children.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Can you tell me how you spent Saturdays when you were a schoolgirl?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Yes. If there was any extra shopping to be done - on we all had our weekend little chores to do. Nothing very much you know, 'cos many of - many hands get rid of it 
quickly. And - if there - often at school they ask us to take boxes for the Life Boatmen and - and - Dr }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14505167\charrsid14039999 Barnado's}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 and all those kind of things and we were asked to go for so many hours, if mother could spare us, and she usually did, and we loved doing that
. And - we play about the streets and that. 'Cos there were - there was no pictures until a long time - after. The first pictures that I - ever saw were - it was - where is the - Scala now. In - it was a big - on Market Street, it was at the top there, an
d they used to - tuppence for children on a Saturday afternoon for a couple of hours.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 When did that start?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
This - oh - I hadn't left school. And - if I'd perhaps run an errand for some other old lady up these streets and then I got tuppence and m
y other - the other girl that I used to run about with a lot, she'd got - plenty of pocket money, she said, come along, I'll take us - no, but I must pay my ticket, you see, and mother says, it's disgraceful. What do you want to go to pictures for? I said
, well I would like to see what they look like mum. They weren't talkies of course, they were silent.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did they have a piano?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. And this girl took me. And I never forgot it. But never went again thought. Until they opened a place on - on - what
 was that street where the fire station is - you'd think I'd remember that. Yes. We called - everybody called it Hibbits, why it was Hibbits I don't know. And as we were coming out the lace market, this was after I'd - when we were working - a man used to
 
stand with a lot of - looked like raffle tickets. Give me a penny for the ticket and you can go to the pictures tonight. But these weren't talkies. These were silent. And we - oh - we all used to crowd round and the poor man never had enough. But I've bee
n there, and I did enjoy it very much.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How did you spend Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Well we always had - we had to go to Sunday school. She - sometimes she made us go to church Sunday morning if we'd been a bit unruly. And she wanted us from under her feet. But we always had to go to Sunday school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 In the afternoon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Yes. And then in the evening, while we lived town there, and - on Neatherley Street, there was a church mission and we were all very fond of it. The Captain - when they used to have a church 
hall, the Captain and his lady and he made the services so that we enjoyed them. We had a flower service, and we used to go and sing to - there was a very poor part, they called it the - the Marsh and - we'd go and recite to them or sing to them - they tr
ained us up to do this kind of thing. And we did love that. But we had to go. It was a - you couldn't get a - you could they only way you got out of it - you'd got to be ill and she new whether you were shamming or not. You couldn't get away with it.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you have different clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Oh yes, if there was a - anything a bit better that you had that was your Sunday clothes and that was sacred and you could not put it on for anything else in the week. You had to keep it. It had to be taken off and brus
hed and put away and just put on on Sunday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you play games on Sundays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
No, not ever. We weren't allowed. We weren't allowed even to read books. Mother just let us look at these two religious books she - I think it was Home }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14505167\charrsid14039999 Companion}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  or Famil
y Circle - something of these - like Woman such as - only not so big. Not so flamboyant either. It was all in plain print. And - she liked them and we had to ask if she - if we may look at them. But you couldn't - bet - we - when we was knitting }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14505167\charrsid14039999 crazy}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  or a
nything like that, and once brought some knitting out and she said, have you forgotten what day it is? And I said, no mother, it's }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15204605\charrsid14039999 Sunday.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  You see, I hadn't registered her so me mind was just concentrated on doing it. So she said, well you'll put that way until then. What you don't get done in the week you won't do on Sunday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Was the work the same?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well we just did the washing up. But we weren't allowed to do any housework. No. We }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15204605\charrsid14039999 worked}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  - it was well done at the weekend and it had got to last.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 So your parents did think it was wrong to do these things on Sundays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh very wrong, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did your parents attend a place of worship or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No, they never went. But they were quite sure it was right for us to go.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What denomination?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Church of England.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 They never went at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 I don't remember them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Were there any Sunday school outings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Sunday school - oh yes. Yes, we went - we - one of the ladies - Sunday - Sunday school teachers, she lived in the park a
nd I think there were eight of us little girls in her class and she said - I'm going - ask your mother if you may come with me and I'm going to take you home for your tea. I didn't even know there was a park then but of course she took us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What other social activities organised by the church did you take part in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well we belonged the Band of Hope.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you belong to the choir?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes, we were in - this little choir - always at this church mission. Our Vicar at St Marks, he was getting on a
nd some of the boys were a bit - unruly and he would not have us in the church, he said it distracted the other people. So the Captain said - he said, well I think I can manage them. He was young. And you know we - we loved that man. He - he didn't sort o
f make it think it - make us think we were being made to do these things. Now come on dear, shall we do }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15204605\charrsid14039999 so}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 and so? And you did it. We had flower services we had concerts - oh - I loved that little mission I -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did the church of mission run a temperance club, was the Band of Hope temperance?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes. Oh yes, it was the Band of Hope, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did the Band of Hope do anything else?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes., We used to be - have a - a big sort of concert once a year and each little Band of Hope from the mission sen
t to - all of them from Nottingham went to the Albert - the Albert - no, Circus Street Hall. Circus Street Hall it then was. And - there would sing, for prizes you see and recite and - give - readings and all that kind of thing. We really looked forward t
o it, it was a red letter day and it was a great honour for the mission if you won anything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you win anything ever?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What did you win?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 First prize for recitation. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Could you }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14505167\charrsid14039999 do}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  it still?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. Yes. Yes. I've forgo
t the title but - a schoolboy at school once more sedate than the rest, had once his integrity put to the test. I can't follow it all up but I - I know how it starts. And I always remember why they gave me the prize. I couldn't understand it. 'Cos I said 
i
t wasn't really interesting, I didn't want to have it but it was a set piece. And I had to do it. And - but judges said it was - you said it was for the clearest - he meant I told the tale straightforwardly and he said you could follow every word. And the
y gave me the first prize. I had to stand up at the mission and they all clapped when we got back.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Was grace said in your family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Were you taught to say prayers at night?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No, only privately to yourself. Mother would always say, goodnight, God bless you. And don't forget to say your prayers.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did anyone teach you how to say prayers when you were little, did he older children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No. We sort of followed on after them. We copied the older ones all the time you see. What you didn
't know you copied them. And of course the Captain who we got to - oh we were went there for years, he sued to say - now even if you don't say them out loud you just kneel down and say them. And we thought we was doing something clever because we were ple
asing him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did your father take an interest in politics?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Well we always used to say he was a Conservative but - he never took any personal interest. He'd read the paper and talk about it as men do. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14505167\charrsid14039999 But I never knew him take any personal interest
 in - he would - when he worked for his craft for his father, there was a trade - trades council, a very crude affair from what I could; gather and what I can remember - but - the president of this trades council, I always remember his name was Mr }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12987527\charrsid14039999 Thornilow}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14505167\charrsid14039999 , and - used to take dad with him. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
He said, you can't write, pop, but you can speak, so he had - he liked to }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15204605\charrsid14039999 take}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 him for the men - the workmen's point of view in this trades council and dad looked forward very much to that, it only happened perhaps once in three months. But he took no - personal - affair - interest in the affairs.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did your mother have any interest in politics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No. She thought it was a waste of time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Do you remember of them }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14505167\charrsid14039999 voting in a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  general election?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes. They -
 oh father thought it was a crime not to - even - I once heard him saying to another man - men's died to get you that vote. The least you can do is to go and use it. Oh - they always went to vote. If they were well enough.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 In some places at that time 
men felt they risked losing their job or their house if they voted differently from their employers, do you know if your father felt himself under that kind of pressure to vote for a particular party?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well - I don't think so. I never heard of anythin
g like that - at all. There weren't - houses that belonged to a firm, you know, it was sort of got a hold on them they were just ordinary - landlord held houses that - unless you }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14505167\charrsid14039999 misbehaved}
{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  yourself or didn't pay your rent there was no fear of you losing the house. As far as I can remember.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 So your parents voted but they didn't take any part in political parties?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No. Oh no. They thought that was their share I believe.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 When your parents were not doing their work how did they spend their time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Well they did - the one luxury was the Post of the evening and these two Sunday books of - when I'd - we'd helped them, you'd taught them to read, they used to read. But they didn't do anything else. And talk. Some - sometimes mum and dad would talk
, and sometimes they'd tell us bits about the old - things when they were children. Especially if we'd been naughty. And mother said, and when I was such and such an age I was working and doing this and doing that. And she must have been only about a chil
d eight years old. You see. And father said - I can't remember when I didn't work. And it wasn't a - he didn't say it as a - got a grudge against it for it, it was just - everybody else did the same.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Your mother didn't have any interests outside the home at all did she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
No. She never - I used to say to her - the Captain says, do you want to come the Bright Hour or something once a week mother? He would like to meet you. And he hadn't time to go and visit everybody. So she said, I've got no time, 
I've got my work to do. You see, she - every spare minute she was at the chebonning, because it was her livelihood.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 When did your father get home from work in the evenings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 When he was - of course he was working in - at grand - at }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14505167\charrsid14039999 granddad
\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  whi
le he was - often late, eight o'clockish. But when he - it finished and he had got this job at the Mangus Street factory - sort of odd job man and that, his hours were from six in the morning 'til six at night.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How many evenings a week would he spend at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Oh he never went out. Very - just - just for the - about once in - periodically, it didn't come regularly every week. And I can't - odd times of one of the men who he worked with in grandad's shop, they used to come and have a chat with him.
 But he never - didn't go out much himself.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did he ever attend any clubs or pubs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
No, because we - they - they did have a pint and a half of beer every night for their supper. And - as you grow old enough to go to the pub and fetch it for them, that was one tumbler and a half each. And it was their only }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14505167\charrsid14039999 indulgence}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 . And - and a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14505167\charrsid14039999 slice}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  of dry bread and a bit of cheese, that's all they ever had. He'd go with - if any of boys - suppose there was a party or a wedding or something coming off, and one of
 them'd say, come on dad, put your coat on, come on we'll go and have a drink. Well he might go then. But he didn't make a practice of it. He wanted it - he loved it at home. What little he had.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 And your mother en}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10768088\charrsid14039999 j}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 oyed it too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh she did. She looked forward to it. Very much?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 She wouldn't go out to a pub?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did women go to pubs or were they }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10768088\charrsid14039999 men\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  pubs then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Very much men's pubs. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did your father take part in any sport?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You told me about the boot club?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did they belong to any other sayings clubs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Yes, I believe she did have one - from - some - I don't know where he came from, this man used to call every Saturday for money and she said it was a cheque for clothing. Such as wh
en she wanted replacements and - things that she - she couldn't buy. But we had to come to some shop, I always remember it was all way up Bradford. She once took me with her. It was only - not a very big shop at all but she - was in that for years, while 
I was small, I don't know whether she - I don't think she kept it on
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Were they in a sick club?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Or a funeral club?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10768088\charrsid14039999 Oh the - ordinary insurance for death, everybody - when you got married we all said the first thing to do you must ge
t insured, penny - threepence for the father, tuppence for the mother and a penny for any subsequent children. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
And each - each year - I was living at home you see when I got - and she said, you must remember and get that insurance, you'll manage to pay tha
t much, and no more, it's - it's a drain on you. And of course it would have been. And she'd got all these - we used to laugh about them, penny policies. But nothing else, no other preparation was made. As far as I know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How did you get on with your brothers and sisters?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh - very well, really, on the whole. But we did }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16141294\charrsid14039999 argue}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  a lot to each other and we were very jealous of each other. You know, if little - if we thought that mother was - or father was showing the slightest more interest in one tha
n another, we'd say, him. you know, and we'd be really huffy about it. But - I don't think we were an antagonistic family.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Was there one you felt particularly close to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. Harriet. When I was so ill, I always had this reached bronchitis and we
 lived in this little house and - I had to go - I had - they used to lay me on the sofa in blankets and then mother would say, I'm getting tired, you carry her up to bed Harriet in a blanket. And she - I held on to her hand tight, could you just sing me o
n
e little song? And she - very good because she wanted to go out because she was a big girl then you see 'cos - she was about six years older than me I think in any case. And I loved her because she never grumbled. And she'd always sing a song to me. I cou
ld almost sing through half of them.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 As a child who did you place with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Mostly Grace and John. With two next - Grace was two years older than I and John was two years younger. But anybody round about, we sort of played in groups, we had a big sk
ipping rope, we stretched out across the big wide - road we lived in and used - oh we loved that in - we played stick and goose, have you heard of that before. Oh. Oh yes. Mother - stick - just an ordinary stick and a goose was goose. It was a little bit 
of wood and I - we used to have to get dad or Albert to sharpen the ends and you laid it on the floor and the end stood up and you used to say one, two, three, and hit }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16141294\charrsid14039999 one}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  end. And it spun it up into the air and they used to measure how far each of you could get it. The farther you got the goose - as we called it, you - you was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15204605\charrsid14039999 winning}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  the game. And we all stood in line and took it in turns to do this.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How long would a goose have been, about four inches?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes, four or five. Oh not very tick. Just s
o that it was side enough to go with a tap on this - on this - but it had got to be pointed you see because otherwise you - it would have }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16141294\charrsid14039999 stuck}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  to the floor but you see it was just that bit off where the pointed end came. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16141294\charrsid14039999 We all - and we - and we - pancake
 Tuesday as we called it, there used to be little barber on a shop and used to make us little wooden battle dores and tiny little wooden shillycocks we called them, and whips and tops for the boys, it were only - she'd save ever so - ha'penny at a time to
 give us - they were only about a penny each. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh - we loved them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you have}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15204605\charrsid14039999 these}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  at a certain time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Only - only at Shrove Tuesday. Oh yes. And we used to play marbles. If ever we could get any. But mother didn't hold with the girls getting on 
the floor. She said, you're dirtying your clothes up. You're not to do that. But the boys did it more than we did. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16141294\charrsid14039999 And we used to play tin-lurky. Tin-lurky.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Is that what I call kick out can?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 It probably it would be. Yes. These berries that were 
near us, there were - plenty of open space, there's only these gravestones in between.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 The bury was the burial yard?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Burial - yes. But it was open and everybody went through it you see and we never touched the graves or anything but we played on
 - on the grass. And this tin would be set up and we all gathered round it and one was on. Now, you - he'd got to kick the tin as far as he could kick it and - with his }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15204605\charrsid14039999 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 yes shut, and say one, two, three, scatter. And then we'd all got to hide. And bring t
he tin back you see. And - if the one who was left with the tin he was on as you might say, he got the privilege of - of kicking the tin. We loved that. Don't know what else we played.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you ever have hoops?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Only the - they did, but it was ju
st people who'd got the money to buy them, we never had them. Unless somebody gave us an old one and we used to have huge fun with it, and that. And - running games and tick and all that kind of thing as we used to call it, you had to run like mad and tic
k your neighbour. Tick. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What would happened if you got dirty when you played?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Well we - you'd have to watch yourself, see where you sat. Careful, she - Grace would always be looking after me in her little way. She'd say, you've dirtied that 
frock again, she'll be mad with you. But we - she was cross with us - but - she didn't sort of - very harsh. I believe at the bottom she really did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Were you free to play with anyone you pleased?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes, mostly. If - if there was any child that she disliked - I don't like you playing with those }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15204605\charrsid14039999 boys}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  from down so and so she'd say. And we just didn't have to do it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What was wrong with these?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 We never knew, she - one - she told me one - this one boy - she caught him pulling my arm for someth
ing, well children do as their a but rough - and she said, don't you do that. And this boy laughed at her. And that was the greatest insult. So when we got indoors again she said, you'll never play with that boy again. He's a most rude boy. And - I couldn
't see because I'd pulled his arm first you see, and of course she hadn't seen that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you belong to any youth organisations?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Used to go to Band of Hope, that was one night a week. And if there was - when we was in the choir in the mission - an
d we used to go one night a week sometime if we'd got some special hymns to rehearse for Sunday. Specially for the flower service and that kind of thing, we used to have special hymns and songs and some of them with good voices, they used to give a solo, 
you see, and it was - about twice a week that we went. And of course when I was older I went to night school twice a week, I liked that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 When you were a schoolgirl did you have anything you might call a hobby? You crocheted did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh I was alw
ays watching - all me older sisters crocheted and with mother always being chebonning I begged her to teach me, I was dying to try it, and of course she said, a child like you doesn't want to. And then - Alice was doing some crocheting for someone and I s
a
id to her, you show me how to do it Alice. She says, well I haven't got any wool to spare. So mother used to - listen a lot you know, she said, I've got a bag with some bits of wool in. But - I haven't used them for anything as yet. So she give me one or 
two bits and Alice found me a crochet hook and from one thing it led to the other 'til -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you keep any pets?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 We used to have an old cat and he died and then - oh for many years we didn't have anything. But during - when we were in holidays fro
m school I was very fond of pets and I always was on at mum and dad to let me have one but - they sort of said no but - during this particular years holiday somebody that Grace knew who she used to work with had had a baby and I was just baby daft. And wh
en I'd done me errands for mother I said, do you think I might go and take Mrs Whatsname's baby out? Oh you and these babies, she said. Well I - I would love to. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16141294\charrsid14039999 
Well, he says, you must ask her and be very, very careful won't you. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 She says, you won't tip it
 out. Oh, I said, no mum, I'm careful. Well I took this lady's baby out - not every day, when mother could spare me. During me month off school. And she'd got a little Yorkshire Terrier dog and it had just had puppies. Well I was fascinated, I'd never see
n anything so tiny, lovely little puppies. And - she - me - she offered me money but mother always trained us we weren't to take money. I'd offered to do it and I did it because I loved it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you get this little Yorkshire Terrier puppy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes.
 So when - when the - the - I was going to school on the following Monday, at the weekend I took the baby home and Topsy the little doggy was playing with all the puppies and I said, aren't they lovely. She said, do you like doggies? Oh - I said, yes. So 
s
he said, I bet your mother wouldn't let you have one. So I said well I could ask. Are they a lot of money? 'Cos first thing in your mind when you're like that, is it a lot of money and then it was put out of your mind completely if you think it is. She sa
y
s, no, but I was going to give you one because you've been such a good girl and helped me with baby. You've taken them out while I've got on with me work. Well I - oh so full of joy, I - I run every bit of the way home, it wasn't far and - dad was up in t
h
e - in the front room and there was only mum in. I stood there and she says, what are you standing there for? I says, mother - you know the lady I take the baby for. She's got a - I've told you about the puppies haven't I? So she says, yes you have. I say
s
, she's given me one, do say I can have it. I've got enough to do with you lot. Straight away. And as we're saying this father's coming down the stairs. And that - silly thing me started to cry. He said, what are you shouting at her now for? Because mum -
 
just start raising her voice then. So - I says, I can have a little puppy as a present to me but mum says no. And she says, is it only a little one? I said, oh - I says - his mother's only like that. And it was a thoroughbred. So he looked at mother, he l
o
oked at me, go on Liz, he says, let her have it. She's been a good girl, she's not played much this holiday, she's had that baby out every day. So dad, says, what does she want you to pay for it? I said, no, she's giving me it as a present. Oh dear, me fe
et never touched the ground Mother found an old piece of shawl, wrap it up carefully it's only a baby. I said, was it old enough to be taken from it's mother. But they knew it was. And we had him years. Yes. And do you know mother and dad loved that dog.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What did you call him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Mick. He was just - he was no bigger than that, you know that shaggy - they brushed him religiously, he never went on the streets, we got a yard, there was one gate for two houses and we used to yell at the people next door
 if - don't leave that gate open. You see. And he knew every word that was said - he had his own special little bit of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16141294\charrsid14039999 an}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 old cushion and f you went in with sweets in your pocket and you rustled the paper he never left you. And I believe my father loved hi
m as much - more than anybody. He'd go - when dad sat down on the sofa he'd push his mat just to the side of him and presently }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16141294\charrsid14039999 Mick'd}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  have his nose across dad's knee. Yes, that was one of the joys of my childhood.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How old were you when you got him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 I was still at school you see, so I couldn't have been - might have been eleven or twelve, thereabouts. I loved him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you collect anything as a schoolgirl?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No, I don't think so.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you go fishing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Walks?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes.
 Me big brother - Albert - he used to take us sometimes - on a Sunday after we'd been to Sunday school on a Sunday morning, he would take us down Tramp Bridge, we walked all the way 'cos it was trams. And - we would stand and throw stones in and that kind
 of thing or sit on the bank and talk. And we all loved Trentbridge or he'd take us to see Arbreton occasionally. But we didn't - 'cos you see there was any }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16141294\charrsid14039999 appliances}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  to buy we knew we couldn't. Dad once chucked us a rough piece of wood out to - I said, th
ey're all laying cricket at our school. And I said, but I haven't got a bat. He chucked me this rough piece of wood and made a bit of a handle and I - of - course I had to stop, I broke a window.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you have balls, could you afford a ball?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes
. Well sometimes one of the elder ones would buy us one you see, or if we went on a holiday they always brought you a little present and - say what would you like Annie? Just a little ball.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did this cricket turn into fairly serious cricket?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes, I broke somebody's window - it was only a scullery window thank God.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you play any other sports?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
We played - jumping over the rope, I don't whether you ever played that did you where they highered it each time. Oh yes. and skipping of course. We were all }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16141294\charrsid14039999 mad}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  on skipping.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you go to any theatres, how old were you when you started going to the Hippodrome and things like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh - that was after I'd }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16141294\charrsid14039999 left}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  school. I should be - between fifteen and sixteen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you go to concerts or did you just give them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No, we weren't very keen on concerts.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Music halls would be the Hippodrome wouldn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 The Hippodrome or the Empire. And if it was somebody that had got a big name and I'd hear the other girls, the older ones, 
talking about it, oh you ought to go and see so and so, he's very good. I saw Gracie Fields the very first time she - came to - I think it was the Hippodrome or was it the Empire, in Mr Tower of London, a sort of revue. And I never forgot her lovely voice
. But I did think she was a silly girl doing all that mucking about with the song, I wanted her to sing it straight through.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You went to cinemas when you were still at school didn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Went to - oh yes. I was only allowed to go the once. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did your parents give you any pocket money?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Oh yes, Saturday ha'penny from dad always. And if mother had an extra special good week at work she would give me a penny. But I used to run errands, there were quite a few old people just round about and they'd say to mother, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16141294\charrsid14039999 could}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  your little }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16141294\charrsid14039999 girlie}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  just go and fetch me a few potatoes? And as sure as not one of them used to always offer me bread and jam. And I did loathe it. But I didn't say anything and I - I'd got to eat it, I daren't throw it away.
 And then - somebody must have told her I didn't like bread and jam. So the next time I went I got a penny. You see. Much better from my point of view.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You kept these pennies you earned?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You didn't have to give them to your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No. But she said, you want to take care of that because they'll bee something you want it for particular.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What did you spend your money on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You'll die with laughing when I tell you. Sell - with dad's }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16141294\charrsid14039999 ha'penny}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  we were - wealthy. Farthing ev
erlasting strip, I don't know if you've ever heard of them. It was like - caramel, in a long thin strip, it wouldn't be any more - it wouldn't be an inch wide but it was so long. Oh. Yes, it lasted and lasted and lasted. That's why we bought them really. 
And - what was the other - and aniseed balls. I loved aniseed balls. I think we got about four for a farthing. So me ha'penny went a long way you see. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16141294\charrsid14039999 
And we - we'd buy - very, very rare we could afford a bit of chocolate. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 But if I'd got one or two pennies perhaps I'd been saving, and I did love chocolate.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you ever buy things like hair ribbons out of these pennies?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Not 'til I went - not when I was at school. But when I went to work of course I did buy all me own hair ribbons.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You and your sisters helped your mother a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16141294\charrsid14039999 terrific}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  amount with her housework, did anyone else help her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 I don't think so.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 If she was ill or confined to bed how did she manage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 I only once in all me life known her to stay in bed. She - she used to look
 terrible sometimes but she wouldn't stay - I'm a very strong woman, I shall get over it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What about when she had the babies?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well of course I can't remember them being born because I should only be about three when the other three came along a
nd I - but the other elder girls were telling me. They were so annoyed about it. They said, it's not right, father should have more consideration. Dragging her down like that. And they used to have to - what father didn't do those girls had to do, and go 
to work and look after the other little ones. I can quite see their point - I couldn't at first, but looking back on it I can see it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did your parents have any relatives living nearby?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes, they used to - one - a - a sister of dads. The - her name was Sarah Anne but it was a Nottingham way to say - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16141294\charrsid14039999 Aunt Sran's}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  coming. I never called her anything but Aunt Saran. She was older than -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You said it as one word did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Just one word. And - she came - only - I think it was New Year's Eve, to 
see her brother. That's when I found - found out about me dad's name being Enoch, with her. And she used to come with another lady and she used to say, get that jug Annie and go and fetch a pint and a half for your did and your mum. And mother liked her. 
Else as a rule she'd got her back right up against dad's people. 'Cos she thought the old lady had robbed him of his - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16141294\charrsid14039999 livlihood}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  you see and - she never forgave, she'd got a very unforgiving spirit and - there was just Uncle Herbert, his brother who lived on St Ansell Road, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16141294\charrsid14039999 and they}
{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  used to send me with messages to him sometimes. And I liked me Uncle Herbert very much.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did your parents have friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Not - not that you would call friends. But she was always very friendly with the neighbours. But sh
e wouldn't have had one inside like that. Don't make neighbours when I got married - bone of your life, she says, and you don't want to tell everybody your business. She was very - reserved. When I look back on - I think now, I wonder where she'd got it f
rom. I can't think.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did your father have friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Only just these men he worked with, these old men. And there was just this man at the trades council, this Mr }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12987527\charrsid14039999 Thornilow}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 , he used to speak a lot about this man. And I used to think, oh dad must thi
nk a lot about him, but we never saw him. Dad used to go to this trades council periodically, I couldn't tell you how long it was in between. But he never made - any particular friends.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15204605\charrsid14039999 these}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  work friends who came for him come into the house and chat or did they just come and collect him?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
No, they - they'd come into the house for a few minutes, but they wouldn't stay. Because if there was the children a - about you know, they'd soon get fed up. But dad has told us about them and - the peculi
ar names and that kind of thing. But - we couldn't understand.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 When these friends came into the home would they be offered anything to eat or drink?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Not as a rule, it was just sit and chat. Unless - the daughters when they were married with - an
d their husband - when they come - I've heard mother say, would you like a cup of tea? But they flatly refused, you see - I could tell it was - they wouldn't take it because they'd think it was - a - a - a strain on mother. You see, and she was mostly wor
king. 'Cos they didn't come down 'til the evening.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 So these friends of your father's were not really your mother's friends at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh there was one old lady. What did they call - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16141294\charrsid14039999 Mrs.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  Howson Heather we called her. Mrs Howson Heather. She was a - 
she used to wear a - oh such lovely black cape with all jet beads on it and I think she used to be an old chebonner. But I'm not quite sure about that. But occasionally she came to see mother and she sent me to the door and - she says, I'm Mrs }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16141294\charrsid14039999 Maltby}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 , Is L
iz in? She'd call her Liz. And that would infuriate mother in any case. But when I - mother says - tell her to come in then. And she'd sit one side of the fire and she }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16141294\charrsid14039999 smoked}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  a clay pipe the whole time she was there. And of course our - my father never smo
ked or anything like that. Well they never had the money. And - everything she started to say - well how's the nipper? And my eye caught Gracie's and it went round }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16141294\charrsid14039999 to all}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  - and in the end we were all laughing. And I saw - oh mother was infuriated. She said
, one of these days, when she'd gone, she said, I'll give you all a thorough good hiding. Where's your manners? She may be an old lady. But - there's nothing wrong in that. She -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You never knew her real name?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 We knew it was Mrs Maltby I think it was. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4399113\charrsid14039999 
Because - once at the Empire a Billy Mersen I believe his name was came down and mother says, you won't probably sneer at - Mrs Howson Heather, 'cos she copied us, she - she - she said, because she - this old lady - he was on the music halls or stage
 or something and had married her daughter, this Mr - Billy Mersen, he was a big comedian. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
I've never forgotten it, 'cos I - I found a newspaper and read all about it and - she used to look after his children while his daughter - while his wife went with h
im - round the country - they were sort of on tour. He kept her like a lady and my mother said - there's never sparing anything, if she - whatever she wanted she had and she kept those children lovely. We never saw them and she never came while she was lo
oking after these children. But when they'd perhaps gone away for a holiday together, then she'd come again and see mother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Would she just call in casually?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Just casually.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Or did she have an invitation?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh no invitation, no, it was just a casual cal.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Your mother hardly ever went out you said?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Very -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did your father go and visit friends or neighbours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Only very rarely. I've heard him say an odd time, I'll go round to our Herbert's. But - that - nothing - you know, 
not sort of making a preparation to go out.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 When your parents had these friends round the odd time what do you think they were doing, did they just chat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Just chat.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 They didn't have games or music or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh nothing like that, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Do you remember seeing a policeman around where you lived as a child, I think you said there was one living next door?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. This was Harriet's husband's father. Everybody in the terrace called him Bobby Willis, because his name was Willis. A v
ery big fat man, well - nobody was afraid of him, we all loved him I think as a matter of fact.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Everybody?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Well - if - there used to be a couple that drank heavily in one of the houses and they used to fight on a Saturday night and so on and - and I've heard someone shout over, I shall fetch Bobby Willis to you if you don't shut up.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 When you were naughty did }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16141294\charrsid14039999 your mother}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  ever say, I'll call a policeman?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No. Not like that. Because we were so - I think it was - he was more like an uncle to us. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16141294\charrsid14039999 He was very kind to children, he loved children. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
He was very kind to me. I used to run errands for him sometimes you know. And - I always remember once on a window sill in the back yard in the summer - great big meat dishes full of - I thought they l
ooked like - wizened up bone, I said, what are those Mr Willis, nosey parker again. He said, don't you know. I said, no. Well, he says, they're walnuts. I said, well what are you doing to do them? Well, he says, I'm going to pickle them. And I never - and
 I said, well why do you have to put them in the sun. Well, he said, I've got to soften those shells you see. He was explaining it - I think I drove mother made could we have some pickled walnuts.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Do you like pickled walnuts?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Love them. This Bobby }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16141294\charrsid14039999 Willis's}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 wife was an invalid. She had something wrong with her legs and she used to lay on this sofa in the living room all day and he - and his - he'd got great big sons, all sons, and he had two daughters but they didn't - weren't living at home, they
 were married. And they used to do the washing and the cooking. My mother used to say she never saw anything like it. Yes. And she; used to - one of the one - the elders sons was in the Grenadier Guards, oh he was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16141294\charrsid14039999 a fine}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  man. And when he came home on leave
, that' month's leave he was singing at the top of his voice in the little scullery and doing the washing and pegging it out for his dad. There was no disgrace in it. But that man did all that, and he did cook. Most marvellous joints, thick joints, we'd n
e
ver seen them. And he once said to me, will you have your tea and let me give you a bit of bread and black pudding. And I did like black pudding but I'd never - he fried in the frying pan. I've never forgotten it. I said to mother - well - why did he - it
 
was lovely mother. She says, well - she ways, well we've always eaten them cold. But it - that's the kind of man he - he was a wonderful man I thought. When you see my dad sitting there and Mr Willis scrubbing the step or anything. And that was during his
 police duties, you see, being on shift he had more opportunity.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Was it very unusual that a man did this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. Oh most unusual. Oh yes. He was the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16141294\charrsid14039999 first man}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  I ever saw or heard of doing anything. They used to sit back, wait for the meals to be do
ne and then they were off out, out to the pub are - if they went to the football match and so on. But they didn't think - I don't think they were brought up to help in the house. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you know any other men who did, your brothers-in-law or anybody?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Yes, of course. Well - wait a minute. Julies husband when he - he - he got a lot of - he got gassed during the end of the war and he was off work with his chest and he never got work again, so - of course Julie could earn enough money, she went ou
t. Well he did. You see. But I think he - he only did it because he'd got to do, he resented it very much 'cos he was always moaning about what he'd got to do. And I said to him, well if Julie's earning the money what's the odds? And he said - well, he sa
ys, I've been a sergeant in the Army and - it was so against his }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16141294\charrsid14039999 grain}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
. But he did keep the place clean. But he wouldn't do the upstairs. And he'd cook the meals. He - I don't know whether she'd showed him or how he learnt but he did cook the meals. But he 
was the - the other husbands - Jemima's husband didn't do anything, Alice's husband didn't.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 But the policeman would hang out the washing, the lot?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes, I don't think they - all these men if they - if they did anything you - you'd have to han
g them out. Yes, yes. Yes. George did for me, I had - once when I had a very bad }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16141294\charrsid14039999 abscess}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 under me arm, I'd washed them, I could manage doing it - my arms down but I couldn't get this arm up properly. And I was going to say perhaps our Joyce'll do it. He sa
id, I'll do it. I said, oh I wouldn't - all right he says, give us the basket. And he did, but it was the only one occasion. He would help in the house though. Those that had been soldiers did. Grace's husband wasn't - he didn't want to do any cleaning bu
t he'd do you a few potatoes and he'd put a stew in or anything like that. When she's been at work. But only if you were at work. When you were at home they sat back. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You say the policeman was very kind to children, how do you think he treated other people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Well we never heard him say a cross - he'd shout a bit at the kids who were making a bit of a row, that'll be enough from you, and one word from him, but he didn't sound cross. My father sounded as if he were going to kill you the next min
ute. But he's - he'd got a - a sort of deep voice. And he was brought up in }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16141294\charrsid14039999 Guild}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 Hall Cottages because I don't know whether his father was a policeman but they've always been attached to it. You see. But - all the children - nobody was frightened of Bobby Willis. Because -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Nobody at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
No. And he was such a huge man, he would have terrified some people but of course we lived next door to him and you see you saw him at home must like a housewife. It was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16141294\charrsid14039999 familiarity}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  I think. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Was your home rented?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes, rented.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you see anything of the landlord?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
No, just the collector, the rent collector. We no - we had - we had to got the offices if there way anything unforeseen we'd sort of got to see about, mother used to mostly go,
 it was - oh for the past - I don't know how long she was in there, about twelve years, it was Harlow and Sons on Parliament Street. But we never knew -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Do you know who the landlord was?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No. We had no - no idea at all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you ever think about landlords?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No, it never occurred to us because there were so few houses that were either bought or - or - or - most peoples were rented - in our -

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Do you remember feeling that your parents had a struggle to make ends meet?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes, we 
- we'd got this very deep in us. Although mother never complained. But if we went - and asked can we - if we can have so and so. And we said, we know we'll say yes before we asked, so we stopped asking. You see, when other girls and - boys were going to h
ave such and such a thing, it may be something very trivial - and I used to see it at a theatre, I said to our Grace, she was ever so upset 'cos she couldn't give us those coppers. I said, don't ask her any more.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What difference did it make to the family when your father was ill or out of work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Well she had to work, she's told me she's sat up at night, all night long, doing - she never stopped working until she couldn't see. She was quite old. But - I can't - I can't remember - this was - just the
 out of work phases were when the younger family were coming along, I wasn't born then, I didn't - mother didn't like to talk about it very much, odd things she'd tell us. And he'd tell you little bits I only knew that all her life she had this resentment
 against his mother because - they took his livelihood away. That was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16141294\charrsid14039999 the only}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Do you know if they ever had help from the Guardians or the Parish or any charity?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 I believe I can remember her once saying - she could go without food herself 
but she couldn't see the children, I can't remember it happening but it did. And she did go to the Board of Guardians and they gave her a big loaf of bread. And that's all she ever had. 'Cos as soon as she got some chebonning again she could get some food
.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You can't remember her saying how she was treated?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Oh no. No. Not ever. She just - she said to us, well we can't live entirely on bread. But that was all. She'd say so to dad but she wouldn't to us children perhaps.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How did you feel about this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Oh felt was - we felt we was cheated in some way or other. Well you particularly when you got the idea other children were having this and when you played together, why don't you have one? And you see you don't let - you didn't want - we were a
ll very loyal to her, we wouldn't - we wouldn't give her away at all, but - it hurt us. And once when I said, we can't have anything, we're poor. Don't say that word here. She was - she'd got immense pride. And I don't know where she got her standard from
. Certain things were }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16141294\charrsid14039999 right}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 and certain things were wrong, there was no grey in between those I can assure those. But she was wonderful. She - how she bought that family up, I've said since - since I'm old enough to know - well I can't imagine how ever she 
did it. She told me once she had - lived on cold water of three days so that she'd have enough - just enough to keep the children going. And charity - oh - once the - at the St }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16141294\charrsid14039999 Mary\rquote s
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  church there they had a - a food kitchen and - the Bishop told her - any
body who's father wasn't working take a basin and go down to the food kitchen and there'd be some soup for you. Oh I saw her hackles rise straight away. 'Cos Grace and I were - always to go together so as we shouldn't spill it. She was going to let - we'v
e got a dinner for today, we'll manage.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 She wouldn't let you go?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
No. She resented other people knowing. And if at any time we had been short of anything, I got smacked once for crying - we hadn't had any dinner that particular day, I think it wa
s towards the end of the week and she hadn't got her money. And she said, what are you crying for? I said, I'm ever so hungry. Could I just have a slice of bread? She said, you know there's no bread 'there 'til we can go and get some. You be patient. And 
-
 I went into another child's house to play and they were sitting down to a gorgeous dinner. And of course we'd all been told what were good manners, you come out immediately they have a meal. And I got to the door and of course, only being a kid, me feeli
n
gs - sniffing and this lady, she was a Welsh lady, she was good, she said, what's the matter Annie? I said, I'm hungry. Well come along then, she said, there's plenty here, sit down. Mother won't let me. And she went and told me mother. Oh - you won't go 
i
n there again to play. You'll play in the yard. You see, she - I don't know where she get this immense pride from. She'd got a standard and she wasn't going to let anyone know that she fell below that standard. But - it was only her own efforts, dad didn'
t care.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did she feel she'd married beneath her do you think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Oh no. No, she treated him like a lord. But - you know the newspaper at night - if by any chance you picked up, put that down, you're father's not seen it. And he had all the best cuts.
 Whatever - when there was a joint to cut. Your father'll cut that. And he had the best of everything. She'd treat - oh - I couldn't have done, I've said since I've been married, I should have said no, you don't have a blinking hit, you haven't done a thi
ng towards it. But - that was her - I don't know how to describe it. She - never made him lose his manhood. She paid everything, she wouldn't be in debt. Oh - debt was abhorrent to her.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 She must have been a marvellous person?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 She - well I think so. I do indeed. I know - I don't know - 'cos she - we used to think she was so harsh, always see other }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16141294\charrsid14039999 children\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 mothers giving them penny, go and have a - buy some sweets from the shop and that kind of thing and we'd look but we daren't say anything, we mustn't say we never had one. Only a ha'penny from dad on Saturday. And she must have given him that. Yes.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Instead of giving it direct to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. Dad's Saturday ha'penny was gold to us. Until he went to work of course it - immediately he went to work that all stopped.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 When there was someone in the district who people disapproved of very strongly was there any special way in which they showed it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 I don't think there was outwardly. They'd say it indoors, I know there was some people t
hat drank a lot and mother was very scathing. Good heavens, she says, the money they waste on drink. That kind of - and it made us feel that to - drink was strong. But at - I have heard - there used to be rows and fights you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Do you ever remember anyone being made to leave by what some people call rough music?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No, this is new to me. No, never heard of that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Have you ever heard of an effigy being made of anybody?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Only - only at bonfire night they'd make one. But not in the normal way. No. I never heard of it. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Were you given any lessons by your parents, I imagine it was the opposite wasn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. Yes. She spoke - mother spoke - sort of rough English, there was some words she didn't say correctly at all and she was ve
ry cross when I once told her. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14878678\charrsid14039999 She would say, pass me me scissors. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
I said, mother, there's not a thin scissors. She says, you're a very rude little girl. I said, but no, you can say it right. But she wouldn't alter it. And she never said yellow in her life
. It was yalla. And I said, you - did your mother say that, where did you learn these kind of - there was one or two other words that she used and she would not change it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Can you remember any dialect words she used that have completely gone out now?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You know the word mardy don't you? That's easy. Yes, that is, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What do you mean by the word chastise?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh she - if you got a smacked face or a smacked b.t.m. Yes, I suppose it's different parts of the - where they've come from. Yes. Oh 
I don't think until I was getting more grown up I ever heard the word chastise. I'll knock your head off she'd say. That was another thing she'd - never do it of course, never even hit you if she could help it. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14878678\charrsid14039999 But if she did hit you, you knew you got thimble pie on your nut and you felt it for quite a few days.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How old were you when you first went to school?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Just about three. This - the - the church schools took you when - if you could speak plainly. And it didn't matter if there was other chil
dren in the house, I believe they thought it did help the mother, you see, and it was not far from where we were living at that time in Silverwood place, we'd only got to cross the bay and I was at St }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14878678\charrsid14039999 Mary\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  school. And she took - I was in - I doubt whether I was three. I loved school though.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What time of the morning did you go?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Nine o'clock.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 And when did you come back?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Twelve o'clock. And then we were - must have been half past three when we came home in the afternoon. But you see the
re were other big ones who time - if - she was a bit afraid of us crossing the road there and it - it - as I - when I was little I can always remember her hurrying Grace, go on take this child across the road, see she's safe, you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you go to afternoon school as well when you were three?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 And it was a church school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 It was a church school - St }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14878678\charrsid14039999 Mary\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  church. Oh yes, boys and girls.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How long did it take to get to school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Not - well, I should say ten for a child '
cos our yard was a big one as we came down then we'd got to cut across Bellargate, up this flight of steps into the - the bay and they bay - the school was the top of the bay you see. It really wasn't far but it would be for little legs you see. Bellar. T
hese were some of the old English gates you know. Bellargate, Bartergate. Didn't you know them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You came home for your midday meal didn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What did you think of school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Loved it. I loved it from the start.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How did you feel about the teachers?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14878678\charrsid14039999 Well - odd ones - that I didn't seem to get on with at all. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
We had one that was very sarcastic and I used to think - as she - when she sort of walked down the rows and looked at - and I think - I thought she was sneerin
g at me, that's the idea I got, the woman may not have been. But - I couldn't bear that one, I never did any good for her, but the others - I was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15204605\charrsid14039999 perfectly}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  all right. But I was so dead keen to learn.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did the teachers emphasise certain things as important in life?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What did they emphasise particularly?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Good manners - were most important. And to be truthful in all things. And tidy in your person. One teacher used to examine your shoes to see if they'd been cleaned each night, you 
see, and you were tidy when you were - and not - and if ever you got a tear in your clothes she'd say, it's high time you learnt to sew, you see. They sort of installed a - a personal pride in you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did they worry about ways of speaking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes, you - you mustn't say you and you mustn't say I'm going on. That was the usual - words.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 If you did something the teachers disapproved of what would happen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Get the cane.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Girls the same as boys?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 For what sort of offences would you have got the cane?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Oh she was particularly - one teacher at ours - she was there most of - for talking, I would talk. And for talking to the other girl and not paying attention to the lesson. She'd tell me once, then the next time she'd say you
'll have the cane. She didn't - she'd just say, come on and - just - not - yes, just on the hand. It wasn't hard.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did your parents show an interest in your schoolwork?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes, mother - mother used to say I was daft.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did they ask what you did at school?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh we didn't need any asking, it was so new to us all that we wanted to tell her.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did they ever visit the school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes, she had to come on one occasion. I'm trying to think what - it was second - oh I know what it was now. My 
shoes had worn out and I'd got me feet wet every time and she couldn't afford to have them repaired, they were beyond repair, they were only secondhand really when I had them. And me feet were very wet - and I saw the headmistress there, she was a very ni
c
e woman, I liked her, she says, couldn't you change your shoes child? And before I could think I said, I haven't got any more. So she didn't say any more to me but when I came home - would you give this little note to your mother? I said, yes, I will. And
 
of course when I gave it to her she said, you'd better read it. You see, because she wasn't sure of herself. And - it said - was it possible to get that child another pair of shoes, she's going to get a very bad cold getting her feet wet like that. And mo
t
her started to cry and that upset me. I said, I wish she'd never looked at me feet now. I've managed before, you see. But - I don't know whether she asked one of the other girls, my elder sister was going to work, to go - there was some place - there was 
a
 sort of a market where they'd get secondhand goods. I went - next day I think they must have been and bought a pair. Wouldn't have cost very few coppers but - at least they would have - wouldn't let the feet get wet. So I - I said, can I show them to the
 headmistress, she'll be pleased I haven't got these others on again. So mother, said, well -t would be good manners to tell her that I say thank you. But that was the only time I can remember. I was so little you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did your father ever go to the school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did the other children come from similar types of home to your own?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did the teachers single out some children for different treatment from the others?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well - I did hear one of them say that if you work hard we're 
going to help you but if you're not interested, waste of our time, you see. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14878678\charrsid14039999 And a child that did take an interest - they did help you, you know. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 And they once asked us if we'd be willing to give up our playtime, we had ten minutes break you see, and someti
mes they'd let us go into the bay to play - walk or run round. And - but if it was something in particular - we used to sometimes do songs, learn songs and things and it took a long time. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14878678\charrsid14039999 
And - she'd say - well if you're prepared to give up a bit of your p
laytime, they did help - they worked very hard with us, 'cos we got awful to do, we got Welsh people, quite a lot of Welsh people lived in our - our - Silverdale Place, yes, and - people from all over. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 There were very few real people, you know, Nottingham people. And it must have been very difficult for them.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Were there any gangs or groups in this little school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Were there any children who were left out of things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14878678\charrsid14039999 They'd have to be very naughty indeed for anything like that to happen. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Because you - we were all - I must impress upon you that we were all terrified of teachers you know. You wait 'til you get to school, the teacher'll soon straighten you out, if you'd been naughty at home you see, and you got - went with the school in 
fear. But you see you were so tiny. You were sort of brought up with it and it didn't impress you as it would have been later on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 When did you change schools? Or did you just change departments?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No, I - I had to leave St }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14878678\charrsid14039999 Mary\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  because we moved house. Went from Silverwood Place to Gordon Road because Albert was getting a big boy and mother said, I must have at least an attic to himself you see and - John was growing up and she had to do this }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14878678\charrsid14039999 and}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  so we went to this house on Gordon Road. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14878678\charrsid14039999 Well it wa
s much too far for John and I to go right to St Mary's. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
But at the bottom of Gordon Road we only had to cut across the Victoria Park and was Bath Street school there and I was taken there. And I stayed until - forget how old I was. We had a to take a - an 
examination to see if we were clever enough to go to - a scholarship for Huntingdon Street school, which they had - it was a - they had to pay you see. It wasn't like the scholarships there are today. These girls and boys, well they have better class peop
le, business people mostly, and if they'd got one or two vacancies they'd let them form the board - we were called the board schools you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 So you went to a church school then a board school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Do you remember about what age you took the scholarship?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 I'm not quite sure, I think - well - I shouldn't }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14878678\charrsid14039999 be}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  quite ten because - we moved again by the time I was ten and we was on - we went on Gordon Road a long while 'cos mother didn't like it, don't know why.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 And Huntingdon Street?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 It's still there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What sort of school was it?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
It was just an - yes, just call this Huntingdon Street Council school I think, or something like that. The fees weren't heavy fees. There were one or two of the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14878678\charrsid14039999 girls}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  used to tell me, my father pays - so much a year for us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 And you didn't have to pay?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
You got free you see because - you'd - you'd - you'd been top of your class, I'd been in the top class at Bath Street so long they were getting tired of me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How did you get to school at Huntingdon Street, did it take long to walk?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
No, not really. Though it was - it was coming from - from - Gordon Road first and after a while we moved to - Heatherley Street off Union Road, you see, and then it wasn't really far at all. And I stayed there until I was thirteen and could - could leave.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How did you feel about the teachers at that school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Only one there I couldn't get on with, the others I liked. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14878678\charrsid14039999 
And I was very, very happy there. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did the teachers at that school emphasise certain things as important?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What did they think was important?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well you see - in }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15204605\charrsid14039999 my}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  class like I can remember our - our children in our group, we were made - we had got to make a dress or whatever we got on la
st so very long, we weren't allowed to come to the table without a white pinafore on. And you had to wear one. And mother wouldn't let me to Huntingdon Street without a pinafore. And I can }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14878678\charrsid14039999 
hear}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  the gasp when I walked in with this - it was quite a nice pina
fore, it was white. And the teacher said to me, you could have hung your pinafore up in the cloakroom. Annie. I said, but mother wouldn't let - I'd soil my dress perhaps. You see. She said, well it's the rules here we don't have you in here with - a lot o
f }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14878678\charrsid14039999 snobbishness}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 there, that was - oh - very much so. And so of course I was made to - oh in fact I rolled it up in a bundle and put it in me - schoolbook bag when I got towards school that I shouldn't have to be immolated again. But she was very cross about 
it, I told Grace and somehow or other it - it came out, she didn't mean it to do. So she says, you'd better not take them any more, she said, if that's the regulation - she said, I wonder what the pinafore - the dresses look like. Underneath.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did Grace go to the same school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You were the only one of the family to get a scholarship were you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. Grace went to Bath Street 'til she left. But she would be thirteen, just the same as me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You say there was a lot of snobbery at this school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. Awful lot.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Can you talk about that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Yes. We all had our own pegs in the cloakroom, and - yes. And I'd - I'd hung; me - hat up on this - my own peg. And they were very long cloakrooms. And as I got to the bottom - the hat hit 
me on the back, it had been thrown at me, my hat. And I heard this girl say, I'm not going to put }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14878678\charrsid14039999 mine}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 with the dirty Bath Street lot, that's how they termed us. There was so many of us that had gone there and we were the dirty Bath Street lot and you coul
dn't live it down. And the headmistress was a snob. I always remember her name, Mrs Thorn, and I heard her once say, some little thing we'd done and she said, what could you expect from that place?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 The headmistress was as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes, I thought th
at's - they took their cue from her. But I found one teacher a friend. You see we had - there was quite a lot of - sort of lessons that we'd never taken at Bath Street, particularly in English, parsing and paraphrasing. Actually, I daren't let on, I didn'
t
 know what it meant. You see. And I sat quiet. And when the teacher was walking round - noticing all, this Miss Price said - you're not getting on very well Annie. And I said, no, I - I've never done it before. You never did it? No. Oh dear, she said, I'm
 
sorry about that. It's going to keep you backwards. So she said, will you give me up a little bit of your playtime and I'll just put you on the - start you on the bottom. Of course -n no time I caught the others up and I was all right. But - she - there w
o
uld only be one teacher in that school who would ever have done that to help me because I was a Bath Street girl. You didn't get any - any help at all if you fell - and then - when it came to - they had a - a sort of - small examination in the middle of t
h
e term and - you each had to say a piece of poetry. Well I was scared stiff of this piece of poetry, I thought - I thought, well, you used to say it in the mission. I'm not going to let them worry me. And - when it came to my turn - you had to stand up an
d
 I said this bit of poetry, it wasn't very much. And I saw her looking at me and she called me to the desk, she said, Annie, she said, that was the best piece of poetry I've heard spoken she said, I'm going to give you full marks. Oh, I said, shan't be ve
ry popular shall I? She said, you naughty girl. She says, but it was the way you said it. I said, well I'm only speaking like I'm speaking to you now. Oh no you didn't she said. But she was a lovely person.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What sort of homes did these other girls come from?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Oh there's quite a few of them who are fairly comfortable, had good positions and got lovely clothes and that kind of thing and - they'd sort of pull aside, they wouldn't pass you on the stairs if they could help it. And they - oh they used t
o look at us if they - as if we were tramps in the street. And of course it used to get my back up a bit and I said to one girl, I said, well I shan't contaminate you, I said, and I'm not a tramp. And she tossed her head and turned. But after a while I ju
st ignored it, I thought, well - they don't know any better perhaps.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did the teachers single out some children for different treatment from the others?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes, definitely. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How did this show?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well if there was - anything you were p
articularly - very good at, you'd never get a chance. Oh so and so, you - come on dear, now you say it. Or when we used to read, that's something I learned which I'd never had the chance to do before. We had - had to have a book a month. And - I didn't kn
o
w where to get them from. So one - the teacher said, go to the public library, I'll give you a card. So of course - and we had to study these books and read so much that - as to get our reading perfect and pronunciation right and that kind of thing. And I
 liked it, and if I liked a thing I could do it well and if I didn't like it I didn't try.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What didn't you try at?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 History, I couldn't bear it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How old were you when you left school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 I should - I wasn't - I wasn't quite thirteen. Becau
se I should have waited 'til the March when I was thirteen but dad had to go to the education officers to say that I was thirteen - he went a few days before, he didn't mean me to miss the chance for getting a job. And he got the wrong date. And I went an
d got this job. And they made me go back to school again for two - for another week because I'd been - gone a few days before.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Would you have stayed on longer if you'd had the opportunity?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 I couldn't have done you see, 'cos -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 If you had been able would you have liked to have done?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes, I should have loved to, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you attend any part time education afterwards?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. Yes. I went to Huntingdon Street }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14878678\charrsid14039999 night school}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  for - book keeping, English - you had to take three subjects. I forget what I - what the other one was now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Was it shorthand and typing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. Yes. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14878678\charrsid14039999 
And my boss, Mr Egbolt, he paid for me to go to - Ball's Business College on King Street. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 When the typist was off, and they'd bought me a little typewriter 
to do the tickets. He said it was quicker than handwriting and he said, if you - if you're prepared to give one night of your - of your - you know - after you've left work - to go, I'll pay for you. And it was very expensive. Yes. It was only people in bu
siness who - who could afford to send their daughters there. And I loved it. Every minute of it. And that gave me the grounding you see which has kept me going ever since.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How many years did you go to evening classes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh it was only - they were t
hree month course, I think I went to two different ones. And Mr Headgate said he'd had a letter from the principal to say they were very satisfied with me. That I'd worked hard.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Do you have any regrets about your education?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No, not now. Because ever since I've always - each job I've taken sort of I've improved myself a bit.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Do you think you benefited from attending school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. Oh yes. I often wish I'd have had a better opportunity - more opportunity to learn, or that I'd paid more att
ention because I was very full of un you see and if I didn't like - I should have been made to do the things I didn't like. I felt that it wasn't fair - I - others I could do quite - with no strain at all and I was all right. But one of the teachers expla
i
ned to me, when we were going to give the prizes out, she said, I resent giving you this prize Annie. I said, what for? What for, that was my pet question. Oh, she said, well - most of these girls have worked hard the whole term to try to get ahead. But o
f
 course - you've got ahead of them and you've played about half the time. Oh, I said, I didn't look at that - at it like that, I'm very sorry. She says, well that - you know, if I could, I wouldn't give it you. But, she said, I'm compelled to for the work
, you see. You see and it proved to me that - I should have concentrated more on the things I didn't like. Even - oh dear, yes, wasted opportunity.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 While you were at school did you have a part time job or any means of earning a little regular money?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No, not while I was at school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you do errands for people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Oh yes. Running about. There were some - several old couples about. And - they asked me to go and fetch some potatoes and things like that, I didn't mind, of course the shops were all very near.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you get paid for that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh I've had many a penny, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 So it was not regular but you earned yourself some pocket money?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Were you allowed to keep that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. Mother would never take it from us. I ne
ver had more than a penny. But you see, if I went for two or three I'd save it against I might want something.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Your first full time job now, first of all you were an errand girl weren't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How long was that for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 I didn't s
top there so long. I can't remember just exactly. I didn't - no, not long at all, because I was not quite fifteen when I went to Redgates. And I was there for over seven years.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How did you get the Redgates job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14878678\charrsid14039999 Well I wanted - I used to walk up 
Heathcote Street to go along Stoney Street to the place - to Homburger's where I was the errand girl. And - this overlooker, I think I've mentioned about, she used to make me take this cat for walks and I got - I did resent it 'cos all the lads round abou
t
 going for the errands - here's the cat girl coming you know, and I - I used to - I won't stop - I don't like it, you know, and as I passed this Redgate's it was just at the top of Heathcote Street, loading on to - is it Hockley, I thin, yes, it would be 
Hockley. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
And I saw this notice outside, it said - smart girl wanted. Able to reckon and a good writing hand. So I thought, oh the overlooker at Hamburgers likes me cards that I write out for the dinners, I don't know about the reckoning. But then I didn't g
et any mess ups with the money. I thought, perhaps I will. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14878678\charrsid14039999 And we had to be at - didn't have to be at Hamburger\rquote 
s 'til nearly nine o'clock because - the errand girls couldn't go before the - main staff were in and if they were on short time we were on shor
t time, so I called at the Redgate and I saw the manager came to me and I told him, I said, I've come in answer to your - advert for a girl. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
He looked at me. I was very small. So he says - what can you do? What have you been doing? I said, an errand girl. 
He said, hm, that won't make me think any the better of you. Anyway, he says, he bought a piece of paper, write your name and address on here. He says, can you add up? I said, oh, I think I can. And he made a little addition sum at the side. He says, do t
h
at. And I'll pass this in to Mr Headgate when he comes, he was the boss. He said, and - what wages are you getting? I said, well you know where - what errand girls get, five shillings. Oh well, he says, that won't do for a clerk, we shall have to have you
 
as a clerk I think. I were - oh I couldn't believe this was true. And - he said, call in gain - I don't think I went the next day, I think it was the day after. Can you come at the same time? And I'll have a talk with Mr Redgate about you and we'll see if
 he thinks you'll do. 'Course when I went and they took me into Mr }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14878678\charrsid14039999 Redgate's}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 private office then. He says, you look a bright girl. I said, I try to be sir. So he said, very well then, he said, how would you like to be an order room clerk? I said - no errands? He said, no. Never even said - would be a waste of time }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15204605\charrsid14039999 you }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
doing errands. And I loved it from the beginning. And you see the war - all he men, the managers, the chief clerk, they were all called up, all the men were.
\par Mr Redgate called us - five of us w
ho did different jobs, there was Lois the typist, I was a clerk and - one or two more packers, light packers as we called it, he called us into his office, said, well - he says - I want to know if you 'lo help me. He said, the boys have all got to go, he 
said, and we can't keep the place going and the jobs open unless we all pull together. He said, and I'm going to allocate you all a job to do in addition to your own, but, he said, I'm going to see that you're well paid. I shall give each one of you two }
{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14878678\charrsid14039999 pound}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 a month over and above your wages. And he gave me double wages to start with. And I've had raises too. You see, I was to give all the work out to the outdoor hands, do all their wage books and help in any }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14878678\charrsid14039999 other way}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 . Had to write all the tickets for the 
laces that went away and all that. And - Doris did the typing. I used to help her if I - if she was too busy and she helped me. We got through and we kept going and the first month he called us in, he said, I am proud of you girls. There's not anything be
e
n left. Oh with that - oh and that two pounds. He said, what are you going to do with it? To me. I said, well - one of my sisters, it was Alice who taught me thrift. She says, never throw your money away Annie. Says, I - I can earn good money but every we
e
k I go to Heathcote Street money society, it was underneath our building where I worked. You had a - you paid - a shilling a week for three years, just about three, and you got ten pounds at the end of it with the interest. And I'm thinking about this ten
 
pound. Well if I only put a shilling in it - I won't be spending it would I. So Mr Redgate said - and I showed him me book, I'd got it with me, I'd been that morning. He said, oh, he said, you beat everything you do. He said, haven't you been to any dance
s
? Oh yes. Been to - we used to go to the sixpenny hop as we called it. But that - that's all - and right from the start - I realized that don't throw away if you did get anything. And of course - I was married when I was there, he gave me a lovely silver 
t
eapot when I got married. I let my daughter have it. And it was hard to part with it but I thought well - better let her have it and - I went - I - I left when I had Joyce and then - I went back to him again. He wrote me, he said, can you put a few days i
n Annie, if it's only to do some marking for us. Marking the tickets for the lace. That's why I'm able to mark the decimals because - used to have to put twelve yard eleven meters and so }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14878678\charrsid14039999 
on and}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  work it out because - the meters were always so much short - shorter than the yards and that kind of thing. And -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 So you left to have Joyce?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes, and then I went back again.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What would you have called yourself when you went back again?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Just Mrs Williams, they called me -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 I wondered if you got a work title?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Well I did just the same work. Order room clerk. In a lace warehouse. You see. They said it was very essential to put that because there was order room clerks in all sorts of trades. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How long did you stay the next time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Quite a long while. 'Cos Joyce was running about. And we were - George was - thought he was going to get his discharge because he'd signed on for twelve years in the Army. But instead of that they - they demobbed him - three months before. You see, if h
e'd have - they'd have let him - serve that full twelve years he'd - they would have been compelled to give him a pension for service, time they called it. But you see he'd lost his eye in the beginning of the war and he'd got a - they gave him a - disabi
l
ity pension for that but they got rid of him before they had to add it to - the other one you see. And then, when I knew he was coming home, well I didn't know, I'd still got these two rooms at mother's you see and I didn't know - I hoped he'd get a job. 
So of course I stopped at home at did - what I could. But of course he never did get a job for four years. Four solid years he never earned a penny. But any -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 And you were still at }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14878678\charrsid14039999 Redgate's}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 ?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No, I couldn't go because he'd altered the staff round
 again and I knew very well that I couldn't have given the time, he wanted me for - if he could have taken me part time I could have done it you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you go back to chebonning?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes, everything at home again.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How long did you do that for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
For - quite a while. And then I went - and then Grace said to me - she was working at the embroidery place and she says, there's a - there's a machine empty next to me. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14878678\charrsid14039999 
They wanted a ribbon ender. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 I'll show you. This was at - Lenton. So I says, well, if I've got to come full time. Yes. Some dates are still in me mind, and others are not.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How did you get your first job, was there any difficulty in getting it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh no, because - the schools didn't have everybody leaving at a certain time. Yo
u - you left when you was thirteen. You see, you didn't have to wait 'til the - no - no end of the term business, waiting so until everybody was leaving. You see. So - it wouldn't be - well, a matter of fact I - I believe we went - we went down on the Fri
day afternoon, the girl next door and I, and we both got this - these jobs before we - we was to start on the Monday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How did you know the jobs were there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well you - oh there was always a - label out, errand girl wanted, or something like that, or someone would tell you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 So you got it yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Your parents didn't get it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What exactly did you have to do as an errand girl apart from taking the cat out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well they - had to used a little - sort of hand thi
ng to wind cord and stuff that they put on the laces for edgings and keep all the bobbins - with the numbers, tidy in boxes so that when the machinist came out and they wanted a box - they called it pearl, it was like - the edge of the lace you see. And t
h
ey'd come and ask me for a certain number and I'd know just where to give it 'em, or I would wind them some more off card, but couldn't put the cards on the machines, had to be wound on bobbins. And I did anything they - the machinists asked me to do and 
all sorts of errands within the factory and without the factory.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What hours did you work there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Well that - that depended. It was mostly from - half past eight until half past five. That's when they were working - more full time but - they had a 
lot of short time at that place and when the other - the machinists and that all went home say at four o'clock they had no more work for them, the overlooker used to say to me, you can go Annie, it's no good keeping you. You see, and I didn't work so many
 hours. That's where I used to do the chebonning you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you ever work Sundays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh no. Always Saturdays. Oh yes, there was no -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 A whole day on Saturday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No, not the whole day, always 'til twelve noon.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You weren't there very long but did anyone have holidays with pay, would you have done?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh no, nothing like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you remember what you were paid?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. Five shillings. Normal errand girl - it was the standard rate for an errand girl.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you feel it was fair?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes, we thought we were - oh we were right. Five shillings was an enormous amount of money.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you give this to your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 All of it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 All of it. And she always gave us threepence to start off, that was our pocket money.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 And it was spent on general housekeeping I suppose?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Oh yes. She couldn't have managed otherwise you see with all the other girls, they paid their board, that meant just for their food and that but they bought all their own clothing,
 but until I could earn enough to pay me clothing - and the others - mother had to find our clothes, but we always tipped - gave her our packet just as we got it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How did you get on with the other people you worked with?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Very well, there was ju
st odd ones that were a bit - erratic, one or two you know that used to - think they - well, I was a child you know and they couldn't - every little thing - blame it onto her so everything went wrong that they could get a go at me they did. But I didn't l
et them bully me because I liked the other girls and they liked me. Just an odd one or two.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How did your employer treat you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh, very well.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How did you feel about him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 I liked him very much.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How did you feel about the work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Oh - well I liked it, really, I liked the indoor part but - I loathed taking this cat out. Oh - and you see they were so huge, these long rooms, they went right across the top of the factory, it was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14878678\charrsid14039999 five floors}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  up, I think it's pulled down now if I remember rightly, and there was the machines all in this room and the far room the - clippers and }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14878678\charrsid14039999 calipers}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 used to sit in little groups and work in there and there was no machinery in there so that you could shout your head off in that room and nobody would hear 
you in this room. And I had to put big sheets of brown paper down near the hoist, one of those hand hoist things that you pull up, for the cat to use as a lavatory, and I had to fill it with sawdust each - and take it up each day and carry it down these -
 all these flights of stairs, there was no lift or anything, to the dustbin so it wouldn't smell or anything. That was the part I didn't like.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did most of these places have cats to keep the mice down?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well - quite a lot - we had a - there were a lot of rats and mice.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 There was a reason for this, it wasn't just somebody's pet was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Oh definitely. Oh yes, it was the overlookers pet, she bought it herself as a little one but - they were very pleased she did because - you'd go some days and on the benches where - where lace had been left }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14878678\charrsid14039999 when}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14878678\charrsid14039999 machinist}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 got up, it's been all - dirt form them, from mice and rats too. On the lace and they had to sort of try to scrub it clean. And it smelt you - oh open the door sometimes. You could smell it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You told me how you found your - second job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes, I went in answer - there was the bit of notice outside - a girl wanted, quick at figures, or something like that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What exactly }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14878678\charrsid14039999 you had}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  to do in that job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14878678\charrsid14039999 Well - the - this was a -
 Levers lace place and - the - it used to - they'd come in great big bundles and then these lace duchesses that we used to call them - they - well, middle women really, and they'd got huge hampers on wheels and - they'd take the - oh the - biggest - big a
s beds sometimes - hundreds and hundreds -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 And they'd give it to the outworkers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
And they'd take it home and draw it or - scallop it, it just depended what wanted doing to it. And then it was brought into the factory and - and made up in - ever s
o fancy - little blue pieces of paper and bows on it or - my job was to ticket this all and watch - check from the books for each order that -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You had to measure it as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh no, I never had - that was all done upstairs into the workroom. In t
he order room I had to put these gilt tickets on, the yards and the meters on each one and the number and - what order it was for. Because you see, there's perhaps be one particular number was very popular and I'd perhaps have to get five different orders
 at time, they piled them up and then we }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14878678\charrsid14039999 had}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 to make them into little parcels and - they were called - assortments. Then the boys would pack them in these huge cases and they weren't all over the world.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What hours did you work there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh I - nine 
o'clock, always an office girl then. Once I was in - I was an order - when you was clerk you weren't any more an errand girl, you came at nine o'clock. Nine 'til six. But if you had your booking at the days and you'd got all your booking to do, you see, I
 
had to book all this work out to these - outdoor hands and we'd got twenty of them and it was very complicated and I had to have a price book with all the different prices. Some were two three a dozen, some were a penny farthing a dozen and so on. I must 
be sure to get those all correct. And I'd got to put this down in my daybook. So that could go into the office to be checked when I made the - minute out for them. And so of course if they haven't finished them - the - have you done your books Annie? }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14878678\charrsid14039999 No, I've not finished, I've had a lot today, Mr Redgate. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Very well then, finish them off, then you can go.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you ever work Sundays there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No, not ever. Nor Saturday. Twelve o'clock. To - I mean Saturday afternoon, I'm speaking of. Work 'til twelve.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you have any holidays with pay when you were a clerk?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
No, I don't know. No, we just got the ordinary - annual holidays, Bank Holiday and those kind of things, but there was no regular - nobody sort of had a holiday for themselves, you see, w
e just had the - Bank Holiday, Easter and Christmas and so on, but nothing else.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What were you paid as a clerk?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well I were - I was getting the five shillings at the - as errand girl and then - and he gave me seven and six to start, that was - 
and I thought that was wonderful. And - every year I had a rise. And then when the war broke out and I got this two pound a month bonus for all the men you see I was getting quiet a good -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What would you have been getting at the beginning of the war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Can't just remember for sure. The minimum rate - was - twelve shillings a week, that was the top wages a girl got when she was twenty-one, you see, you started at five shillings and if you were quick or good at your work you gradually rose until you 
got that twelve shillings. That was the sort of - standard rate. Yes. But I believe the clerks got more, I'm sure I got more than my sisters because they used to say, you don't - you don't do half the work I do and yet you get more money than me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 And during the war you got the extra two pounds?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 We got the extra. Yes, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 So it must have jumped up then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes, it did, quite a bit.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 When you were getting the seven and six did you give any money of to your mother, was it the same pattern again?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
No, she made me pay my board then. When you began to get anything like an amount of money and she thought that you could clothes yourself and - like you paid - like the elder girls, you paid you board, it was called paying your 
board. And there was a standard rate. Don't know whatever she - I - I think it used to be seven and six and I'm not quite sure about this, and I know that there used to be lots of - would say haven't paid me board yet. And they would say - oh, I've got se
ven and six. Whether they'd got seven and six towards it or whether the - they'd got the whole seven and six. If they were very short of work they still had to pay that you see of course.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 When you were only earning seven and six you would still have given it to your mother
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How would you have clothed yourself then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Well she would - well - I - I'd be - you see, when we was chebonning, getting that - and we were doing chebonning you see, so I'd got the - I'd always got some money for my clothing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How did you get on with the people you worked with here?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Very well indeed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How did your employer treat you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Extremely well, I'd never met a man like him before, he was - I think one of the most exceptional bosses I've ev
er come across. He - had them - he thought of the workers comfort. Others you see, they sort of - you was just a - a shied for then walk by you but - a man got the toothache one day and it was warm and I'd got the window open because I liked the window op
e
n, and the boss's son - he was a very nice man, he walked by, he said, you know you'll never get that toothache better like this. We must have the window closed. And there was a sweet on the desk somebody had given him, I wouldn't have it, I put it down, 
he says, no don't eat those wretched sweets. There was all - because it pained. He was thoughtful.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you know it was a good firm when you happened to go to it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 I knew nothing about it at all. I'd just seen it as I passed daily going to the other place. No, didn't know anybody there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did they pay for many people to do these evening courses?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2979937\charrsid14039999 
Only - I don't know, I think it was if they thought you'd got any promise, you see, and when he bought me this little old typewriter, because I - o
dd times I'd get a drop of ink on the lace when I was writing these tickets, some of them were very small and I had to learn to write small, and always a child writes big, but I got - I could do all right. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 But anyway - he told me what to do. If I'd got ink
 on I could take this little packet back to the workroom to the overlooker and I ask her - she'd undo it and work it in so that it didn't show on the crease. Tricks of the trade. And - you know, I didn't - I met - somebody nudged me elbow. I think one or 
two bi}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2979937\charrsid14039999 t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
s of ink got on - frequently, Mr Redgate came by, he says - and he saw me do one. He says, you know Annie, we can't have that. I said, no Sir, I'm sorry. 'Cos ball point pens weren't even thought of in those days. You see. So he said, could you type 
those little tickets? I said, oh I've done quite a lot on Doris's machine, that was the typist. Well come along and show me how you do them. Of course - we used to play about, we hadn't always - we weren't - you know - sort of grinding all he time, we had
 to work 'til the work came down and then we had to work like slaves to get it all finished and I showed him, I did quite a lot - He said, it's much }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2979937\charrsid14039999 quicker}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 . I says, yes, I like - he said, do you like typing? I }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15204605\charrsid14039999 said}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
? Oh yes. So no more was said and then the
 next - it was only an old one. But I used it for all the tickets, I never wrote any more after that. And - when she was off ill - the typist was off ill for a long while and - the manager came to me, he said, I can't get my letters written now Doris is a
w
ay, wanted the letters typing. So he says, you type those tickets, could you type a letter for me? I said, I can't do shorthand, I've not shorthand. Well, he says - we'll see what we can do. And of course I did him a few letters, he dictated them to me, a
n
d he must have told Mr Redgage that I'd done these letters quite satisfactorily. And then he came to me and he said, are you willing to give up a couple of your nights off when you've done work? Of course I was thrilled to bits. And he paid those fees and
 
bought me books, and they were quite expensive in those days. And of course when it was time - she was off about six months, she'd a long illness, and I kept them all going. There was two - there was - Mr - Mr Redgate's letters, Mr Price's letters, George
's letters, and my own letters and - always the price lists, I had to type all these, and I - I liked doing it. And I suppose really it - it did for them. You see, but it was knowledge to me - I used it in many ways after you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What jobs did you do after this, can you tell me?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You were telling me your sister told you of a job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Yes. To embroider. You see, I stayed - I went up to work 'til - end of January when Joyce was born in the June, you see, and I couldn't go any longer. An
d then I got - it was all work at home what I could get, but it was very poor paid and it was very erratic. You may have a lot of work one week, the next week you'd nothing. You see, George wasn't earning anything. So of course I had to do my work. And so
 she said, there's a - there's a machine against me, she said, happen you'll soon take to it, you're not daft. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2979937\charrsid14039999 That's how they used to express it to you, you see. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 So I said, oh, I said, I don't know, I said, but if it was writing his tickets out for him I c
ould do that all right. So she says, well, I'll take you down tomorrow when I go. It was right down Lenton. And I was frightened to death of the machines, strangely enough, yes, scared. They were only like little ordinary sewing machines what we had to us
e but no teeth in them, you see, and you had to used these hoops to make the pattern by movement of your hand - the same thing - like embroidery
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What was the job called?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Mending. You }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2979937\charrsid14039999 were}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  a Swiss embroidery mender
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Why would you call that mending when you're not mending?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
You are mending. Well - it was a hole in the embroidery but not in the met it was made on. You see - this - this Swiss embroidery - well it was made on nylon, it was made on fine silk and the machines were ten yards lon
g, there was two tiers, one belong and one above, made twenty yards at once. Hundreds of thousands of needles, those - little girls used to have to thread up. Well - if a bobbin of silk or cotton }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2979937\charrsid14039999 broke}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  it left a gap in the embroidery. The net wouldn't be b
roken. So they'd bring them to the menders, used to have to pull them on a counter, a specially black painted }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2979937\charrsid14039999 shiny}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 counter to show it up and tie them up then take them to our little machines and you'd stitch them tight - have you got it. Fit them ever so tight into the hoops and you followed from the pattern above or below or either }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2979937\charrsid14039999 sides}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  and you made it fit in, you couldn't tell we'd mended it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How did you join the ends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You just put - put your needle in and pull the thread through and then cut
 it off when you'd finished you see so - or you worked over it. But there was a lot of raised work. They had to work several times backwards and forwards, then you got to jump across it, the thick stems, you see. And flowers, we used to embroider flowers 
all over everything because you were drawing with them but with machinery and you can -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did it take a lot of learning?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Quite a long while before you could get any speed. You see, and you'd got to have a bit of a gift for it for - Grace used to li
ke it, she said, oh, she says, they've never seen mine. Of course I didn't give the - hadn't given me heart to it like I did to the clerical work and I wanted to do typing and that kind of thing at the back and I wasn't - she said, you don't give your ful
l attention to it. And then all of a sudden it sort of comes to you. And I was quite quick, I am very good 'cos it's very well paid. We were piece rates you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You were very skilled weren't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well - it was not for the skill, it was the amount you could get through.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How long did you do that for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Roughly on and off - I - I had - the break for the war when I went in }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12987527\charrsid14039999 
Fire Service}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 . And the first aid post was - I remember - the rest of - I went back after the war to these - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2979937\charrsid14039999 mending}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 . Live
d near - it was quite near me where I lived then. And I didn't finish work until I was turned sixty-three. And I was still on the mending then. Yes, because I could - it was so convenient for me. I had to come down the road, past the shops, pick me shoppi
ng up and I was only on the street where we lived and it was so convenient and the boss never struck us for time. You see, it was my time I was wasting if I didn't get here early because I was a piece rate.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 That suits a housewife I should think.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 During the war what were you doing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Oh we - yes, they - asked us - any of the girls in the factories if we would like to take first aid classes. Because, they said, it way be needed before the war was over. So, I said, well we can't go wh
ile were' at work. So this lady was speaking to us about it, she was from the Red Cross I believe, she said, well you can go in the evenings. And - do you know where Eastcroft is? Or do you - have you heard of it? Well - on London Road. Yes. Well it's rig
h
t down the London Road and I was right up this end of the town so me sister Grace and I, so I said, we'll go, it's lark. Come up and - you know, when you think of it seriously. And we had to go two nights a week for two hours and - we had to study, you kn
ow, first - we took first aid first and then we - doctors examined us and what we'd done and then after that we had a period of a fortnights rest and then we went again.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You said you were doing lessons in home nursing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. Yes. I got - yes, I go
t those, and then after that they said - they were wanting so many people at the City hospital and to finish those course correctly you were really after us for - to go all the time. So you - I was working in the day time and just like as if I'd gone to t
he pictures two evenings we went to the - we really enjoyed it. And - then I'd got to put fifty hours in at the City Hospital. Oh you had to }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2979937\charrsid14039999 do}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  anything the sister told you and she - she knew the things that you hadn't done, you couldn't have done in the le
cture, you see, and - I did the full fifty. And then of course I had to go and tell the doctor. Just put paid to my career. He said, you've got a chest like this, he said, I couldn't possibly. He said, and I wasn't - in any case he said, you won't be stro
ng enough to be on your feet all day. Because I'd been in a sitting job down all the time and me chest was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2979937\charrsid14039999 dreadfully}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 bad then and I really worried about that. But I didn't mind of course Oh well, we all have the things. And then the next - who was it, some
one came and said, well go in a first aid post. You will be doing something. And I went - you know the entrance to the City Hospital, it used to be part of the old work house. Now what did they call it? There's a name for it. I can't just - on - as you go
 in on the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15204605\charrsid14039999 left}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 hand side, the main gates, it's up a flight of steps. And we used to take the tramps in there and the - stone bath let into the floor and if they were dirty they had to go in there and be washed. And they made them chop wood for the breakfas
t and that kind of thing. Well I was there quite a long while and - then the war shifted, we weren't getting the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2979937\charrsid14039999 causalities}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
. You see, we should - we only had two lots of casualties, but it's a lot of money to pay out. It was moving more towards the centre
, to Birmingham and - all round there so they said well - they couldn't keep us on, there was six of us and a - a sister in charge. So - they said, well we're going to do something about women in the Fire Service, you'd better go there. And I was one - I 
was the first woman to be taken on as a telephonist. That suited me fine. And I stayed there until - oh - the war was over - was the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2979937\charrsid14039999 war}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  over, yes, the war was over. But even then I went to work again after Joyce was born and that you see, I went to - to - 
embroidery place part time, and ; and then of course when they was all growing up and they'd gone and father had - he used to work nights a lot when he did get a job, and my - I used to go - it was all right 'cos you see I could see him safe in bed and gi
ve him a bit of breakfast before I started out and I went right up 'til I was sixty-three because I liked doing it and it wasn't any - strain or anything. I was doing a bit of embroidery, except she did it by machine.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You could it almost without thinking by then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes. Yes. And I did like it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you belong to any trade union or professional organisation?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No. They did once come and ask us but - the - we were scattered you know. We'd perhaps one member could keep ten machines going an
d it wasn't worthwhile having a separate one.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you feel that employers and workers had the same interests or different?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No. Oh we got some wretched ones. Some that were really good and understood it and took an interest in the work. But other
 - this - where - automatic }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2979937\charrsid14039999 embroidery}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 where I worked, it used to belong, during the war to a - before the war, to a German. And they knew an awful lot about this Swiss - it was a - an industry in itself. Well of course - he was interned, Mr Disney, and it
 was shut down for a while. And then an ordinary Levers lace - manufacturer in the lace market, he bought it up. Well they thought they cold work it up but they - they didn't know a thing about it. And it was neglected shockingly, we had - oh it was long 
f
ight to get a proper rate for our money, they imposed on us all - we struck twice. Oh yes. Oh yes. Because they'd promised this and promised the other. You see, it was a very - when you'd got a piece you'd got to do it for a certain amount of money. It wo
uldn't matter if there was one mend in it you'd have to do it for that, but if there was five hundred mends you'd got to do exactly the same. For the same money. But of course they paid you by how many }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2979937\charrsid14039999 stitches}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  there were in the making of it. You see, how m
any times those needles went in on the big frames. Well it got to such an extent - they got a lot of - young girls who weren't very efficient, they'd leave the - if a - if a needle broke, what I call the cotton - or the shuttles too if you like, ordinary 
s
ewing machine, with the shuttle under the needle, front and back girls they called them. Well if they broke and they weren't - they used to do it with that - machine in motion, they had a queer sort of hook and they'd whip it down into and get it through 
the needle eye like that. While the machine was going, I was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2979937\charrsid14039999 fascinated}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
. And the shuttles, used to press the thing on the bottom and they'd shoot up, empty that one and put a full one in and put it back again and it never stopped the machine. Well it got to
 such an extent that it wasn't our - we weren't earning - earn kids money we used to say. So we all went - we asked the boss what he was going to about it. But do you know you could have talked to the wall, he didn't understand you. He didn't, no, because
 
it wasn't his - it wasn't his business, he didn't know. So - anyway - he said, well would we take - a set wage instead of piece rate? So we said, yes, we wouldn't mind that, but we wanted to know what the set rate was going to be before we would say anyth
i
ng about it. What did he offer us? He offered something that'd come out about four pound a week. What menders? Skilled menders? Oh, not on your life. And we went on and on with - we'd get - give in at another time, you had to keep on to get anything. And 
eventually he made it up to - we got six pound ten a week, and mind you you'd got to get through that work for that. You see, because you never knew how much you'd got to do. There'd be one, I want this quick, it's for a special order. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12987527\charrsid14039999 And it - it'd perhaps be full of mends if that girl'd been gossiping and the things was run down all the time. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
We used to shout at them as we went by to - hey - seven one's down, pull 'em up. You know. 'Cos they were only young kids from school, they wouldn't earn much more than five or six shillings. But dangerous work like that. I'd have died to have put }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2979937\charrsid14039999 m}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
y fingers where they did. You see. So eventually, we did get a fair - set wage. For our hours. You see, then he wanted to make us work longer hours and so we were all marrie
d women, we'd all got homes to do, we can't do that, we'll get the work done. You see, and of course we did and we - it went off all right after that,
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you feel there were divisions of interest among workers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes, oh yes, we got - we'd got one old lady on the bench, Liza, we }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2979937\charrsid14039999 
\endash we always}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  said she }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2979937\charrsid14039999 was}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 a fixture, she'd always be in there, never worked anywhere else. And she wouldn't sort of - when we were asking them to give us a fair price, we said, come along Liza, she was a wee bit deaf. We
 must say to her if you're in agreement. I'm not going to talk to him, she says, satisfied with what I get, sort of business, and she played up and played up and she - she thought as she was the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2979937\charrsid14039999 oldest}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  one that she should have had the priority and had the 
best work, 'cos certain patterns always made - but she wasn't going to. If you want to go and make a fuss go and make one, she says, I'm not going to.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 But she }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2979937\charrsid14039999 benefited from}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  the better wage all the same?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 She never said no thank you to that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Some people say in those days there was a great division between trained craftsmen and other workers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you feel that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes, if a new girl came and she said - odd times we were very rushed for work and he'd take a new mender on a
nd he'd say to her, are you a mender? He just said that and you said - if you - she said she was a mender. Well - the first piece they gave her - 'cos it had to be all checked when we'd done it, it was pulled over a counter to see if we'd left any mends i
n it, or - if it was badly mended, you could tell because perhaps the rows'd be all }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2979937\charrsid14039999 lopsided}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 you see and that kind of thing. And - well when he used to look it over she used to say to us - she used to say, hey, have you seen this new menders? I said, don't 
let her see you looking. Perhaps she's only done - just started, she'd perhaps not been at that pattern before well - it was a bodge, it wasn't a mend. And she couldn't mend. And when we tried to - where did you work before love? You know, like - all - al
l
 this kind of - oh so and so, oh I didn't work there long. But she never gave you a straight forward answer. Though she was - getting the same money as us. Of course there was - one woman, she's - if anything was going like she had to grumble, she was a g
o
od mender - and she said, well I'm not going to sit down and work and while she's getting the same money for me for bodging it 'cos, she says, she'll only have it all cut out and have to put it in again. 'Course and she went and complained and they got ri
d of her. But she - the first thing they ask you, were you experienced. You see. They won't take you on - not for that particular job. Nor for being a front girl or a back girl, 'cos those girls how used to }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16337627\charrsid14039999 slip}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  the shuttles in and thread the needles they'd got to be experienced although they were very young, you see. And -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 This was after the war wasn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 When you were a clerk, did you feel there were great differences between trained craftsmen and other workers then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. Oh yes. Yes. In the Fire Service, anybody who'd been to a bit }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16337627\charrsid14039999 
better}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  school than you'd been, you see, after all was said they got more chance of promotion than we did. Oh yes, definitely.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Would you have preferred any other type of occupation from what you've done through your life?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
No. Quite happy. It was varied and there's several of the jobs that I - I would have loved to keep on - I'd love to work a switchboard all the time. I was the first woman switchboard on the City Fire Brigade and I always
 remember the - we had an agreement with newspapers, the firm knew how - if there was anything, a fire, a big fire broke out, we used to ring them and tell the - that there was - we'd got a conflagration, we weren't allowed to say fire. Conflagration. And
 
- the very first time I'd gone on this - switchboard - and I'd - he said, the officer said, ring the general offices in the Post and tell them we've got - a good 'un, on, you know. So I said, all right, and I did. And of the man didn't put the receiver do
wn, the man who took the message, and I heard him shout right across the room, Christ, they've got women on the Fire Service now. I never forgot it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 When you first went to work would you say that full time work changed your general attitude to life in any way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes. Very much so.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 In what sort of way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Well - we - I'd sort of got an inferiority complex. While I was at school, I was practically - particularly from Hungtingdon Street school and from, you know, we weren't treated as equal
s there, you did feel as you - and you felt as it was a stigma because you were poor, you see, and you couldn't keep up - and have the clothes that they could have. And I always felt I'd got this }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16337627\charrsid14039999 inferiority}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  complex so that I was surprised when anybody - when I went to work - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16337627\charrsid14039999 could}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 find that I was giving satisfaction. And they were very good at giving me a bit of praise, which was a thing I never had. But I - made me think life was much worthwhile. And which one - whichever bit of a place I've been I'd got 
on - each time I was a leading Firewoman in - and you had to sit exams for that. And - at }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2979937\charrsid14039999 Redgate's}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
, you see, I got on to that - one of the men's - the men who'd - men probably been to college to get that jobs, we were doing that in our - you see, I did se
em to - I felt as if I was doing something and getting somewhere. I didn't want - anything out of the ordinary but just to feel that I was on the level with the others. And Doris the typist had been to a - a - her father paid for }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16337627\charrsid14039999 her}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  to go to the - Underwo
od typewriting school and she'd paid no end of fees and she resented me a little bit. She said, you've only been to these, she says, that's only a part time place, she said, I had to go -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Before 1918 did you think of some people belonging to one sort of group or class and some to another at that stage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 On you tell me about that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Very much so. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2979937\charrsid14039999 
Wherever you were, you know, if - if anybody's - 'cos I taught myself to speak correctly because I went in the saleroom a lot when I was 
at Redgate's and I had to speak with the buyers very often, had to take them in and find the man they wanted and that kind of thing and it - you - you mimic these things after a bit and it's natural to you, you see. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 But - if I'd been out with me friends th
en I should be just the same as the rest of the. And if I heard someone doing this for show off, which you knew her - used to say - oh, shows off. You know. And then I once said to the girl who - I could say it better than she can if I wanted to.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What sort of groups did you put people into in your own mind?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
I'd always got a - think there - was always saying that they were well educated. And my mother said, you know - well even if they're well educated that isn't the world you know. She used to p
ut me off, she said I was education mad. I'm not mother. But, I said, when they can speak properly - or use their brains - 'cos half of them don't try to use their brains, you know, even though he talking ordinary. She says, oh you. You see - I took them 
to be educated and the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16337627\charrsid14039999 uneducated.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 And I wished - I did so want to do - I said, if I'd have had a chance to have gone to a university I might have been able to make some - I might have made a false report, I might not even have done anything, but I felt as 
if I wanted the chance. You see, I didn't - I couldn't - I knew I couldn't possibly have it, but I just felt -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Nowadays you might have done?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes. I've taught me lots - lots of things myself since I've been - you know - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16337627\charrsid14039999 left}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  - since I've been 
on me own. I - latter part of the time at Redgate there was this Spaniard came and brought us a lot of orders and he couldn't speak very much English and he used to ask me to type the - these prices lists out in Spanish. Oh, I couldn't possibly do that. S
o
 he said, I'll help you. And he used to sit beside the typewrite and speak every word, and before I knew it - do you know, I could do it ever so quick. And I was fascinated. I said, I would like to speak like you. I teach you, he said. You know. 'Course h
e never did 'cos never had time. But I could type those letters in Spanish and they all used to laugh and say, well what's this - and the other girls couldn't - I said, oh I'm not telling you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you think of people in different social classes or groups in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Yes, very much so. You - and another thing, where you lived mattered. You say, oh those awful people who lived on the Bottoms. The same as you'll hear today, those awful people on St Ansell Road, from the slums. And at one time - I 
know some families that were - weren't - it was quiet, a nice residential road. I lived on Union Road which was a sort of carry on of it and they were nice people, really nice people. And there was the Bottoms. The Bottoms was - they run along from - the 
b
ottom of Bath Street and Beck Street and down there and all those - lot of little back to back houses and - all summer through you could see these ladies with their beautiful white aprons sitting on the doorsteps if it was warm - drawing and scalloping la
ce and they looked spotless and their little places were spotless. But they were low, they lived on the Bottoms, you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 I know }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2979937\charrsid14039999 St Ansell}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  Road very well.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Do you? Oh. My sister lived there forty years. She said.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You wouldn't recognize it now on on side, it's gone?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Yes, so they tell me. I've not seen it but she told me. And there was the Mile Marsh, that was the worst of all in Nottingham, because we did have a lot of drunks down there, it was the back of the Midland station. We wouldn't
 go down there by yourself. No. Even the policemen patrolled in twos.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What sort of social class would you say you belonged to yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh working class.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What sort of people belonged to the same class?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Practically - Practically all t
he children was - in our status as we were - you know - and so on, we all had to go out to work for our livings and we were rather proud we were the working class. You see, but - we never aspired to be anything else because if we'd got a decent job we wer
e happy.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What other sort of classes were there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Well there was - we used to laugh at the high school boys with those special coats on, you know, what did they used to call them - bum stars one lad used to call - little short coat. And - mostly it
 was the clothes they wore. And if we were playing about and they walked sedately by us and looked - sort of looked down on us and of course we should laugh. Most rude of course, but we did it. Said, who does they think thou are. And someone with us - oh 
look, King George coming, just look. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16337627\charrsid14039999 
You know, it was a very, very rude but it was instilled in us, we were all - and business people, people who had got a shop or somebody, that was another thing. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
You couldn't compete with those, you was just an ordinary - working girl, you'd no opportunity - of sort of meeting on a level ground with them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Any other groups you can think of?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well the bosses, they were in a class apart.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Can you remember being brought up to treat people of one sort differently from people of another sort?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Oh yes, it was terrible thing to have to live by - we had a French family come to live in - just at the back of our house and they could speak a little English - but everybody sort of laughed at them. And I used to say, i
t's awful, laughing at those people, they can't help being French. And - when we got to Huntingdon Street, see, we had never taken another language 'til we got there, we were taking French. And I used to - I got to air mine off on this - Jenny - }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16337627\charrsid14039999 Jenny}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  Brut
er, I always remember that girl's name - she said, you're very kind. I said, well, I want to learn your French. She said, you - you teach me your English. I like it better. And we got to we could converse quite well but - they came from France and I don't
 think their parents - had - I've gone in - she went - asked me in to tea one day. Oh and it was a torture to me, I couldn't tell a word - they were going too fast for me.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Were you sort of brought up to treat the bosses differently from other people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes. Oh -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 In what sort of way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Well - it was a sort of grapevine, it - you'll find it in every factory - every place and wherever you go - if you're up to something that you shouldn't be there was - you know - just a - and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16337627\charrsid14039999 everybody\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  know, the bosses say, I'm just watching what she's doing, you know, that kind of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Were you ever told to curtsey to people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No, not ever. No, that was passed. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16337627\charrsid14039999 
But we were supposed to stand up when Mr Redgate came - he had a private office yo
u see and when he came into the order room he had to come down a little passage and then - if he looked at you, you knew he was going to - wanted you to - tell you something or to ask you to do something. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You automatically got up. From your stool. But nothing else, no. And we always called him sir. We didn't call the others. Mr Redgate was sir.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Was there anyone else you came across you called sir?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh in the fire service it was all sir. And 1 anybody above you in rank.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 But pre 1918?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh I don't know about that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Anyone you had to call master or madam in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Do you remember anyone showing respect to your parents in these ways?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Just in the usual way. We were - we were - we had to call mother or father - none of this business of calling them christian names.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You didn't know what your father's name was for years did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No I didn't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Was this usual?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes. Because we never heard it. Mother never addressed him by his Christian name, and o
nly - no, she didn't say Mr - it'd be dad. You see. And also I didn't know mother's name, I asked her particularly because he always called her mother in front of us. It just happened, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 I thought perhaps they were }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16337627\charrsid14039999 still}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  on the Mr and Mrs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh no. No, it was just mum and dad. Or mother - she would insist we said mother and father you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 In the district you lived in who were considered the most important people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well at the - this - it was a sort of terrace that we lived in and ther
e was a big house on each end that had more rooms and that and one of them was a milk man, he'd got a great big shed full of his milk churns, he was supposed to be the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16337627\charrsid14039999 nobles (?)}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  as they call it, that's the delivery one you know. And then at the other end 
there was two maiden ladies who let rooms to people. And they'd got a status. You had to - and if you played around about their house - get away from here, you're making }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16337627\charrsid14039999 anoise}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 , and that kind of thing. And we sort of semi respected them. Yes, because they were old and we knew they'd got to get their living. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16337627\charrsid14039999 
My mother once explained it, she said, you see, they can't do with a lot of kids racing round, 'cos we used to play tin- lurky and that kind of thing.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you come in contact with them otherwise?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No. Oh no, they never spoke to us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What about the shopkeepers in your area, who did they associate with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well they were - they were pretty friendly with everybody. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16337627\charrsid14039999 
Who was a good customer but if ever you - there's one who didn't pay you, you got a bad name straight away.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What about the clergy, who did they associate with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well - I never even saw them at home. 'Cos we used to go to St - first we went to St }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16337627\charrsid14039999 Anne\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  church because it was the nearest. And then when Joyce started school 
I - I got her into St Marks school which was a bit nearer, that was a church school. Of course I wanted her to go because she would keep running away. And - we used to go then - then that's when we went - went to the mission, St Marks mission and I was ma
rried from there and we all went there after that. But for a short time we }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16337627\charrsid14039999 did}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  go to St }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16337627\charrsid14039999 Anne\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  because it was near for us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Before the 1914-18 war who did teachers associate with, do you know?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Teachers? Oh only with other teachers - oh she - the t
eacher was - you all looked up to them, in many ways. And they were sort of - in a class apart from us. You had to - please Miss, may I so and so. And stand at the desk with your hands behind you }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16337627\charrsid14039999 if}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  you wanted to make a request.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Who did employers associate with? Do you know?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No, not ever.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 It's no good asking you about farmers is it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What sort of people would you say went to Church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well at one time when I was quite young everybody went - from the poorest right up
 - there was only the people who drank, we used to have quite a few who did drink, they didn't go. But for the rest - and what I noticed and thought about, even if their parents didn't go they made their children go.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What sort of people went to chapel?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes, there was quite a few chapel people. They were the same as we were, just working people.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 They weren't very different in any way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Where you lived did all the people in the working class have the same standard of living or would you say there were different groups?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Oh yes, there were - well - one or two always seemed as if - my mother had the expression - they've seen better days they have you know. She thought they'd come down to come to - like where we were. But we
 never knew, they sort of kept it to themselves. I played with one girl a bit when she was new and they'd had a public house. Oh and we thought that was a marvellous thing. You see, they - they'd had - come down in the world, because they'd - don't know w
hether she'd - something had happened that they'd given up the business and they were just ordinary like us then. But they never sort of - mixed - altogether. The kids played a bit together but not the other ones - there was older ones but they didn't.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Could you describe another family like yours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 They were mostly like yours?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Were there any other sots of families?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well they're pretty much the same, they all went out to work, they - they worked hard. There were q
uite a few miners. Who lived there. And there was Bobby Willis. And there was quite - four or five big families like ours. That - as sure as Alice married the sailor boy, he'd got seven sisters and three brothers. He was a big family, the same as Mr Willi
s's - oh he hadn't got so many but he'd got quite a few. That was next - either side of us. Where - there was another big family, oh - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16337627\charrsid14039999 Roberts}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 . I - they'd got - I think they had ten children if not more. And she'd been left a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16337627\charrsid14039999 widow}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
, she was only a little tiny thing, her daughter }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16337627\charrsid14039999 Hilda}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 was about my age and we used to go to school together. You see, as - and it - and I came to be in her class we went along together. And they were pretty much the same as - they had a hard time of it with her being a widow, but 
she'd got one or two grown up sons and a - a married daughter and they helped her with the little ones. But she - I've heard her say, I shall have to wait 'til our so and so comes and she'll get you a pair of shoes, but - she did drawing at home, lace dra
wing. But you could never earn sufficient. To keep a - I don't - I don't think there were widows pensions in those days. See, the father had been dead when - oh a long - I hadn't been at school ever so long.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Do you think that one group felt itself superior to the rest?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Which sort of lot?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Well it was either somebody'd who'd got a shop or some interest in a shop. Or they'd had - got a very good job somewhere. Was always something to do with - with work. As far as I can -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Were some families thought of as rough and others as respectable?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Can you remember a distinction of this kind between craftsmen and labourers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well, if you were a craftsman you - you were considered something. But the labourers were 
- say he's only a labourer. In a - a derogatory manner. You see. Don't know whether they treated them any different. You thought of them as different.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did your mother and father have the same attitude to people in different classes?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Dad didn't express himself very well. Mother would do. But I - I've heard them to roughly }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16337627\charrsid14039999 agreeing}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  and that because - they were brought up as children you see very close together. She - he lived in the next street but one to which she }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15204605\charrsid14039999 lived}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  in.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Do you think your mother saw herself as belonging to a particular social class?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 To any special social class, did she think of herself as working class?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Just - Oh no, just an ordinary working woman she was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Do you think she thought about it at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No, I don't }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15204605\charrsid14039999 think,}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  it ever - ever worried her. She used to say, as long as I've got enough to feed an}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15204605\charrsid14039999 d}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 clothe you I'm satisfied. And I don't - and she must have had a contented mind or she couldn't have been so placid as she was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Was it possible at that time to move from one class to another?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes. You went up in the world if you went in a house with a bay window. Oh. Definitely.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Can you remember anyone moving up a lot?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 In my family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No, in the area.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 In the area. Can't think. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16337627\charrsid14039999 I can't just remember, oh }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15204605\charrsid14039999 there}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16337627\charrsid14039999 
 was one lady went - came to live - in a big house in Carrington and I thought it was the - the world's best place of all, I never saw it but she - she told me when I used to run errands for her, she'd got two or t
hree older children and she lived there a terrible long while and when she told me where she was living and I said - I was telling mother. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
So she says, oh they're coming on in the world aren't they. Else it didn't occur to me that way, but I know she said it was a big house.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 But you don't know what sort of job it was her husband had?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh no. Her husband was always in work, he was never one that was out of work.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Do you remember anyone being described as a real lady or a real gentleman?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Y
es, there was one. She was a widow and she - took this man lodger in and they used to go drinking together occasionally. And when he was getting a bit abusive she wouldn't have him in. And she used to - these - with it being a cellar kitchen, you imagine,
 she'd sit at this back window which looked straight onto the yard and we always remember what he used to say. Called her by her Christian name, Helena I think. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16337627\charrsid14039999 Helena}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 , let me in. And he spoke well. I will not have a drunkard in my house. And it used to be an entertainment for us - on the Saturday nights that he'd had this extra - yes, and his name was Mr }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16337627\charrsid14039999 Pready}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
. And she never called him - by his Christian name or anything, although he lived there. Mr Pready, you go away until you are sober. I will not have 
you. And we - our house was almost straight opposite you know and our mother used to say, can you hear them again. And I said to her, but doesn't she speak nice mothers although she's shouting at him? She said, yes, she does, she's a lady you know. Mother
 
did. That's all she ever said. But she was. And her carriage was a - a - carried herself - she never slouched about. You never see her with an apron on, she wouldn't come to the door with an apron on. That was a - that was a very wicked thing to do, to go
 
to the door with your apron on. Oh yes. Oh my sister - my mother had a fit the first time she saw me with my apron. She said, what have you got that on? I said, well I'm working in the house. She said to me, just take it off before you come to the door. T
hat's the one who went to be a ladies maid. Oh yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What would she have described a real lady as?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Well she did associated with these people, she was there a long while. And it changed her completely. She looked down on us. Definitely, yes. She w
ould say - dreadful, the way you speak, she'd say. Of course she'd had to pick it all up. Give all credit there to her. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16337627\charrsid14039999 
But - she was - and another thing I did that had - that annoyed her - she said, it's your duty, when you've washed up after dinner, you 
go up and wash yourself and you tidy yourself and put another dress - it doesn't matter if it's an old one, just so long as it's clean and fresh. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
I says, to her - I've got four children and I should never get a chance to do anything if I stopped every day 
to do that. I said, I do sometimes when I've got the chance. And she did just the same to my daughter Joyce. And - of course it got our backs up immediately and - Joyce had her little boy, her husband was in the Navy and she stayed with me the first two y
e
ars because he was in the Far East and I was - I was at the Fire Service and - she - mother was a widow but in those days you'd got to get - I think it was ten years stamps you wanted to work enough to get - a - pension when she was sixty was it, somethin
g
 like that. So she came to me - I don't see much of her 'cos she didn't mix with us very much, and she came one day, she said - do you find it a lot to do, she says - to go out to work Annie, to Fire Service and do the home and everything? I said, well - 
I keep Joyce. She helps me such a lot. With }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16337627\charrsid14039999 the meals}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  you see, because she's looking after a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16337627\charrsid14039999 baby}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 it's saving her. I says, it is a bit of a - thing for a young girl like her, I said, I do the washing like in the evening so as go help her. She washes her own baby things. Oh - she said - I'd be }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16337627\charrsid14039999 very}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 willing to come and give you bits of hand in the house. And I didn't know what she was getting at. Sometimes I'm a bit dense, I - well I haven't. I couldn't see it. So she - she talked a bit - she had a cup of tea 
and she said, well I'll go now, but I'm coming Monday. So she says, oh and here's my card, will you stamp that for me. You see, those stamps cost her quite a lot. You see. So - when she'd gone our Joyce said to me, let's have a look at that card mum. She 
says, it's her insurance card. She said, you're expected to pay her and put her a stamp on. Oh, she says, the penny's dropped, Joyce did. She said, I know. She says, she wants - she hadn't got any }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16337627\charrsid14039999 work}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 , but she didn't want to lose those weeks, she wanted that money so - mind you -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 She could have bought them herself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
She could really. She was better off than me, a lot. But that didn't make any difference. And she came to me quite a bit and one week when - when I came home - she'd been going a litt
le while - and she was very critical. She said, I - I happened to meet her as I was coming home. She says, oh dear, she says, I do wish your Joyce wouldn't give me such a lot of dinner. I said, a lot of dinner? I says we're not hogs, we only eat normally.
 
So she says, well I've never been used to eating - she was so different to us, she didn't eat a - a - I said, did you leave any? So she says, I have to eat it else Joyce doesn't seem to be very pleased with me, you see. And she says, you know you've not b
r
ought her up very well Annie. I said, haven't I? She said, no. and I was getting me blood up. I said, well you only had one did you not Jemima. I says, I've had four. I said, and I can't and a cantankerous man as well so, I said, I don't - think I've done
 too badly. She says, but you've not trained her. And it's training that counts. That's when she started. Look at you going to the door in your apron, Joyce does just the same. Joyce doesn't change herself. She says, she keeps her baby beautifully. }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16337627\charrsid14039999 She wouldn't - there wouldn't be a speck on him but - but does she brush her hair after dinner? }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No. She doesn't. Oh, I said, }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16337627\charrsid14039999 M}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12987527\charrsid14039999 ina}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
, don't be such - a fuss, I said, it give me the willies. I said, we have to live as we can. I said, well you've got a full job on I can }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12987527\charrsid14039999 assure}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 She never had a very satisfactory husband?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 She was worse than ever, he never did earn a living. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16337627\charrsid14039999 
And it was quite a few weeks after I'd had a weekend flu, and of course you had to send a message in, you couldn't fail in a duty 'cos someone else'd have to take it over. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12987527\charrsid14039999 
And - I didn't got that weekend and when I went on the Monday and when I came home I said, has aunt Mima been? }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
So Joyce says, no. I said, has she sent any word round? So she said, no. and I never heard from her from then for months, never saw her. And it was me sister Alice }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12987527\charrsid14039999 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12987527\charrsid14039999 happened }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
to come in. I said to her, what's up with our Mima, is she ill? She said, no. I said, well what's the matter with her? Of course Alice knew she was coming to me. Well, she said, got all her
 stamps on you'll bet. Oh and when it come out like that I - you see, I was too dense to see what she - she wouldn't help and say so to me. Well, I mean, sisters, you say all sorts of things to each other don't you. But - that's how she was. And yet she w
as - mind you, her place was always a picture. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12987527\charrsid14039999 Everything}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  in its place and - that you know. Of course she was }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12987527\charrsid14039999 a widow}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 many years. She had - and you see, had never - although he - what odd jobs he got he got a stamp for perhaps but he never put them on the card, after he was dead she found four or five stamps in her drawer. So she never had any - she never had any }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12987527\charrsid14039999 widow\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 pension. And I admire her in one way for being - but she could have just said to me, as long as we can just get those stamps I don't mind. I'd have been - well -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 As long as you knew when she was going to stop coming?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. She left me in the lurch altogether you see. 'Cos it was a lot for }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid12987527\charrsid14039999 Joyce}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 , 'cos she was - she was twenty-one when she got married I think, be about twenty-two. We
ll I - she'd never had the whole of the house left for her to do. Not all - I did what I could, I got the breakfast always, every morning before I went. I couldn't at four o'clock in the morning when I'd got to be on for six, they would object to me getti
ng them out of bed at that time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You went on living at home after you left school didn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did starting full time work change your relationship with your parents at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes, we - we got a wee bit more freedom. And - we still h
ad to help with the housework. It was a routine thing. But - mother never washed up the dinner things or - they were all piled in the bowl and when you got home from work at night, you see, in those days we had to have our tea at work. It was - it was - a
bout eight o'clock 'til }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12987527\charrsid14039999 twenty past}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 seven at night, you see, so we took a slice of bread and butter or something with us and a mash and we had a cup of tea at - well, we had ten minutes to have it like. And then - then there was all that - a day}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15994928\charrsid14039999 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 s pots }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15994928\charrsid14039999 to be washed}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  - there for us to wash. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12987527\charrsid14039999 And of course you - two of us, one'd wipe and one'd - wash, we didn't make hard work of it, we were used to it. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 And always every weekend we got the place to clean out. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12987527\charrsid14039999 One had to vacuum it while the other scrubbed the floor. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
And we all wore - it was very much blouses and skirts in those days, very few dressed. And if you - she did the washing and she was a beautiful washer mother was, and - but if you got something special, perhaps you were going to a dance or a concert and 
you wanted your clean blouse, special clean blouse on, you got - we had to iron it before we could go. So it didn't alter your status.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did it alter your relationship with your brothers and sisters?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes. Mother wouldn't give you a ha'penny the
n. Our Alice was generous. Julie wasn't. We called Julie the mean one, but Alice - and I would often give me sweets, she was a terror for that. I used to say, can you buy those sweets. Yes, she says, and I can always spare you one. And Alice did too, Alic
e never failed with - if she'd had some - they never gave you the money to go and buy them, but if they'd had some there was always so many left in the bag - few sweets for you.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 When you started work did you spend your Sunday any differently?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well we used to dodge if we could.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What did you dodge?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Sunday school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you go to church just the same?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 We did - we'd go in the morning. We didn't object to that, we got out of things doing at home by going. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid12987527\charrsid14039999 But we - we went - to Sunday school in the afternoon, and if it was a lovely day - come on, lets go down the embankment. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh we loved it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you take any interest in politics at that stage yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 I used to like to hear me dad talk about them. He
 was a sort of a - he belonged a - can't - not a union, something else belonging to his work. I can't say what it is.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 But were you interested?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. Because this man used to come - this Mr - Mr Thornilow was the President and dad used to - sort o
f - tell him the - he was the practical side of it and Mr }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12987527\charrsid14039999 Thornilow}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 sort of used what dad told him - when he made his report. I can't - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12987527\charrsid14039999 it\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 not a union, it's - they have this same thing today but I can't just say it. Trades Council. That's what it was. I've got it. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12987527\charrsid14039999 
And sometimes this Mr Thornilow would come to our house and there'd be one or two of the men from the workshop when dad was working for his father and they'd sit and discus and - and say what they thought was right and what was wrong and so on. }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
And - I was all ears. It interested me, very much so. But - and of course we was all threatened to keep quite and not to speak when me father was speaking or any of these gentleman. We were - we were made to have good manners. We wouldn't be allowed to ta
k
e if your parents were speaking. You'd wait until you - was - got a chance and there's nobody speaking. But I really did like it. 'Cos - when we got into the last form at Huntingdon Street, we had debates. And I - I - loved it. On all sorts of different t
hings and - didn't know anything much about politics but - I used to read the Post and that kind of thing and - yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You told me earlier on how you spent your time as a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12987527\charrsid14039999 schoolgirl}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 , your spare time, was it any different when you'd left school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 We
ll of course I didn't - so much time, I'd got some own time for a little bit after we'd had our tea and washed up whatever we'd got to do. Or if we'd got some chebonning I'd perhaps do a bit of chebonning and - Alice watched over me because I wasn't well,
 and she'd say, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12987527\charrsid14039999 you\rquote ll}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 sit there 'til you're so pale. Get out in the fresh air a bit. And then I'd perhaps go out on the street and play with the others for half an hour or so.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 When you'd started work were you still the same sort of person about playing out or did you go out with a bump?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Oh - no, we didn't go out. I was - I was very much interested in playing round. Used to play round a lamp - we got an old bat and we used to go up there and play - about four or five of us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you go out in the evening when you were working at first?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes. We started to learn dancing. And one night a week we went dancing. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid12987527\charrsid14039999 And if there was a - something - on at the - either the Hippodrome or the Empire it was only ninepence in the gods and we'd save up 'til we'd got this ninepence to go. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 'Cos we liked it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Who did you go with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Grace usually. And sometimes John went with us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you make any new friends, boys or girls - at this time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. I'd got one girl at work I - she used to come
 - sometimes she'd come to tea on a Sunday and I used to go to her house on a Sunday. And - we'd go for walks sometimes on a Sunday. If Grace didn't want to go - perhaps - Grace had other interests you see and she said, I'm not going out now. I'd say, oh 
well I'll go and fetch Florrie Smith then and go with her. And I didn't have a lot of friends. But we went out. And we - the embankment was our - second home. And I used to walk often from there to Atcliffe on Trent and walk back again. We loved it all.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you have any special friends at this time, was Florrie Smith special?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Florrie Smith was the one. Yes, she was the same age as I was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did your parents meet your}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15994928\charrsid14039999  friends,}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  she came to tea?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 She was the only one. I - you'll have to ask mo
ther first, see, I'd say, Could I bring Florrie mum? And she'd say, oh my goodness, that's another one. You know, but she didn't say it nastily. And I would say again, well can I. She'd say, yes, all right then. Mind you we had nothing any different, brea
d and - butter and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12987527\charrsid14039999 Hartley\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 blackcurrant jam. But she was such a nice girl. They were just a working family like we were and she'd got a lot of brothers and sisters.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did your parents expect to know where you were when you were out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes. She said, where have you been to 'til this time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did she ask before you went out where you were going?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
No, not really, no, she didn't do that. But - there was - father'd say, well remember what time you get in and what time we expect you in. I - we 
would say, all right dad, all right mum. And we'd be off. But - were we to be a little later. Where have you been to this time of night? We've been walking, we've been talking. Oh - I've seen her look as me dad as much as to say, you'll not get anything o
ut of him, they won't say.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What time were you expected to be home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Nine o'clock on Sunday. And then - in - in the weekday if you went to the pictures or the Hippodrome or anywhere like that as a special occasion, the - couldn't get in the first house because we'd be washing up, so it was later. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12987527\charrsid14039999 You was allowed out 'til ten. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 And we had to run all the way down Union Road. We didn't get into trouble.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Can you remember talking real Nottingham, can you remember it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Can you do me some?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh aye. Are you going art? You never said out. Art. And }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12987527\charrsid14039999 going 'ome}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 . Oh - you know - when you - when I've said one or two and I've got it in me mind I can say it straight off. But I've tried to train myself not to do it. But now I've got to make an
 effort to go back to it. Yes. Goo - I'm goo-ing - I'm not going - I'm goo-ing. And it }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4399113\charrsid14039999 ain't}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 nowt. Nowt. Never anything, nowt. I }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4399113\charrsid14039999 ain't}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  been doing nowt, if mother says, what have you been up to? I }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4399113\charrsid14039999 ain\rquote t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  been doing nowt. And if we'd been playing about and I 
knew it was time to get in - I'm going 'ome, I shall cop it. That was a very favourite expression.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Isn't there a word for road?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 A causey. Yes. Keep on the causey so it was - 'cos that was there the traffic used to come, horses and carts it was m
ostly then in those days. Yes, causeys.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Tafees are sweets?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 A }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6301576\charrsid14039999 tuffee's}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  a toffee. Tuffee. You put the u in it, not o. Tuffee. Well toffees are boiled sweets mostly, you see, and - chocolate bars we simply said chocolate. They were few and far bet
ween, they were beyond our - pennies really. We just got one perhaps at Christmas, a little bar in our stockings. And }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6301576\charrsid14039999 mother}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 always said yeller, she said scithers for scissors.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 That was just her though?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes, she never - she - yes, she always sai
d those. Dad didn't - dad spoke pretty much the same but he didn't say that. What did he say? Geroff. To get - instead of saying get off. Geroff. Oh I once read a book with it all in - it was all about Nottingham, have you read it, Terrace in the Sun? By 
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6301576\charrsid14039999 whets}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  his name. He's - he's a Nottingham }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15994928\charrsid14039999 artist.}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  And he was brought up in one of those little houses on Wilfrid Road and it give you all his childhood and he - and he - and he does eventually become an artist.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 It is Frank Dobson is it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No. I've g
ot it myself, I'll find it for you, it's my own book. Had it given to me as a - present on one occasion. Terrace in the sun, it's a most gorgeous book. It's all his - and his mother was a teacher - his father worked down Clifton Pit, oh it'll give you no 
end of it. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6301576\charrsid14039999 And he goes to a - to a - maiden ladies in the park because his master at school - only Wilfrid Road school, that was another old part of Nottingham. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Wilfred Road - round by that pit. Oh awful people lived down there. They said. They weren't, they were miners and they had to work all hours you know. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6301576\charrsid14039999 And - his headmaster told his mother that he'd got a - he'd always got paper and pencil in his hand this boy, you get it right from his childhood days, and he said, you should try and do something with that boy. }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
And he went to church but she was a very good churchwoman, she'd been a teacher herself his mother. And these two ladies, she meets them at church and they - they gave drawing lessons in the park. Nottingham Park. And of course it's - that'll gi
ve you no end of information about - because this boy - he meets these people who've lived in - who live in the park. And the snobs and all that. Oh they treat him abominably. And he wins a pencil case for drawing he said, and - and of course he's under -
 
what - Nottingham as a child, what would - Beckinhall or something he called him, his father works down the mine. Oh - he really nasty and he resented it because his father was a very nice man. And there was only him you see, and it's all his life. Marvel
l
ous. I've read it - if I've read it once I've read it four times. And that - and they give you the Nottingham dialect in it, a lot of it. Yes, I must - Wilfred somebody. Wilfred, I'm sure it was. I'll tell you what I'll have to do. I've got to go and stra
ighten that room. Yes, but it's - it's a lovely book. You won't be able to put it down once you start. But I'm -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You told me how you met your husband?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How old were you when you were married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 I was nineteen and - and George was twenty-two.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How long had you known him them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh I'd known him from being - he first came to our house when - I was - I'd only just left school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 So you were about }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15994928\charrsid14039999 thirteen then?}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. You see, he was in the same regiment as my brother, on
ly as a boy, he enlisted as a boy drummer. And - in the band you see, so - and of course when he used to come on leave sometimes and he wrote to me all the time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You told me he came from London?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Where abouts?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 His - his home was -
 Cricklewood. But he'd - run away so many times from school. A day school you see, in the beginning. I don't think he was very happy. At first he told me that he had no family, it was this old grandma that gets - got it all out of him, I wouldn't have dre
a
mt of pumping him like that but she did. And in the - they - and - he was - he was very unhappy. An older sister told me - his - this - older sister's - they came from very decent people, her mother was a vicar's daughter and she - she married this man in
 the Army and he - he had died leaving three children. Well then he married George's mother. And George was the first baby, and this girl told me afterwards when she was a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15994928\charrsid14039999  woman,}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  she was a very nice person, she said, he was wickedly cruel to that lad, I - y
ou - you could see it, he wouldn't come in if he could help it. And he ran away and ran away 'til they put him in a - a school, you know, a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6301576\charrsid14039999 whatsername}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  school - oh I can't say the name. Somewhere in Kent it was. And of course, when he had - when he'd finis
hed his time in the school he said - well, they said, do you want to go home? He said, no. He wanted to go in the Army, see, he went straight to the Army, before - I think he be about fifteen. You see, and of course that's how - my brother was in the Army
,
 in the band and these band boys used to do little jobs for the men for the sake of coppers sort of business you see, and of course he told them that he'd got no - people. And my mother was so sorry for him. And Albert got all our sympathy. All the girls 
a
t home said, fancy poor lad, he don't get any letters and he's got no home to go and have his furlough, can I bring him home? So mother said, oh goodness I've got enough her now, but, she said, we'll squeeze one more in, he can squeeze out - he'll have to
 
go with Albert then, sleep in Albert's bed. And that's how it was we sort of we got to know each other and then he went - called up - he went in 1914, he was still in the Army when the war broke out and he went to France. And I think it was the - was it t
he second eight days leave he had that we got married. He so wanted a home of his own, he always talked about - you wait 'til we got married and I've got - if it's only a tiny bit of home and I knew then the longing he must have had for his home.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 He probably felt himself an orphan?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh - yes. No, he felt it. Although he knew where she was all right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you save up before getting married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes. Yes. I worked frightfully hard, saved every penny I could.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did your parents help you in setting up home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh no. They hadn't anything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Were you officially engaged?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How long were you engaged?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 About a year. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Was there a period when you were going to get engaged?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. We talked - we talked
 about it a lot. And he said, wait - wait 'til my ship comes in, I shall buy you a ring. I said, oh I don't know as it matters because we hadn't very much money, he didn't get a lot of money in those days. But he - he backed a horse or something and son s
ome money.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Could you describe the wedding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes, just a quiet family wedding, at home. And - my sister Grace she said, shall I be your }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6301576\charrsid14039999 bridesmaid}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 ? I said, yes. And - me brother John, you see George had no men friends, he couldn't bring them down f
rom - he was in Scotland then - not Scotland, Sunderland, stayed in Sunderland then and he couldn't bring them down, they were - you know, during the war, so John said - well, and father gave me away and there was just - Doris and Florrie and - all me sis
ters of course. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6301576\charrsid14039999 They waited at the table and made such a to do, tied them up, big bows on their hair as if they was waitresses. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 They'd got a sense of humour. Just had a quiet little time. I was married in me own church, St Marks church. And -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you wear anything special?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. Well I - I did do because - the girl next door was a friend of mine and she was a marvellous dressmaker, used to make all our }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6301576\charrsid14039999 clothes}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  at one time, and I said I was going to have a costume. Oh, she said, don't do that, she 
said. I'd love to do you a white dress. I said, well they're dear. She said, well never mind. You see, and she did one in white taffeta wholly by hand. Not a - not a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4399113\charrsid14039999 stitch}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  in the machine. She joined the seams together with that - faggot stitch you know. Y
es. Because - because we were friendly, we lived next doors so many years - and she - oh I couldn't let you - you know you're not going to church in a costume. You know Yes, I was very happy.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did people give you presents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh I'd go a whole - big
 packing case up in the attic full of - because you see I was in charge of all the outdoor women, they vied with each other - four people will give presents Annie. I've begged them all. I said, join together but don't - I said - you can't afford. I heard 
o
ne or two bits what they were saying. So I said, keep out of it, you don't get married every end of the week, sort of business. I had a caseful. Even the woman at the corner shop sent me the most beautiful trinket set. I - I can't remember what - and the 
b
oss gave me the silver teapot. And then there was a case of cutlery from the men staff. Oh - and all me sisters brought me things. All me utensils, I'd - I'd practically - you know, I could have started housekeeping. I had half a tea service from mother. 
A
nd then one other the girls, they - two joined together, half a dinner service to match you see. Oh, I had some wonderful presents, I did. I had - they all gave me a blue garter. I said, whatever's that for? Oh, you must wear something blue on your weddin
g day. And I had to have a blue garter - a blue fancy garter. One of the girls gave it me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you have to wear something old?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes. Yes, something old, something new, something borrowed and something blue, and I was - I said, oh I can't borrow
 anything, I must have me own things, but a friend of Grace's who worked with us, she'd be married just not long before and when two or three days before the wedding she bought this parcel home she said, Ethel says you've got to wear her wedding veil, it'
ll be good luck for you. And - it was a beautiful thing. I hadn't anticipated doing that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you have a honeymoon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6301576\charrsid14039999 He'd only got a day's leave. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 But - we went to the theatre once. We counted up how much money we'd got and - George said, well 
I would have liked to have taken to the theatre, not at here, it was the Arcadian. He did too, very fond of music. And when we got - Doris lived out at Long Heaton, and she said, well you've got to come to me for a weekend, you can't stay - just have your
 Saturday on the - it was such a job to cram them all in you see, all of them kept - well, you'll come to us, we'll do such and such a thing. Well I couldn't be at them all.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You lived with your parents after you were married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. I stayed there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How long did you stay there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 I was there - over four years after I married. See I was married in 1917.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 That'd he 'til 1921?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. You see, couldn't get houses, it was all the soldiers - the married people who'd gone into the Army wer
e coming back and they wanted the houses.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You said your husband was out of work for four years?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Four years. He had no trade you see. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6301576\charrsid14039999 He\rquote d}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  gone into the Army as a boy. And all - all he knew about was beating drums and - music and that kind of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Could you tell me his jobs after that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Well - well he - he never kept anything for very long because you see it was - so little money - he'd got to be able to do something. The first job -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did he lose an eye?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes, he did. That 
was happened - actually in England while he was stationed at - we'd been married just a month to the day, when I got this telegram asking me to go to the war hospital in Sunderland. I'd never been anywhere like that. Mr Redgate even got the ticket for me 
a
nd found out where the Young Woman's Christian Association was. They feared he was blind you see, for me to go and arranged for one of the men to take to the station, that was the kind of man he was. Oh I couldn't - I couldn't praise him sufficiently. And
 - when I got there the sister sent for me and she said, I cannot find you accommodation, most difficult. I said, I haven't asked you to. I said, I'm going to the Christian - the Young }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6301576\charrsid14039999 Women
\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  Christian Association. I said, I shall find a place. Or if not, 
I said, my - I'm, my boss told me to go to the police station and they're compelled to find me somewhere. And he said it's a - a dock city and - and anyway while - when I did get to see the doctor, they made me wait an awful long while and he - he told me
 then that - it was - he was doing physical instructing while he was getting well to go back to France. These were the new recruits. And of course he was a bit a crazy you know and he was taking them in these }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6301576\charrsid14039999 Nissan}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  huts for - punchball. He used to train th
em in boxing and all that kind of physical - all sort of physical things and he'd reported it to the sports officer, he said, you know sir, that bottom plate is not safe on there. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6301576\charrsid14039999 
It's a brass plate in the floor on an elastic band then another one in the ceiling. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
And - so he had a look at it and he tugged it, he said, oh that's all right. And of course George had so many recruits and he'd filed them all in and the - to show them how to punch it correctly, I didn't even know there was such a thing as a corre
ct way, did you, and of course being a man when he'd finished them all and they'd all filed out the hut, it was just - September - it was October - it was just a month to the day that we'd been married, and - as he walked by it going out he gave it a wond
e
rful punch himself and of course the plate gave. It came up and it struck him cut him all down here and it smashed the eye completely. Well you see, the shock alone took the sight of the other. So the doctor - that's why they sent for me because they told
 
me they couldn't guarantee - that the shock could ease up and he would not be blind, but they thought he would. But the - they had to take - graft so much of the damaged eye socket out that there was so little between the brain, he said, he must be so car
e
ful. Never let him bump himself there because it could - and of course he made - it was a tragedy to him, in any case, because it was of his own life. So - I stayed with him 'til he'd got the sight back. And I always remember, I'd had a blue costume to go
 
to a girls wedding in and - I thought I'd put this on this morning. I used to visit him, they used to let me go every day. And - I was coming down the ward, he was propped - I thought he was propped up in bed a bit more. And I heard him say - I can see so
m
ething blue. And the ward was in uproar. It was my blue costume. Couldn't get me features - 'cos they weren't bold enough you see. And - oh the doctors were thrilled. An American doctor he was, only looked a kid - but I always think it was him that saved 
G
eorges' sight you see, in the one eye, he'd got no sight of course in the other. And - he was ; very weak because he got depressed. What good am I to anybody, oh I had an awful time with him, I could not - he says - we were going to go with the regiment t
o India, was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6301576\charrsid14039999 due}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  for the trooping season and - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6301576\charrsid14039999 when}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  - the war was over we'd made all these plans and everything went. No - nothing he could do properly. He was termed as a -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Were you expecting your first baby by then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No. No. Not then. No, I'd been married just over two years when I - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15994928\charrsid14039999 
when}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  Joyce was born.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 I wondered if he was worrying about this as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No, not that but he was worried - it was - because he wanted to live the life he wanted. He was a big football - played for the regim
ent, boxed for the regiment. What shall I do with myself? He was no reader, he looked at a book, no, I don't want to read that. He never read a book through. Although he - he'd got a first class certificate of education in the Army. He wasn't badly - he w
a
s better educated than I really. But - he couldn't - that wasn't his - way. I was very sorry, I always think that made him - erratic, as he was. I can - oh yes, I can understand it. And I must tell you one little incident when I got - I was waiting to fin
d out where I was going to - where this Young }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6301576\charrsid14039999 Women\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 Christian Association was, one of the men in the bed as I passed up the ward to come out, said, go to that little V.A.D. Hospital across the road, missus, he said, and, he said, they'll find you a bed, not like this lot here, he was going off. }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6301576\charrsid14039999 I said,}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14039999  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6301576\charrsid14039999 all right I understand. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 And of course he was making himself sick, where will she go, he knew the town you see. I - anyway, I asked for this little war }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15994928\charrsid14039999 hospital }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 and there was a sort of reception room. And there was a girl behind a table and I said, did - could she tell me where the Young }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6301576\charrsid14039999 Women\rquote s}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  Christian Association was? So ah, she said, that's out of town - she was talking broad Yorkshire and I couldn't understand half she said. I said, oh dear it's no good 
to me, I don't want to go traveling any more, I've been traveling all day. So she said - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6301576\charrsid14039999 ain't}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 you got nowhere? She said, can't they put you up at the hospital? I said, no, they said the nurses are sleeping two in a bed. She said, well we }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6301576\charrsid14039999 ain\rquote t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  even got the beds. And - while I'm talking I saw this man sort of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6301576\charrsid14039999 hesitating}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 in the doorway and then he smiled. I thought - well I don't know you. Anyway - he came stalking in to me. I knew he was a doctor at once. He said, would you please repeat that what you've ju
st said? I said, well I just want a bed, my husband's in the war hospital and - there's no Christian - no Young Women's Christian Association where I can go and get a bed, further than - I've got another train journey, I'm quite lost. I said, I'm very tir
ed, I'm very hungry and all the rest of it, I made quite a to do of it. He said, and I'm Doctor }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6301576\charrsid14039999 Piecer}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 from Nottingham. He said, I knew I couldn't fail to catch that Nottingham voice. He took me by the hand - come along my child. Sat me in an easy chair in 
the doctors room, there was a tray with coffee and sandwich, Oh, I said, doctor, it's all right, I can wait a bit longer. You sit right there, no towney of mine goes hungry. And while he was talking to me, he must have been on the ward, he came in with an
other young lady. He said, Mrs Williams, this is your hostess. He says, they make a practice in these - their }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6301576\charrsid14039999 voluntary}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 hospitals you see, and - they take - if anybody comes a distance like that they call you their guests. They wouldn't take a penny. And it
 was only on the same road as the hospital. It was a lovely bed and every - room to myself. I never saw - well I've never seen such a lovely house. And they looked after me. And I said, please, I - I pay my board at home, could I pay for my lodgings here?
 Oh don't insult us. We're only charmed to have you. And - he was the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6301576\charrsid14039999 superintendent}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 on the railway goods office. It was a lovely place and - go - went to visit George, they were wonderful. Cigarettes - he said, I'll never be able to smoke all this. Oh they
 - and Mr Redgate himself when I got back and told him, I said, I never met such hospitality. He said, well we can soon help that. And he called me in one day and there was a huge parcel on his desk. He said, would you like to take this to West Annie. I s
a
id, yes sir, of course I will. He said, I just want to show your friends that - particularly at the little war hospital, they knew where - 'cos I used to go and help when they wouldn't let me go in there and - that - Nottingham and Nottingham lace is well
 known for it's - and wish to be - this is our way of saying thank you for how kind they were to you. Oh.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What was in the parcel?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Lace. Of every description, he had had it done up specially for them. Cost a lot, it must have done. I said, Mr Re
dgate, could I pay for that, it's really - he said, go on, out you go. And I - I stayed there until his sight was quite confirmed but they told me, the doctors told me, they said, don't build your hopes too high. He will have vision but it won't be true v
i
sion. He said - put his hand like that - if you've got a brick wall this side you could imagine it. But - afterwards he always used to say he could see more than I could. He - concentrated on it and that but he never could do - a proper job, you see, nigh
t watchman or - labouring - any - anything that - came along, but there was never any money - much money attached to it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Can you remember anything about the details of the jobs in the right order or was this too difficult?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 I'm trying to - the fir
st one he - he got was at - the beginning - you wouldn't know, you wouldn't remember because you wouldn't be in Nottingham probably then. They started a thing called knocker post. There was so many men out of work and they wanted to train for - to sell th
e
 Post, the Nottingham Evening Post, and he was - they gave them so much money if they went round to each house and got an order for one. But you'd got to get it for a whole week and they gave them - not a proper wage but a sort of - bonus on all that they
 could get. And the things George used to say, and me brother was - he was out of work at the same time, used to go together. Used to say - I'll - I'll bath the baby for you missus if you'll sign this form.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 It's funny now but it can't have been then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Oh no, it was tragic to us. And - the things those lads used to - she - she'd come to the door, I haven't time to bother with you, I've got me old man's dinner to cook. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6301576\charrsid14039999 
Come here, I'll peel the potatoes for you,luv. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well - those boys - I knew about - 
there was George and my brother John and about two more of them, they had the time of their lives. They really enjoyed it. And they got a few shillings and they were satisfied. And then when that - that dried up of course. Couldn't expect it to last. And 
J
ohn says to George one morning, we haven't tried the farms have we. There was a lot of little farms round Nottingham, in the villages and that. So George says, oh we've tried a few things, come on, we might as well try that. Oh - when they come home at ni
g
ht, that day - oh I said, get outside, whatever have - is it. And our John - mother says to John, get upstairs, strip yourself, get the whole lot off, put your best things on. She said, good God it's like a farmyard. He said, so it is, we've been muck spr
e
ading. And they'd got a bag of potatoes. The farmer had given them a bag of apples. Those farmers were wonderful to them lads. But the dirtier the jobs the better - oh, he says, we're cleaning the pigs out. Oh, he says, happen - you think cows smell, you 
wait 'til -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did they get paid for these jobs?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Yes. Oh yes. But - he couldn't - they weren't experienced farm workers so they couldn't expect to get a proper - you didn't any case - in any case get - good money in those days. But it - they'd alwa
ys give them a bit of something. A few potatoes or a few apples or whatever was going. And they did that for quite a long while 'til he - there was no more of that. And he was all right a long time after that. And then he used to belong to the British Leg
ion. And he was on one of the committees, George was. And - they said they was going to see - there was so much unemployment in Nottingham they was going to see if they could approach some of the big firms. There was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6301576\charrsid14039999 Adlers}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 , Players, Boots and all these peo
ple, if they'd help to get a few of the men, if it was only about temporary to get them started back to work after the war. So, you see George, he could speak fairly well you see, he was educated, and they chose him on the committee. So of course he - he 
l
oved it, it was somewhere to get him out the house, it was a bad life for a man to lead. And - they got a letter form the - the railway asking for their representative to call and they'd like to interview them to see what they had in mind or what kind of 
m
en they wanted them to take on, but they were interested in the scheme. Of course George went. And he came, he sat down in the chair, him, he said, I go - I go, he said, cadging the jobs for the men and I've got the devil myself and I don't want it. It - 
it really was - he was a delegate and he says they offered him - he says, well we've nothing much we can offer}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15994928\charrsid14039999  you - you}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 know, because you can't do any skilled work. He said, it's not me, he said, I'm just the delegate from the region who's seeing what you 
can offer these men. And how many you can take. Oh, can only take one in any case. This man was very curt. What about yourself, he says, you're a bright lad, he said, you can do something can't you? So George said, well I don't know, I've not any trade in
 
my fingers. He was strong you see. But, he said, it's not me, I - I'm just here for - to my - my committee, tell them. Oh no, you're not any more. And they talked him out of it. I said, well never mind dear, you've done a bit towards it. Yes, but George s
aid, you wanted it for the - they're worse off than we are. I said, well I can't do anything about it. And it was - unloading big planks of wood from the railway as it came in and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6301576\charrsid14039999 stacking}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  it in this yard. Oh it was heavy and he used to come home really exh
austed and ; that. And he didn't stick it - I knew - I wouldn't - he knew he wouldn't stick it 'cos he was against it in the first place. I don't think he was there - three months at the outside. He said, well I've got me cards. He didn't - I said, well t
hat's a bit of all right, what are you going to do for the wages then? I said, what did you do? Sell, he said - they caught me }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6301576\charrsid14039999 smoking}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 . I said, I expected that you wouldn't leave your smoking alone would you? }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6301576\charrsid14039999 But - it was out of work a long, long while again. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Oh he went to a printing firm - Round Street, wanted a man - a man to do odd jobs. Stack boxes in racks and - all sorts of things like that. For - that wasn't much money at all but anyway I thought it was better than him hanging about. And - he went for
 a while but - I new from the beginning he wasn't going to like it. But he didn't want to do the exact work and he - he'd got the place reorganised and every - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6301576\charrsid14039999 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15994928\charrsid14039999 n}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6301576\charrsid14039999  fact}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 he organised himself out of it pretty quick. I knew he would do, I told him, I said, you
 have to - when you do a job for a firm George, you have to do it their way, not your way. He - he was very one for saying, you shouldn't do that like that - even to me about the housework. Of course I got used to it and never listened, I just ignored it.
 
It wasn't any good going on about it, it was just his way. You see, and I knew, I said - acting a fool, I said, you'll lose the job. And he did. And then he never did anything for - a long spell, I can't tell how long. Oh and I - in those days you could o
n
ly have so much dole and then a period and then you had to wait so much longer before you could come on it again, you see, there was no money or anything and this gentleman came to to door and said, where was - was Mr Williams in? And of course I can kick
 myself when I think about it. I said, oh he's in bed. In bed - now? I said, oh aye. So he said, well - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6301576\charrsid14039999 ain't}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 he out looking for work? You see, I fell straight in the trap, I didn't realize. I said, well he has been doing, I said, but he - he's not got up t
his morning yet. So - next thing we got a letter that - taken his dole off of him. It was his place to be out looking for work. Oh he was marked. But anyway - the same British Legion, he told them about it and - and he told them that they'd stopped his do
l
e. They said, yes, they can stop his and not his wife and children, by that time I'd got Grace you see, there was two of them. So of course they made an appeal for it and they gave me a little allowance. Not much it wasn't. But you see, I got this bit of 
work all the time. So we got through. And he went away somewhere, forget where it were. I know, it was through the British Legion again. One of them said, you ought to go to one of these 'ere - rehabilitation }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6301576\charrsid14039999 centres,}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  George, he says, and get your self trai
ned for a job, something worthwhile. So he said, I don't want to - I don't want to learn any more at my time of life. He really thought he - he did a bit of window cleaning or anything like that, but he wouldn't do a proper job. But anyway this time they 
s
ent him to a - a - to see some people, I forget who they was now, and they sent him to - a ammunitions firm in Leicester that - that was training people like George with a handicap to do some job in it and - oh he fully learned engineer in that fortnight 
y
ou see, and he stayed at Leicester coming home occasionally for quite a long while. And then he went - where else he went - he went to work at somewhere else. Cromford - Cromford - somewhere - what was the North - and then he - he had - he - I don't know 
w
hat happened to him, he got it but he got pneumonia and they sent for me and he - he very nearly died. But he pulled through again all right. And then he - he'd two or three night watchmen's jobs, that all he - they'd give him, you see, and I think that's
 what - undermined his health more -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 He was still quite young when he was a night watchman wasn't he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Oh yes. They don't - well they do employ old men but he was - quite young. But I don't really think that they found him suitable for - anything else you see. And - he was away for a very long time, just coming home on - home on weekends. }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6301576\charrsid14039999 And - and then he got a job - he had - he was out of work a long, long while before they got - he got - always got this pension for the loss of the eye and with 
what I could earn you see, and he'd got - he'd get so much - on the dole, you see, the three together, when Joyce started to work of course, she went in to Bairnswear and it wasn't much but one with the other and I'd always been used to being careful so t
hat we managed pretty well. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
And I got the chance of this house in Sherwood and - and - it was through mother. It was the same landlord, mothers landlord, and the doctor was saying the - we never got the sun, our backs were like little - little corners and t
he sun never penetrated to those houses and - Joyce had pneumonia and Grace had got bronchitis and I was ill and this doctor who came, I - he said - you know, these houses aren't fit to bring children up in, he said, I don't know what - whatever do you st
ay here for? I said, well you just tell me where I can get another one will you and I'll go. So he says, well, he said, something should be done, you want to get out. Sherwood or Ma}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1334943\charrsid14039999 pperl}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4399113\charrsid14039999 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1334943\charrsid14039999 y}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 or somewhere where there's plenty of fresh air and sunshine. He said, these children'll never be really well. If you don't - try to get them away. See, it's just bricks and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6301576\charrsid14039999 mortar}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 , crumbling all the time you see. So - of course, we couldn't do anything straight away but - some time after that the landlord said to mother, d
idn't your daughter want to move out to - to Sherwood or Mapperley? So, he - she said, yes. So he said, well, he said, she can do me a favour by that. There was some family that he'd got who'd got to come into the town. But he wasn't - they were very part
i
cular then. You'd got to sort of pull all sorts of strings to get it. But I always remember Eric was just six month old, he was the last one, and we - I says to - he bought the keys to me, I didn't even know where Sherwood was, I'd never been up here. No.
 So he said - you've -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 It sounded a bit romantic did it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
It did really. And he said, go and have a look at it. Well, when I turned - I had to find it because it was a bit difficult to find. It was Crossman Street. Because you see you'd got to - 
I got off - it was a tram, not a bus - at top of Haydn Road but I came down Haydn Road and they told me it was the second turning on the right. Well I couldn't - that was Sceptre Street. Well I can't think - I can't see any Crossman Street can you? Well, 
h
e says, it's there, you must go up there, it'll be at the top I think. And he said it was beside the school. You see. So we went up to the top of the - and when I saw this house I just nearly died. There two windows, full size windows in every room, and a
 great bay in the - oh I said, George it's - we couldn't - we couldn't afford a house like that for }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15994928\charrsid14039999 goodness}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 sake, and it backed on to the school field. It was one blaze of sunshine. So we went and had a look and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4399113\charrsid14039999 oh}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 dear. My heart was saying, oh if only I could. There was a bathroom in it, no washbasin or anything. Every - it was lovely. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4399113\charrsid14039999 
And you see the position of it being on the corner of Sceptre Street and Crossman Street, you see. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 But oh - I said, I'll never find enough curtains to cover the windows for 
a start. Took forty-five yards of curtaining. And I got it from }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1334943\charrsid14039999 Pullmans}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
, it was some that was slightly damaged at two three a yard. Tuppence three farthings. It's true. It was damaged, but nobody would -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What years was this now?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Let me think. Eric was six month old. And he's what now? He's a married man with five children now so it's a good - long while ago.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 It was well after the war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What was the rent then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 It was fourteen and three. And I know we never paid any m
ore than six and eightpence a week for the other house. You see, I said, only it's no good now George, I said, whether you like it or not you've got to get a proper job. And of course -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 The only thing he got }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1334943\charrsid14039999 night watchman}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 . And sent away all the time. He never altered. I didn't think he would and of course the - he was at - he went to Hoveringham gravel pits. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1334943\charrsid14039999 
He was there a long, long while.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What was he doing there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1334943\charrsid14039999 Night watchman}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 .
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 So most of the time he was a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1334943\charrsid14039999 night watchman}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 ?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 He was an all night watchman when he was anything else, then he went to }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1334943\charrsid14039999 
Payne\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  on Haydn Road, the printing place. It - he was there when he took ill, in his - for his last illness and he never worked again after that, so - that was - he was abou
t - he was due to - see is it sixty - a man retires at sixty is it? Well - man retires at sixty-five, in the middle sixties and he - he'd been ill for so long, I said, aren't you ever going to go back to work? I was so sick of him under me feet. So he sai
d
, yes, I am. But I thought, I doubt - I don't think you are. And he didn't. He had changed from sick pay - he came to the sixty-five and he got his retirement pension and the next week or two after that he was in - I had to fetch the doctor him, he was - 
well he nearly died then with his chest, it was terrible. He'd got the 'flu from the camp fire, sitting over - all this business with the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1334943\charrsid14039999 night watchman}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 , he was - and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15994928\charrsid14039999 in}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 the cold night air in front of those coke - that - breathing that coke - it was the coke fumes, one of the doctors told me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How did you manage about paying for doctors when you were a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes, I must tell you about that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You were quite chesty as a child were you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 I always am, but I never had a doctor, mother could
n't afford one but - with work, when the girls were working, the family was growing up, and you had - they had to }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15994928\charrsid14039999 pay}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 a penny a week what they called hospital money. Well - and they could apply for any one of their family, was ill.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 It covered other people as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Oh yes. It was - called sick and handle or something like that but - there was the dispensary on Broad Street, I don't think it's there now, it maybe, and that was the poor peoples' doctor. And you had - somebody had got to get you thi
s recommend, you see. You had to pay for it - it had been paid for all this time and then you got this recommend. That permitted you to see the doctor. And that's how mother took me to the doctor, that's the first time I'd ever seen the doctor.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 At what sort of age?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Oh - I was getting quite bit, I went to school, you see. But of course you couldn't - we never had them. In fact - the doctor was somebody like a King on a throne sort of business. She'd got her own - wonderful remedies for you and she
 said, I know what'll get her right, she'll soon be all right. And you couldn't say nothing about it 'cos she wouldn't understand but she told me afterwards. And then - when I came to live in Sherwood well - the girls said, well we can't get recommends no
w
 for you Annie because you'll have to - your husband will have to get them. But of course he didn't because he was only a night watchman. So it was - I think it was me young brother. He says, why don't you join the Forresters? I said, what's that? Sick an
d holiday he said. They charge you a penny for the youngest child, tuppence a week for the next one, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1334943\charrsid14039999 three pence}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 for the next one and fourpence for the tops, that'd be four and one three's seven, two's nine, that was tenpence a week for four children. And t
hat covered you, you got - the choice of four doctors and all medicines and everything free. And I was in that for years. And then of course then they started the new - beginning to get ready for the new health insurance that went out, but you see, I paid
 
bills. Old Doctor Clark very - this one is now, he's not any relation to my Doctor Clark but he was - he was there before him, it was his practice. And I - I'd - he died about a fortnight now I think I heard - I owed him another shilling or something and 
I went to take it and I didn't even know he'd died. We used to take it as we'd got it, you see, but he said, I never mind as long as you do pay me. But we - he had to have this, we'd no other choice you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Looking back do you think you should have seen a doctor when you were a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Oh definitely. Oh yes. I'd have been sent away to a convalescent town. Definite. 'Cos - each one of them when they did see me, how long have you been like this child? All the time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did they recommend treatment you couldn't have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Oh very often, yes. I know one - one said, she want's building up, to me mother. It was very expensive. It's The juice of the meat or something. And he said, that's what you want Annie. He said, I shall have to see that - if you ca
n't get some. So I said, how much is it? I think how much is it was engrained in my head. So he said, oh it's very expensive child, he said. I'll have to ask my mother. And she asked someone else. Oh - a little tiny jar like that was - pounds. Oh no, I co
u
ldn't have had that. But - they used to get one part of the town, I never did, but my children had, Bio from school and emulsion for their chests. From the schools. You got - if the teacher heard a child coughing; in school they'd say, you all at the head
mistress's office before you go home and you'd have to pay a few coppers for it but it wasn't anything like what it was -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You don't remember the name of the doctors at the dispensary do you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Not at the dispensary I don't, there was - you see - n
o, I'll tell you what - where there might be one - where - this - there was four there, I do remember in - there was a big - yes, the big doctor, we called him the big doctor because he was such a big man, Doctor Diemer and there was a Doctor Sheppard and
 then - who - and then the little one. But I liked them all. They all worked in this for this sick and annual club where we paid fourpence a week as you might say.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 So you didn't feel you were getting a less good doctor than the others?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Gracious m
e no. We had the best of attention. When Georgie had jaundice once, I never seen it before of course and I'd no idea what it was but I knew it was something serious and when he came and he said - this - it was the big Doctor Diemer He said, no food whatso
ever but - pure milk from the cow. I said - he said - well - what milk do you have? Well, I said, I have the stores milk. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1334943\charrsid14039999 Sterilized}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  milk or - and they even arranged these little Moss's farm somewhere out at Woodthorpe, and they arranged for that milk to be
 brought to me so it shouldn't have been tampered with in any way. Because George had - he was only a little lad. Be about five or six. To live on. During that time. Oh they - they - no stone unturned for the children.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Could you tell me your children's birthdays, Joyce was 1919?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. Yes, Joyce was born in - Joyce was born in 1919. On the seventeenth of June
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 The second was the very end of 1922?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. December the thirty - December 31st - New Year's Eve.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 And then Eric?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 George.
 He's the eldest boy. 28th of October - now this is where I always go wrong - there was about three and a half years between him and Grace. So that would be? Yes. Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 That would be 1926?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. Yes, that's right. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1334943\charrsid14039999 And Eric was born - not quite tw
o years, I had him very, very quick after George, on the 19th of August - under two years.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Could you tell me the jobs they had?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How did you manage the housekeeping in those years before 1919, you were living with your mother weren't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes, the first four years of our married life I lived in two rooms at their house. So that would be from 1917 to - '21. '22 perhaps.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you know what your husband earned?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well he wasn't working, he did - he never - he was four years co
mpletely without work. All he got was his - the pension for the loss of his eye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did he give it all to you and you coped with it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well of course he - he was a bit fussy about this, it was his eye and he resented having to give me anything really
. But I pointed out to him that you must give me something, I can't do it all. And then I'd give him so much }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1334943\charrsid14039999 back}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
, for his cigarettes and so on. And - of course before the week was out he was always broke, you know what men are.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You had two rooms with your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes, I had two rooms with mother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you do the washing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Oh yes, I did - did all of it. And I kept mother's part clean because she wasn't very - she was getting old you know and I did her washing too and blackleaded the grat
e and that kind of thing, as I'd always done, it was no hard - you know, nothing any different to me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Were you making clothes or mending them yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh - made all the children}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1334943\charrsid14039999 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 s things.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You hadn't got any children before 1919?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh no, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1334943\charrsid14039999 before}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 I got - I had - well I made - I prepared for the babies coming. Made all their layouts and crocheted matinee coats and bonnets and everything and so on - I - I've always liked sewing. But of course I went to work as long as ever I could before Jo
yce was born. Went 'til after - end of January and she was born - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1334943\charrsid14039999 at}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid1334943\charrsid14039999 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
nd of June. But you see I was in the order room and when I began to show the - it made me feel uncomfortable, you see, I said I'd have some work at home, and I did some of the work f
or them at home for a while. Then it - it was a bad spell come along, so it was seasonable this kind of work, home work.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 When your husband was at home did he help with jobs in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes, he was very good about that. He - well, you see, I was - it was the cellar kitchen house, you remember me explaining to you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Which rooms did you have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
We had the two front rooms, the front living room, that was on level with the front street, and the bed - - bedroom above. But we'd got to go down a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1334943\charrsid14039999 flight}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 of stairs into mother's living room and the scullery was off there. So every drop of water had to be carried up in buckets. And all our slops taken down and we had coal fires and what kind of thing. Well George always would fill the coal bucket i
n the morning and he'd bring me up a couple of buckets of cold water to start off. He was very good in that, and he would - he didn't like going errands, he loathed going an errand, but he would do other things. About - he's done the ironing for me, if I'
ve had a rush of work in - you know, and I was aching to get it done he'd just say, oh well, I'll do the ironing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Would he ever do washing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh he has done on occasions but not very often. At that stage, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Cooking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes, he would - he could always cook himself a meal and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Cleaning of your rooms at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 He kept - he liked anything that wanted polishing. But he didn't want - he didn't care for anything else.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you do decorating at all there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes, well I'd nev
er done any before but of course we couldn't afford to pay a man so he says, I'm sure if I tried I could do it. And in the end he was doing he papering and I was doing the pasting and handing him the stuff and we }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15994928\charrsid14039999 did }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 them quite nice, 'cos you could get the paper rather cheaply you see and made we could keep the place nice - quite reasonable.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How did you cope about meals, where did you have your meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh we had - my - I had me own private living room you see, that was the front room of mother's 
house you see, so everything had to be carried up the stairs again and down, cook it and I used to have a big tray and over it over to bring it up to keep it nice and hot and if he was in the house and not doing anything he would carry the hot food up you
 see. He was very good in that respect.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You cooked downstairs, did you say you had gas?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. It was a gas stove in that - back kitchen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Would you have had breakfast there as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes, well we lived completely alone.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What did you usually have for breakfast?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Well we - I used to - one time it was a craze to give all the - the children porridge, I loathed it but - and George liked it, so I used to give them porridge and a bit of bread and butter to fill up. And on a Sunday we
 made a special treat, we had - if we could - if it was possible we had either egg and bacon or something like that. That was a treat for Sunday but never in the week. I couldn't do it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What sort of midday meals were you having at this time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes
, well - I carried on from the normal way that we usually got on you know. Tried to give him a green vegetables most days and made them soups and broths and rice puddings.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 When it was just the two of you did you do it the same?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes. Yes. I baked my own bread. I did that - oh I did that for years, I always used to bake a little batch for mother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Who taught you how to bake bread because your mother didn't did she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No. She - no, oh she wouldn't let you touch the food. Well - the latter
 - latter years at school we had the cookery class and - mind you I forgot it all by then, I thought to myself, I'm not going to let this beat me, and a friend of mine, she said, I'll give you a rough idea if you're a bit - you know, if you're not quite s
u
re. I said, well I'm not quite sure of myself about it. Because she said it was so much cheaper. And of course I watched her one day and when I saw how she did it and the things she used I'd got it then, I was all right, and from then - oh for years after
 
- I didn't give it up until the beggars - as fast as I made a batch which ought to have lasted half the week - we'll have it while it's hot man, it's lovely. You can well imagine it can't you. I said, I can't keep pace with this, I can't bake every day, t
wice a week is enough. So I gave it up after then.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 When there was just the two of you did you make jam yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Pickles?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No, we never did anything like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Wine or beer or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you learn to make medicines?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh I just - I just - oh I'll ask our mum. You sort of - when she's there you know
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 As that stage did you have your main meal in the middle of the day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What would you have had in the evenings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well we never had anythi
ng very much except for tea it was bread and butter, a bit of jam for the children, or anything like that. And - for supper - I'd give them a bit of cheese if I could. But the kiddies didn't very rare - rarely have anything. Just a drop - a cup of cocoa, 
they liked cocoa - George liked cocoa tool.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 When it was just the two of you did you have anything different on Sundays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well I always - always tried to make a decent tea. He liked a bit of cake and things like that for his tea and usually it was 
eggs and bacon if I could and of course if we hadn't got the money for it we just had some toast or something. We managed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Where did you get your vegetables from?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh I had to buy them all from the shop. There was a little back garden but - oh you'd put - you could put it in half of this room.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you used to go to market for vegetables?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Oh I used to go down the covered market. They were cheaper than anywhere else but - I don't think we got this one greengrocery and they were very good and mostly very fresh. We were apt to stop there once you'd got satisfaction.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Once they knew you I expect?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes, I suppose so. And they were very fresh, we were very fortunate in that respect.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you never have tinned or dried vegetables in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No. Never tinned vegetables ever.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Fruit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well I'd some - if I'd got a few shillings left I'd buy them some apples or an orange.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You hadn't any hens or anything in the back yard?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh no. It was forbidden you see, there were too - the houses were too closely packed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How many times a week did you eat meat when there was just your husband and you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well - if I could I got a little joint for Sunday which we always washed up for Monday. And then we'd probably hav
e - a leg of - a leg of beef and - kidney stew for the next day. Most days - oh and we'd have sausage one day, it }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1334943\charrsid14039999 depended}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 how the money ran out.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You could manage meat most days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes, we mostly did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Tinned eat ever?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you ever get extra meat like your mother did the rabbits and things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Oh occasionally we did, yes, but that was in place of anything else. That was a luxury. If this man came - we knew he was a poacher - and he'd come to the door sometimes with this cou
ple of rabbits and - give me so and so for them. We got them for next to nothing, else we couldn't have had them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you ever have to go short so your husband could have things in food?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well I did but I mean I'd sort of try to }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1334943\charrsid14039999 camaflage}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  it - I
 didn't want to make them feel embarrassed if they thought I wasn't having any. Then I said, would you like a bit more bread? And one of them would say - he'd say - George would say, well I haven't seen you have any. Oh I'm not hungry. 'Cos I didn't - I -
 no I didn't go really hungry you know, just having a little bit, but there was no - no real variety in it. You see, I couldn't always have - afford a second vegetable, 'cos they were very expensive. The }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid1334943\charrsid14039999 greens}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  were.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What did you do on Bank Holidays in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Oh yes, if it was a nice day we'd take - well this is - before the children came - we always used to like to go for a walk down - the embankment or go and have a walk on Clifton Grove, we loved that. But that was - there was trams of cou
rse and we did go on the tram. And we've often walked back. Because if }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1334943\charrsid14039999 it}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 was a nice day. We couldn't when we'd got the children you see and the prams and that kind of thing. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1334943\charrsid14039999 So they'd have to be satisfied with the Hoverington or the Forest. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 But we enjoyed it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Between your marriage and the end of 1919 did you ever go away for a holiday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You hadn't any relations or anyone you could stay with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh, I'd only got the one bedroom you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Can you remember anything you did with your husband - on Christmas Day that was different?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
No, it was always - we'd always kept Christmas Day the same, he sort of fell in with the family, he was treated as one of the family from mother - they'd all known him from a boy of about fifteen and he 
just sort of followed on - we didn't do anything very special but - if it was possible - we couldn't afford a fowl or anything like that but we did have a rabbit or a bit of pork and had a nice dinner. Never bothered about any tea much. And then in the ev
ening the married sisters would come down and that and we'd all get together and have a talk and we enjoyed our Christmas that way. There was no television or tele - whatsname, but we were quite happy.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 At that stage were there any musical instruments in the home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Yes. There was - John used to play the mouth organ. He was very musical but - poor lad he had to - well it didn't matter how cold it was he had to go in the attic to play it, she couldn't bear it. Even at that stage.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you sort of have sing-songs?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Yes, we all used to - yes, we all knew - there were certain old songs that we all seemed to know. Songs often that mother had sung to us. And I always remember we used to say it was the only year father ever - only time father ever 
sang, and I used to say - go on dad, sing us your song, it's Christmas. I never forgot it. Poor Old Joe. And he used to put the actions to it, he - he had us all in fits with laughing. Poor Old Joe has gone to rest - I }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid1334943\charrsid14039999 sat down}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  by my Mary's side and a stor
y she did tell, was about old - no, Darkie Jess. It was about old Darkie Jeff. 'Cos I used to get the words all mixed up, it was a long while before I could right until he was ever so old, he was - it was not himself if he wouldn't sing it. But we had to 
d
o a lot of coaxing you know. But - I - we did love it, and all the sisters knew - they knew all the songs that mother used to sing. She was a great one for singing to us and we all loved it. All old fashioned songs, and that kind of thing. And then we all
 sang the songs we knew from school. My older sisters - we often learnt the same songs after I went to school that they knew and say, oh I know that one.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Were there books in your part of the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well only.-
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You said you had them when you were little?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Yes, we had to do. But - well - she didn't bother then so much. And I did go to I got going to the library quite a bit, there was a free library near us, and I did }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1334943\charrsid14039999 enjoy}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  it but I had so little time that I had to sort of sneak a few minut
es and that then I got - disheartened because if I got entranced in a book and I didn't want to leave it and I know all the things that were waiting for me to do.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you take newspapers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Dad had the Post.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What about your husband?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Wel
l dad always used to pass it on to George you see and we had - I think on a Sunday - he had a paper on Sunday, can't just remember what it was. That was all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Magazines at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did your husband have any difficulty reading with the one eye?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh no, he used to tell me he could see twice as much as I could see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you ever read aloud together?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Could you tell me how you spent Saturdays at that stage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. I always used to like to get all me cleaning done by Sa
turday dinner so the place was all nice and spick and span for Sunday and we'd have a bit of rest, say - Saturday afternoon, then George says, let's got and have a walk down the market. And it was the covered in market then, the old exchange - and we'd ju
s
t walks about the stalls and have a look round, see if there was anything we could afford to buy and we were quite satisfied at that. But George liked to play billiards and there was a billiards room nearby and if - if I didn't feel like going, I didn't g
o
 ever, but he used to go sometimes and we'd come back, we weren't late, and he'd say, I'm going down to the billiard hall for a bit, and I said, all right. But that was - an odd times we went to the pictures but - he wasn't too keen on pictures. He was li
ke me, he liked the theatre better. But that was an event, you see, it's got to be something special, or something special we wanted to see that we could arrange it you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How did you spend Sundays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Sundays, well we always had a lay}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15994928\charrsid14039999 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 in. Sunday was the day we hadn't got to work by the clock. But - very little different to any other day.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you put on different clothes on a Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well we had - you'd got to keep one thing decent you see, we couldn't - I would never work in the dress t
hat I - Sunday dress like. Well we hadn't any others to do it with so you just couldn't do it until you could get better clothes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 When you were first married did you think it was wrong to work or enjoy yourself on a Sunday or did you think it didn't matter?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Oh - well, we had to be very discreet. We couldn't be noisy at all, if George - sometimes he would act the clown you know, and I used to say, oh don't make a noise, you'll disturb mum. Oh dear. Yes she was down below and - but the sound did - 
it always seemed to - she could hear it more. I know if we were laughing a lot she'd say, it's not any hope - hope of me getting a rest Sunday afternoon when you two's on giggling. You see, we used to get into trouble a bit for it. But she didn't - not re
ally cross you know but she liked us to have been - or we've gone a walk. I've taken them - when the kiddies were very little I used to say, well I'll take them round on the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1334943\charrsid14039999 field}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  a bit, it's a long day if you }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1334943\charrsid14039999 don\rquote t.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
. You see, and I've worked - I've done wo
rk at home when I've had it many a time, if I'd got to finish some for Monday and I hadn't got it done, he's say, well I'm going out round for a bit and - and I'd sit and work when the children were in bed. I'd sooner do it than be late with the }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1334943\charrsid14039999 w}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 ork if it was promised you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You felt quite happy about this, you weren't made to feel guilty about it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh no. Well it was the life of most of us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 When you were little you weren't allowed to do anything on Sunday were you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Nothing whatsoever.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 When did you begin changing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Well as we - when we started going out to work and we knew what other girls did. One of - one of the girls said, oh I did so and so on Sunday. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1334943\charrsid14039999 
And I - I just said - and if you could ask a girl to - one of your gi
rlfriends you worked with - I - to tea on Sunday, mother never provided any tea, it was just the same bread and butter and this lovely jam and - I said to her once, could I bring Florrie Smith to have a cup of tea with us? }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 I said, you know, she did ask me the other week, mum, I went. She said, yes, I know. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1334943\charrsid14039999 And it was a long, long time before she made up her mind. }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 But she says, you'll do everything yourself because I'm going to have my rest. And instead of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1334943\charrsid14039999 lying}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  on the sofa which she did, the old sofa, when 
I brought the girl to tea she went and laid on the bed, you see. But - not very often. I - we - you didn't ask very often, well I knew how the situation was, and we knew that she could ill afford it and I thought well if she's - she's worked hard at that 
chebonning all week she must be tired. You know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 When you were first married did you attend a place as worship or not on Sundays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No. I'm ashamed to say it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 So you don't know anything about church activities at that stage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh I used to have the magazine. They used to send it to me from the church.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you belong to any clubs organised by the church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Was grace said at meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No. We never said grace at meals, not ever. In our own youth and - I never - oh, well - 
I say no - I always liked them to say when - if they finished first - and I wouldn't let them leave the table and start running about if I'd not - say your manners and get down, and say thank you for - what did I say, thank you for my good dinner. }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1334943\charrsid14039999 Thank you for my good dinner, please may I leave the table? }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
That was - well it was a form of grace. But nothing else - nothing religious attached to it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 When you were first married did you }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15994928\charrsid14039999 take}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  an interest in politics?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes, I used to like to - me dad u
sed to belong to some - well he never went to the meetings but he always used to talk about them - the Conservatives and - I used to like to listen to him talking about them. But I took no - personal interest in it, not until after we were married. And th
e
n the - I - had a friend whose father-in-law stood for the council, he lived opposite me, he was a Labour member and I - I let them have the room once for the con - for a - committee meeting. And I did go to those meetings if mother would listen to the ch
ildren. You see. And - I - I got very interested in the Women's Association at one time and I - I was president of it for a little while but - then I was ill and I couldn't keep it up so I had to give up again.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 So you were more inclined to the Labour party?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Why did you think that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Well I think it was - being on the edge of - you know - sort of - having to work for every ha'penny and not knowing where the next is coming from and they had a - they had a way of looking - a sho
pkeeper was looked down on as if he was dirt you know, and I used to - there was the butcher, he was a rank Conservative and he used to get my blood right up. I once heard him say, the devils don't want to work. He was talking about some people who - hadn
'
t got any work and I knew they'd tried every so hard and - I thought to myself, you're darned lucky to have a shop to work in. And I felt resentful. All the time about - I always have and I still do. I said, you want all the privileges but a man whose got
 to work for - doesn't have - it wasn't a thing that they carry on with, perhaps be going on nicely for a few weeks, stop this now, no more work - and was out of work. And there was no - only periods of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid1334943\charrsid14039999 dole}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  in those days. You couldn't get any assistance - there was no - no public assistance or anything like that, you just had to manage.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did your husband take an interest in politics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No. Used to go to the meetings with me sometimes because, you see, we were friendly with this family, they lived op
posite me and we were quite friendly with them, and they said, come along, come to the meeting. And I - I really enjoyed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 But he really wasn't interested?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Not really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What were his views?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well I think the billiard hall was his - I thi
nk the billiard hall was - and he liked football, if he could get enough money to go to a football match he was happy. He did - you know, he'd listen to them and he'd talk to them but he - and he belonged the British Legion.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you vote in a general election?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 And you voted Labour?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15994928\charrsid14039999 Oh}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  yes. I never voted anything else.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What about your husband?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 I never asked him 'cos I said it was personal, and I believed he did because he seemed to - he - sort of - with us knowing th
is family and knowing the ins and outs and that I believe he - he felt the same as I did. Yes, yes, I never knew for sure, I couldn't say for a certainly.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you have political discussions with your parents because they were Conservative weren't they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Well they were at the time but - after a while dad seemed to be - I - something happened, I don't know what it was - something that - about the worker - dad said, they'd cut your throat, they would, they wouldn't let you work. Oh I know. Now when w
ould this be, I can't remember - when the miners were - they wouldn't give them any work, they turned them away from the pits. That was after mother went in that little house and it so infuriated me father because - he - he - he thought that - well - as I
 do today, to think of a man having to go into the bowls of the earth to me they must heroes every one of them. And dad was so inflamed at the way they treated these men. They got practically - they were practically }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15994928\charrsid14039999 starving.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  I can't remember the - it was s
omething to do with the - wasn't a strike - they turned them away, they wouldn't give them the work. Then there was a lot of miners round there where we lived. And from then on - father wouldn't hear of the Conservatives, he says -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you or your hus
band ever feel under any pressure from anyone to vote for a particular party? Were your employers interested in who you voted for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh no, well they - oh yes, a canvasser would come round but - most of them we knew if they were in the party and from g
oing to these meetings and with these friends of ours being - oh, they'd say, oh it's all right here. That's all that would be said.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Were you a member of a political party?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Just that short time. When I went - and I went - I used to go about once
 a week. And odd times they'd run a little whist drive at one of the schools and if George would stop and look after the kiddies I would go there. Only about sixpence I think.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you ever work for one of the parties at an election?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you take part in any other political activity at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No. Just for these - this little group that we knew you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Because you knew them really?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes? They were working people the same as ourselves.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 When you weren't working how did you spend your time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
I never seemed to - if I - if I couldn't get any work to earn money with I'd be doing something - making the kids frocks or something, knitting the socks and so on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You occasionally went to the theatre?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes, this was
 - it would be some special thing. If we read in the Post there was so and so on at the theatre Royal, and we got our knowledge of that with - my sisters used to be big - big - the elder ones were big theatre goers and we used to buy a magazine giving you
 
the pictures out of the play and the musical - so I knew all this thing. And when they'd done with this you see, oh you like this don't you? And there'd be captions under the pictures you know and telling you what it was and this will be coming to the the
atre }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1334943\charrsid14039999 Royal}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 in such and such a time. I said, oh yes, oh I shall have to see if I can save up sixpence and then I'll be able to go. You know, and we looked forward to it. And George liked that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How often would this be, sort of once a month?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh not as - not as - not as much as once a month. Just depended what it was that was there at the time you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 What did you specially like?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh musical comedies. And a lot of the straight plays. The Arcadians and The Country girl and - what was the - a
ll those musical comedies, and I went - there was one man I liked - I went to see - who was that man, The Only Way, Martin Harvey. Oh I thought that was wonderful. And I saw - the magazine - in the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid1334943\charrsid14039999 Chinese}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  Bungalow and there was a - and I saw one just called the C}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15994928\charrsid14039999 ruel}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  Sea, and I never forgot that. I can't even remember the name - it was a straight play, just talking but I thought it was wonderful.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you ever go out together in the evening or anything else?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes, odd times. If - if mother and da
d would say, well - we'll - if you and George want to go out for an hour we'll listen the children but I couldn't trust mother because she had them a bit she'd have them all out of bed. You see. And it was more trouble to me when I came back and they were
 all upset and excited you see so - I wouldn't go - not very often, but odd times me sister }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1334943\charrsid14039999 Alice}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
, the one that had got the - and her husband, they liked a game of cards. I loved playing whist, George did too. And we'd go to their }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1334943\charrsid14039999 house}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  perhaps one Sunday and then when the children were all in bed, or if they weren't in bed - let the bigger ones look at their picture book or something and mother'd say -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Might you have done this before you had children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh we used to go to Alice's quite a bit, yes. We played cards but only Sunday night, perhaps for a couple of hours. But we did like it.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did your husband ever go out without you from the very beginning?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes, he was a - yes, he used to go into the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1334943\charrsid14039999 square}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  - there used to be a - a man selli
ng newspapers down there and George knew him. And George said, I'll go down in the - in the square for a paper, he'd be gone hours. And - oh my, crikey, you've been a long while. Oh, he said, we got talking about - he'd been in the Army with George, all t
h
is kind of thing. If ever he met anybody that had - it was like going home to him you see. And he used to go and - and he loved that billiard room. I used to be a bit cross about that sometimes. But it was on our road you see, it wasn't far. I knew where 
he was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did he ever go to clubs, institutes or pubs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Just to the - odd time he'd go in the pub - very }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1334943\charrsid14039999 rarely}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  though. But he was in the British Legion and he had to go to the meeting once a week or something like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you ever go to any }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1334943\charrsid14039999 pubs}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  or institutes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Would you have been able to go into a pub or were they }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1334943\charrsid14039999 men\rquote s}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  pubs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Oh no, you could go in. I used to go in the pub every night to fetch mum and dad's supper beer you see. You could - oh there was no restriction, the men and women all went together. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you ever go in for a drink?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Yes. I had - on several occasions. When - me brother-in-law, Harold, when he won that - some money on the pools - they came and asked us to go, take us out, they took us in the Talbot, I'd never been in there before. And I did really enjoy it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you and your husband ever go?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Odd time. Out it was very rarely. Because you see - he - I had a drink - the money for a drink with him but if it comes to two he'd got to go short so I used to - go on then George, if you want to go and have a drink you go.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 When you were first married to did you belong to any savings clubs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes. Yes. When - when Mr Redgate gave me that - gave us that bonus, when the men were cal
led up to go and he have us two pound a month which was wealth to us I was in the ten pound money society in Heathcote Street and I - I was on - I kept that up - it wasn't until I really couldn't afford the shilling a week that I had to let it drop.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you belong to a boot club at the beginning?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 That was the one my mother had. Yes, oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You weren't in a sick club at that stage were you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Not until the children - you know - got to be about two or three or so then we paid tuppence or threepence a week into the sick - club.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Any funeral club or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
No. We always - mother used to say, when you get married and before you have a family, the best thing is to take out an insurance - on - as the children come along. And I used
 to pay threepence for George, tuppence for me and a penny for Joyce and then have the penny then. I didn't want to pay a shilling a week all the time. Oh no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you or your husband take part in any sport when you were }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15994928\charrsid14039999 first}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No, I don't think so.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you go to concerts ever?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No, we none of us seemed to go to concerts?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Music halls?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Occasionally, just as I say an odd occasion. Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did either of you bet on anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh George loved it. I didn't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 This was horses was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did either of you have any hobbies?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
I can't remember if we - he loved the paper, I used to say I don't know what he'd find to interest him - seemed as if he read every - every line.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You didn't keep any pets at that stage did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Yes. He once - somebody had bread some goldfinches and he - I don't know what it was he'd done for this man but this man gave him one. And mother had got an old cage and - oh he polished every wire on that cage. And he - that
 bird was beautiful, we had him years. And he sang lovely. And then years after I did have a dog and I had a cat and I've been very fond of both.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 But not at this stage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you have any other interests outside the home at this stage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No, I can't - well we never really had time you see, if it comes to that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you ever go out yourself and enjoy yourself on your own?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Odd occasions. There was just - this little whist drive and dance, it was called. Belong - the - got up by
 the Labour party. George wouldn't always go. He'd say, oh I'll - I'll sooner go in the billiard hall. You see, so I - then I have gone - it was only for about a couple of hours on a Saturday evening. Didn't go always. But it just depended what I'd got to
 do. And - I really and truly enjoyed it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Nobody outside the home helped you in your domestic life at that stage did they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well - this - Alice, this one - the Naval man's wife - my sister - she was awfully good to us. But it was in such a - she w
ouldn't let you think she was helping. I've got this and we can't finish it, would you and the children finish it, and sort of things like that. And I know when George was going after a job, his shirt, I'd patched it up and it was so shabby and I - I happ
ened to say, you know, I wish I could have got him a new shirt to go in, he might have got the job. But nothing was said, but presently one of Alice's children brought this parcel to me. There was a little note on top, this is an old one of }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4399113\charrsid14039999 Harold\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 , perhaps it'll be a bit smarter than George's. Things like that. She was the only one who did anything.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 And she did it very tactfully?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh - oh yes, nobody knew. The child didn't even know what the parcel contained you see. And when I tried to thank he
r afterward, oh, she said, forget it. That was all you could get out of her.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 If you were confined to bed at this period how did you manage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well there again George was awfully good. He seemed - he did - very well for a man.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You had lots of relatives living round?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes. There was quite a -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 How much did you see of them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Well - it used to be - a usual thing or me sisters and that when they've been doing the shopping - it was on the main road then, we'll call in our mum's, you
 see, sometimes there'd be two or three of them down - when I got downstairs with a bucket or something, there was two or three of them called in to see mum and they would all have a little chat and then mostly at the weekends one or two of them would com
e in.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you have any friends who weren't relations?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes. Yes I did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Where did you see them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Well this was this - who lived straight opposite - this - in this - they were - her father-in-law was the councilor, and she liked - she w
ould like me - she liked freedom, and that's where we were good friends because we often go to the library together and I was - she was more - the only friend I had for years. But I used to sometimes see the girls I'd worked with - on odd occasions.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 The friend opposite - you went to her house and she came to yours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you and your husband share the same friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh he was very friendly with the Thundercli}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4399113\charrsid14039999 f}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 fs. Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did he have friends of his own?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes, there was tw
o men who were in the same Regiment as George who were Nottingham men and - when - after the war and they were discharged and we were living in mother's rooms and - it was quite by surprise - a knock came at the door one Sunday and I went and there this m
a
n stood in uniform. Well I didn't know him. He was older you see, he was a - me brothers generation you see but of course he knew George. And he said, is Williams in? So George said, I know - I told you, the door opened straight into the room - I know tha
t
 voice. Well he came to me, he said, why it's Darkie Stevenson. Well after all these years. They were old chums. Oh he came in and for quite a long while - he used to go down there and they came to us. And he was a - working at the Clifton pit and he got 
George in the Clifton colliery }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4399113\charrsid14039999 band}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
. Couldn't get him a job at the pit but he got him in the band. And he really enjoyed his life a bit better from then. It - it was something that he liked you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 These friends you invited to the house, how often did they come?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh - not very often. Perhaps once or two or three a week.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Would they be offered anything to eat or drink?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes, I'd make a cup of tea and - I'd usually - with baking me own bread and usually got some cakes and bits of things 
and they'd be passed round. But never - we wouldn't - we didn't have what was called a sit down meal.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you invite them in on particular days or occasions or just because you felt like it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes, just because - yes - because -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Not because it was a holiday or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Was it usually a Sunday or something?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh it was - sometimes they'd pop in on Sunday because they knew we weren't working on a Sunday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Would you say the friends invited were your friends or your husband's friends or friends you shared?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well they were all - they were all really three.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did friends call in casually without an invitation?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. Very often.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did neighbours call in casually in the same way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes, they were your
 friends - and they probably wouldn't stay, they'd just a call in, have a chat and say, oh well be seeing you. Oh - come round so and so, they might say.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you often go to visit friends or neighbours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 I went more to me own sisters, you see, I'
d got so many of them. But I - I was always - I was very often with Sarah, and then this other girl from work, I went to her place quite a few times. But after they'd all got married I lost track of them and I didn't like them to know that I was hard up y
ou see, and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
People often tell us that in those days people made their own amusements, what did you do when you got together with friends or neighbours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Well it was mostly talking and a sing song and a game of cards with - and - and they did
n't play dominoes, they played the dominoes in the pubs but - dad loved a game of cards. And we'd all sit -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Was it whist mostly?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Whist or - there was - more games than whist but - we girls all liked them to play whist because it was more interes
ting, but there was one game that me dad liked because everybody could take part. I can't think it was now. We played it for ha'pennies. Can't think of it for the world but I know they used to say if one or two or them had come, come on dad, get the cards
 out. Let's have a game of cards. And I think that was his one amusement really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 You had a struggle to make ends meet at that time, what did you think about it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 I used to get a bit fed up sometimes. I - I thought to myself, oh well - but you see,
 there was always this - in - in your mind, that we were all in the same boat round about us. Mother said, that' poor man's been out of work two years, and I never said anything, and I - when I was going upstairs I was chortling to myself, I said, and yes
, and you've been out nearly three years now but she wasn't - he wasn't a poor man you see, cos his wife worked. And it made me laugh afterwards. I thought - well - but it was so young. It was very general after that 1914 war. The poverty was dreadful.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 To begin with your husband wasn't working so you knew this from the very end of the war didn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
Yes, yes. He came out - was it 1922. Was he discharged, something like that. And for the first four years he was home. He never earned a penny. They 
- they - they gave him - I think it was a period of dole, but after that period ran to you'd got to go to work again for so many - months to get the stamps back }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4399113\charrsid14039999 before}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  you could get any more if you couldn't get work. But you see if he never went to work he never got the stamps and you didn't get any.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Did you ever get help from the guardians or the parish or a charity?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No. I didn't. But while I was carrying - after I left work when I was carrying Joyce, well the soldiers pay was twelve shillings 
a week you see. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4399113\charrsid14039999 
Well I was - I got a bit of money by me, I'd been careful with what I'd got, well then I'd got to prepare for her coming and it was Mr Thornicliffe who told me, he says, you know you should get a bit more Annie, I don't know how you're mana
ging to live on that, and I'd got to pay mother for everything and coal and all the lot, I'd got those rooms. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
And - he gave me some address to go to. Somewhere on Castlegate if I remember correctly. And they - I had to tell this man - you know - my husband
 was a regular soldier and - that, and I was - and he had to pay - they took so much out of his pay with this twelve shillings and he said, you've no other money? I said, no, that's - I can't go to work, not until after this, I said, when baby's - when I'
v
e got the baby, I said, I'll perhaps be able to get some work. And things were bad then. I couldn't get the work to do at home and they made me - I always remember what they. Put it on the paper - a child is - you see, 'cos I hadn't got the baby then but 
the - five - shillings a week until Joyce was born.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 This was from the Army?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 No, I don't think it was from the Army. Oh it must have been, of course it must.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 They did make up the Army pay didn't they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. You just got the twelve - if y
ou were married - when you were first married and there were just the two of you he had to put so much out of his money and the - you got twelve shillings a week, that was what you - I always - I got that right until Joyce was born. And then - it - it was
 seventeen and six you see. But this - this five shillings did help me. It must have been from the Army. Of course it was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 When did your husband actually get discharged from the Army?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 I think it was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15994928\charrsid14039999 1922}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 . Let's see, Joyce was born in 1919 and it'
s - must have been 1922, as near as I can remember. I gave George all his - his discharge papers and his rule book and anything, he set great store by them, and his medals. He thought a great deal of those.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 At that stage did you ever know anyone who was getting help from the Guardians?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Oh yes, it was quite - we used to - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15994928\charrsid14039999 have}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  quite a thing about it round about. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15994928\charrsid14039999 You went}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 to the Guardians, and they gave one woman a loaf of bread. That's all they gave.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8407077 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 I wondered how they treated people?
\par }\pard\plain \ltrpar\s15\qj \fi-461\li461\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid8407077 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15820647 AW  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 Yes. I didn't have any - any }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9911385\charrsid14039999 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999  first}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9911385\charrsid14039999 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16006220\charrsid14039999 
 hand information but you - they'd talk about it amongst the - where we lived, you see, and I do remember on one occasion that I - when I'd been ill and I couldn't get - well I think life crowded out on me. So much tha
t - and I'd no time to attend to it or to go to the meetings. But I sort of - I - I read it in the papers, and I get a bit disgusted sometimes, or pleased if such a things right. But I got this feeling that - the people who have money, whether they've ear
ned it or whether there's been an heir or what, they resented when the working man began to get motor cars and things that were unheard of in my -
\par }}