{\rtf1\adeflang1025\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\adeff0\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang2057\deflangfe2057{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}{\f38\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f39\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f41\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f42\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f43\fbidi \froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}
{\f44\fbidi \froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f45\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f46\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f48\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}
{\f49\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f51\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f52\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f53\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f54\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}
{\f55\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f56\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden 
Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs20 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}}
{\*\latentstyles\lsdstimax156\lsdlockeddef0}{\*\revtbl {Unknown;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid854880\rsid2556434\rsid3176550\rsid4857542\rsid6242166\rsid11011264\rsid12287980\rsid13961525\rsid15991843\rsid16650296}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 11.0.0000;}{\info{\title Int 247a}
{\author PRASAD3}{\operator lhorto}{\creatim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min8}{\revtim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min8}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords28633}{\nofchars163210}{\nofcharsws191461}{\vern24613}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 http:
//schemas.microsoft.com/office/word/2003/wordml}{\xmlns2 urn:schemas-microsoft-com:office:smarttags}}\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1800\margr1800\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0\ltrsect 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\donotembedsysfont0\donotembedlingdata0\grfdocevents0\validatexml1\showplaceholdtext0\ignoremixedcontent0\saveinvalidxml0\showxmlerrors1\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace180
\dgvspace180\dghorigin1800\dgvorigin1440\dghshow1\dgvshow1\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\splytwnine\ftnlytwnine\htmautsp\nolnhtadjtbl\useltbaln\alntblind\lytcalctblwd\lyttblrtgr\lnbrkrule\nojkernpunct\rsidroot16650296 \fet0
{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}\ilfomacatclnup0\ltrpar \sectd \ltrsect\linex0\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ltrpar
\ql \fi-461\li461\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid6242166 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\ul\insrsid6242166\charrsid16072257 Information about interviewee}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid6242166 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid6242166\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\ql \fi-461\li461\ri0\widctlpar\tx2057\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid6242166 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6242166\charrsid16072257 Date of birth}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid6242166    \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6242166\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6242166  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid12287980 1890}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid6242166\charrsid16072257 
\par Gender}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6242166           \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6242166\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6242166  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid12287980 M}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6242166 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6242166\charrsid16072257 Marital status}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6242166 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6242166\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6242166  
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid12287980 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6242166\charrsid16544153 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6242166\charrsid16072257 Occupation}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6242166 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6242166\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6242166  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid12287980 Medicinal oil factory employee}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6242166\charrsid16072257 
\par Geographic region}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6242166 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6242166\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6242166  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid12287980 
Llan Ffestiniog, Merioneth, Wales}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid6242166\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\qj \fi-461\li461\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid6242166 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Could you give your name and address?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well - do you want my proper name? Frank Evans.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Where do you live?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Bryn Olew, Ffestiniog.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Are you married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 When did you marry?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 It was during the war. 1916. December 1916. I was in the Army then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Where were you born, and when?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 I was born in Ffestiniog. In - 1890 - oh, something - 18 - well anyway I'm 80 next birthday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How many years did you lived in the house in which you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well roughly about eight or nine years.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Where did you go then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh to - Pengwern Villa. And then after that here.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 You then moved up here?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, well you see my father built these two houses together, Bryn Olew, and then you see my brother lived in one and I lived in the other.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 And you've lived here ever since?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Now wait a minute, after I married I went to live in Bodwyn in Station Road, Ffestiniog, where my mother-in-law lived. And then you see on my father's death the house came to me, this house. So of course I came to live here then, with my mothe
r. And then of course after she died then it was me and the wife. I've got a good story now. Shall I tell it in English or Welsh? I remember watching my father writing his will, and he used to keep the will up on top of the cupboard. And I remember one da
y
 I went and had a look at it. And I remember chatting with a father about what he was going to put in his will and he said, you know, well, I'm going to leave this house to you after I die, and you're to come and live with your mother. Well, I said, you k
n
ow, I might be married by then and the wife probably won't want to live with my mother. Oh yes, he said, I didn't think of that. And I said, you know, look at the moment I'm - paying rent to my mother-in-law, and my father - thought about it and realized 
h
e'd made a mistake because - my brother was already getting the next door house on his death. And he realized, you know, that I'd be paying rent, at - you know, to my mother-in-law. So what he did was get tenant for us. This was, you know, to prevent me h
a
ving - to pay rent and - because I didn't get possession of our house straight away. And then of course I left - rented Tinant to John, you know, he's still there. I sold it to him in fact. Which was probably a mistake really. I mean I wouldn't have got T
inant at all if it hadn't been for the fact that I'd seen the will and told my father that - you know I was being - done down.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember why your family moved from one house to the other?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, yes, I do. Which year was it, I came back from
 the Army in 1919. I went to Egypt for about three years you see and - I came back and lived with mother-in-law, I remember that very well. And I remember going into this shop. And I used to buy - always buy things from Jones - from Manod. And I mean she 
bought there so }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 obviously}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
 I bought goods and things there. And I went there one day to get some goods and the goods came to a pound and a ha'penny and I didn't have the ha'penny. So the old bitch changed a whole pound to just get that ha'penny. I told my mo
ther-in-law, I won't go there again. She changed a pound just to get a ha'penny you know. I told my mother-}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 in-law}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
 that, I wouldn't go there ever again, and I didn't either. And I'd just come out of the Army too.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How many brothers and sisters did you have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Well I have two brothers and one sister, they're all dead now though. My sister was buried - what - about two months ago and she was ninety.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 They were all older than you were they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, yes, I was the youngest. And I was the first to 
marry, no I wasn't, my step-sister was first. She - she got married before I did. And - and I was the first of the boys to marry. The other two married afterwards. That was while I was in the Army.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How many years were there between the children and what order did they come in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Well there were about two years between - my brother - well he was a step-brother too you know. In fact they both were. 'Cos you see, my father married three times, and you see he had a son and a daughter from the first mar
riage and one son from the second and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 only}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  me with the third.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 A boy was the eldest, it was boy, girl and then two boys?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, that's right. Yes, but - that's right, it went, son, daughter, another boy and then me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember how many years there were between you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Well there were two years between my younger brother and me, and then there were about six or seven years between the eldest and me. And then, I'd say there were about - well ten years between my sister and me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 You mean your sister was the oldest?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember how old your father was when you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No I don't, that's a pretty difficult sum to do. My father died when he was about sixty-five or sixty-six.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Could you tell me when your father died, what year?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
I can't remember you know. I used to have some records. It's on the gravestone. You could go down to the graveyard and look at it. See my father died about sixty - sixty-nine. He died pretty young.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 You don't know what year it was?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, I couldn't tell you. Not offhand you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Where did your father come from?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well - you see, my father's story is recorded in the National Library of Wales. There's a book about my father's history and it's been on
 television and so on, my father used to work in the quarry. He was ten when he first went. He was born in Penial Terrace, and he'd get up at six o'clock in the morning and he'd walk to the quarry in Balaenau to be there by seven o'clock. They had to walk
 
in those days. And then he went on strike in the quarry. And - I - was talking to Evan Hughes about his father, you know, Maolod's grandfather. You see, he was the ringleader. Him and Ellis Hughes, from Cymerau, a farm on the outskirts of Ffestiniog. And 
t
hey came out on strike because they were fighting for - you know, for - for rights, for the right for workers to have more wages, and you see because they'd come out they didn't get their jobs back. And you see there wasn't enough guts in the - in the qua
r
rymen to stay out until the ringleaders were reinstated. Because there wasn't such a thing as a union in those days. And so there wasn't any work for these people. And you see what happened was that - Malod's father - grandfather - opened - a butchers sho
p
 in Penial Terrace, and - Ellis Hughes from Cymerau opened a coal business. And at the same time my father left the quarry and - opened a grocers business, at Liverpool house. And then afterwards he had a shop in Trawsrynydd. He had two shops in those day
s. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 
And I remember him saying many time that he used to get up at four o'clock in the morning and set off with a horse and cart down to Port Madoc to fetch coal, to fetch flour, and he had to leave at four o'clock in the morning for the reason that they had 
to be back across the cob, which is the Estuary, near Port Madoc, because - there's been a big sea wall built there now - but then the sea wall didn't exist, so they had to cross the cob before the tide came in. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 And then you see, if they - if they failed t
o do that well the - the road through Llanfrothen wasn't built then, so they had to stay in Port Madoc so that's why they had to start off at four o'clock in the morning, in order to go and get the coal and the flour off the boats which came in to Port Ma
doc harbour and I remember him saying that many times.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember when the quarry strike was?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 I'm not sure.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 But was your father a young man?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, he was. He was pretty young in those days. All the dates you know are in this book 
- that's been printed about my father's history. And then there's one pamphlet published by the War Office, a Naval Review, and that's got his picture in and everything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What did he do after that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well you see, the thing was, after the grocers s
hop, well you see he'd always wanted to be a vet or a doctor, one or the other, it didn't matter, and so he used to spend all his money on books. Books about being a vet or a doctor, and his mother and father, there would be about five or six of them, did
n
't have the money to make him - to send him to be a doctor or a farrier, so they - so he had to spend all his money on books and he studied to be a vet on his own, and then he started studying experiments in oil, how to make oil mixtures and that and he u
s
ed to buy old horses and treat them and cure them. I mean I remember those. I remember him buying one horse for about two pounds and he'd been kicked and he had an enormous great lump on his leg, and I went there with a paintbrush and painted on this oil 
and - in order to make the swelling go down, and of course the horse got well again. And then - one time - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 Lord}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  John }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 Sanger's}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
 Circus came to Blaenau, this is in about 1902, and he had a lot of horses in those days and this story is at home, at my home. And 
my father went there to - you know to - to introduce the oil to him and John Sander said, you don't think we'd come to a place like this to get cures for our - our horses and medicines for our horses. Well, my father said, I haven't come here to sell you 
anything. I've just come to introduce it. May I have a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4857542\charrsid11011264 look}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
 at some of your horses, he said. And there were about a hundred and fifty horses there. 'Cos the - no one had heard of motor cars. And my father pointed to one horse and said, that one's not it goo
d condition. And my father went up and touched him, touched his back like this, and he found something straight away. And he painted a certain point on his back. He found out what was wrong with the horse, and he}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid4857542\charrsid11011264  said to th}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 e man, I can cure this horse with
in a week. And, he said, look if you can cure that horse within a week or fortnight I'll be very pleased to see you again. And he - my father said, you know, would you mind if I gave him a dose now? No, no at all, he said. Providing I can get one of the c
h
aps to - one or two of the chaps to help you. Why? my father said. Oh, you can't give him a dose without having one or two people there to hold him. To twist his nose. You know what that is don't you? I'll manage it, my father said. No you won't, said the
 
man. He - it's dangerous, he'll kick. No, you leave it to me, my father said. My father went up and patted the horse on its back and got hold of it like this and he put his hand in his mouth and - with a bottle in his hand started playing around with his 
tongue. Good God, said Lord John }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 Sanger}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
, I've been with horses all my life and I've never seen that done. You see, the horse was drinking it as my father was playing with his tongue. And }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 Sanger}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  said, well I've never seen that - anything like that in all my 
life. And my father said to him, well you tell one of your horsemen to do exactly as I've done every day - because I mean it's unnatural to make a horse lift its head up to dose it, and a horse naturally drinks with its head down. And when you lift his he
ad up and twist his nose well he's choking. And John }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 Sanger}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
 realized what he was saying and said, you know, that point had never dawned on him. And - of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4857542\charrsid11011264 course}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
 the horse did get better, and they were customers of ours all their lives. No matter where they were with the circus they used to send for the oil. And I remember that, you know, from 1902 at least.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Is that what your father did all his life after that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, that's right, once the business was built up.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did he ever do any other jobs at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, he gave up the grocers shop. Once the - oil business started up.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you ever remember young father being out of work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No I don't. No, he was busy.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you know how old your mother was when you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well she was pre
tty young - I'm not sure. My mother came from Ball. My mother comes from very old family and I've got the history of my mother dating back to 1832. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 
I've got a - a record of the family tree and it\rquote s very, very interesting. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 And I was first given this history by somebody from {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}South Africa{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 who was related to me. He came over to Balla to ask about my mother, and asking after my mother's brother who was a vet and - but my mother's brother was dead and - and then he asked where my mother was. And they said, oh wel
l, she used to live in Ffestiniog but she's dead now. But I do remember they told him that she's got a son and he sometimes comes over to visit his uncle here. He's a naughty little devil too. And so this man said, oh well, I'd like to see him, because he
'
s a relative of mine and I've got the family history. And so he landed up here with a - a man from Balla But - I didn't happen to be in that day so he said he'd come over another time. And then he - and so he came over and he had the family tree with him,
 and he had it, he'd got it from Somerset House. And you see, I come from a - from a family of preachers, some of the best preachers in - in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}Wales{\*\xmlclose}
{\*\xmlclose}, the most famous. In fact they were }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  preachers that started off the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 Calvinistic}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  Methodist movement in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}Wales{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
. And there's the story of one of them preaching in Capelgwyn. He was William Evans from Vedw Arian. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 
And it's so happened that I came into his will and I got a dresser and a few other things and there's a very interesting account of him preaching in Cape
lgwyn, and there's the story of him preaching in Hen Capel, you know, the one here, just - just in Ffestiniog. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
You know where it is? Who lives there now I wonder. You know, the road up to the quarry. You know, Manog quarry, the road up past Tryfal.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 You mean that little tiny chapel?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Yes, that's right. No, no, wait a minute, you - you're wrong. There's a house there now, where this old chapel used to be. You know, Medwin lives there. On the right hand side as you go up that little road. Penfrith y
ou know. And you see there was a chapel there before, and you know it was called Hen }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 Capel}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
. If you looked up the deeds you'd probably find it. And was a story of this - of this relative of mine preaching there. And I've got the books at home about it. And 
here's a story for you. While we're on this. When I got the details from Somerset House, now - this man - William Evans, well his mother and father were - Evan Roberts and that was what his mother and father were called. And you see, his father, Evan Robe
r
ts, was - hung for stealing sheep. And you see, his son went into the Ministry, but because his father had been hung for stealing sheep he changed his name to William Evans. And that's how I get the William in my name you see, my real name is Francis Will
i
am Evans. That's my real name. And the William bit come in after William Evans. And if you look into the family tree you find very sort of prominent people. Vets and - preachers and - you know. And as I've communicated with some of the family, found them 
and things - it's a very long story, and it was one of them that invented the siren, he was in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}America{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
. And then he came over to Admiralty House, his sister told me this. And he was the one that invented the siren in the time of the war. He came over to Admiralty house in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}London
{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
. Very interesting story of - of - you know - of William Evans and his immediate relatives. Yes, and I've got all the history. And I - you see, I got this dresser after the old boy - you see, after my uncle died I got this - this dres
ser. He - it was very old you know, it was at least a hundred years old. And you see what I did in fact was to - to exchange it with something that Robert - Manod's house had because I wanted something more modern. It was very silly really because obvious
ly the old one was worth much more than what I got. In fact it was three hundred years old. And it was supposed to be in the family. But I mean I didn't really know anything about the history of it then, but of course it's gone now.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did your mother have a job before she married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 I don't remember you know. I don't know if she had a job or not.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember if she worked after she married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well I'll tell you what her father was, her father was a joiner, a tip-top joiner. And this is a
 very interesting story. When my uncle in Balla died he was a vet, he - he didn't own his house, he paid rent, and her - her father, joiner, had made a corner cupboard, which I've got in the house at the moment, this is in the kitchen. Now the things was,
 
my mother had a half sister and you see he, my uncle, made his will, and you see he promised a silver teapot to my mother's step-sister, half-sister And you see, she asked my uncle while he was very ill, on his deathbed, if she could take the silver teapo
t with her and he was pretty ill then. Of course, he said, And you know what this old bitch did? She packed three }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 tea chests}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
 full of silver and stole them. Well now the old man was very ill and - an old couple, husband and wife came to live there to look af
ter him. And you see - the sister came to me and said that - that she had a copy of the will. And I said to her, I'm not interested in what's in the - what's in the will that you've got. She was the wife of a preacher. I'm going over there with a solicito
r
 to - to identify everything that's in the house to take an inventory in fact. Because you see, there's this couple living there and I've no idea what belongs to them and what belongs to my uncle, so I'm in charge now I said, I'm the executor of the will 
a
nd I'm taking the solicitor there with me, he was T.I. Jones. 'Cos I don't know, I mean, the people there might turn round and say, well this belongs to me, this belongs to me. And so I went. And - and he had to sign what my uncle had in the house, and th
e
 other party had to sign what they had. And then you see I had a call to say that my uncle was - very bad and I stayed there for a week. And this is a very funny story, I was there for a week and I could have stayed in a hotel over there but I didn't real
l
y have very much money. But they said, the couple, oh well, we can put you up. And so they did. And these people were very nice, everything for the best. And you see, when my uncle died, well my mother's step-sister and her husband didn't know that I was 
the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 executor}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
 of the will you see. And he came - came there with a solicitor. And I said to him, look here, this is the position. Oh, he said, we've got a list of everything that's in the house. And I said to him, I don't give a damn what you've got. I've go
t one here, dating from when I took charge of my uncle's affairs. Well, he said, my wife's got a list of - - which includes things like - blacking and boot polish. I don't give a damn what she's got, I said, this is the one that's going to stand, I said t
o
 him. The one I've got. And I said to him, by the way, I'd like your wife to bring back the blanket she pinched too. Oh I don't know anything about that, he said. Well she does, I said. You see these - these people here, this couple, were here when the so
licitor took identity of the charge. And she came over afterwards and pinched these blankets, two }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 chestfuls}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
 and I'd like to get those back. And she had to send them back too. And the silver that - that she pinched, well - my uncle got that back before he di
ed in fact. That's very interesting, but this is the point now. But I said to them - the only thing that these people who've been staying here, who - who saved me from going to stay - stay in a hotel - the only thing they want is a - an old sewing machine
 
that's here. Roughly speaking I suppose worth about two pounds. Oh, the minister said to me, well - everything's got to stand as it is. Look here, I said to him, my uncle has ordered a painter to paint and paper two room and he's already paid this painter
 
and the painter's ordered all the paper and everything. In fact he's painting part of the contract. But then my uncle went bad you see, and naturally they stopped and didn't finish the other room. Oh everything's got to stop, the preacher said. No by God,
 
I said. He said, you see this cupboard here, I want that. And I said, you're not having it. Because it's a fixture, I said. Oh we want it, he said. And I said to him, well look, who's going to repair the damage if you drag that cupboard off - off the wall
?
 There was no screws in there, they were nails you know, who's going to pay for the damage? Oh, he said, you can easily find paper to match this room. And I said to him, what the hell do you think I am, a bloody fool? He told me to go and see the solicito
r
, and if I've done any injustice you can go and see him. And I told the solicitor you know that the Masefields refused to let the old couple have the sewing machine, which was only two pounds, in lieu of my board and lodgings. So I said to the solicitor t
o
 - to make out a bill - to - ask the old couple to make out a bill as if I'd been living in a hotel, which would - the solicitor informed me would be about seven or eight pound, and throw that at the preacher and his wife. So the solicitor did, and told t
h
em that it was their own bloody fault. 'Cos these people were very kind and all they wanted was that little machine and you said you wouldn't give it to them, you wouldn't pay for the paper either. And I think Frank Evans told you to go to hell, and I thi
nk he was quite right. This was the solicitor speaking. Am I good?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you ever remember your mother working?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No I don't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Not after she married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No. No, she didn't after she married.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember how many rooms there were in the house where you lived first?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well you see I was born in Liverpool House. And there were what - about four bedrooms there. And I remember well - you know, }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 Bobby}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  lives there, the baker now. And I remember well my brother and me fighting on top of {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname 
address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Station Road{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
, and someone came down to tell my father. And he took hold of my hair and marched me up to the attic you see, in jail. And I'd only been there two minutes and I went out through the skylight and I walked along the gutter and over the bit where the }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 bake house}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  is now. I was playing in the top of {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}
Station Road{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} within about ten minutes. I'd climbed out of the attic. And some lady came into the shop and said, you know, oh well, I was up in - playing in station road. Oh it's not possible they said. He's
 in the attic. I've just - beaten him, sent him upstairs. He's in his bed. And she says to him, oh no, he's up at the top of {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Station Road{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 playing down by the little bridge. And he didn't believe it, and he went up to the attic, and realized what had happened. And he never put me in the attic again.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How many rooms were there downstairs in Liverpool House?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well there was the shop, a parlour and a kitchen. That's all there was on the ground floor.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Was there anyone apart from your brothers and sisters and your parents living in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh - only the maid. We had a maid there. And there was like an assistant in the shop.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did the maid live in with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes she did, she lived with us. In fact we had a series of maids. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 At any one time did you just have one maid?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Where did she eat and sleep?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 I think she must have been in the attic. She used to sleep up there 'cos - because there was a big attic there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did she eat with the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes. She ate with the family.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did she have a room of her own at all, apart from the attic?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, she lived with the family, and ate with us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did your mother supervise what she did?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, she did. Because you see at that time we also had some 
farmland. We used to hold the fields of Tyisaf. You know where you live. You know, the ones in front of Bryn }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 Llewellyn}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
. It's a section of the farm. And we used to hold those fields. And I got some very good stories about fields.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How did you feel towards the maid, did you feel comfortable in her company?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What did you call her and what did she call you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4857542\charrsid11011264 she}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
 used to call me Frank.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What did she call your parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh she called my mother Mrs. But I don't remember wha
t she used to call my father. Because - you know, there was a whole series of different ones that came. And I called her by her name - Christian name.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What sort of work did she do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well she used to churn and things. And she'd make food and wash 
the dishes. Do the beds, and look after the house. Because we had a farm at that time with cows and everything. And then the - the grocer business on top of that. We had an old horse at that time called Jewel and my mother gave it sugar, and the thing was
 
that I remember once the - the servant and - the horse was supposed to be going down to the market. But the horse wouldn't start, it wouldn't leave the house until my mother had given it some sugar. Had to give him a lump of sugar in fact. It wouldn't sta
rt you know. And if mother wasn't around then one of us would have to give it sugar. Just wouldn't start. But he'd learnt very wisely.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember if people took an interest in the maid as a person?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What do you mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did they take an interest in her as a person or was she just sort of treated as a servant, you just felt she worked for you and that was it?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well it depended entirely really on the personality of the - of the maid. Or it depended on - on her employer really, because som
e people really did treat their maids like slaves. But we didn't, I mean she got food with us and I mean if she wanted a night out or something all she had to do was just tell my mother, if she wanted to go to the circus or something, and she'd be allowed
 to go.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you know if your mother gave her any sort of moral guidance?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Oh yes, she did. And my father was very strict too and he'd say, you know, Jane or Mary or whatever they - which - whichever one it was - remember to be in by ten o'clock. He was - very fond of discipline.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Who did the housework, your mother and the maid?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, they both did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did they wash all the clothes at home or did they send them out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh, at home, there wasn't - a laundry in those days. No one had heard of one.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Who made and mended the family's clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Oh well this old lady used to come round to mend. She was very old. And she used to live up in Highgate, a part of Llan, and she had a big moustache, I remember that. And I was a schoolboy at 
the time and she came there to mend the clothes. And I remember saying, is this a man? 'Cos she had a great beard. Is this a man mum? Oh I was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4857542\charrsid11011264 beaten}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  black and blue then. And I used to call her Katherine Jones moustache. But I got hell of row and beating for doing that, for saying it out loud I didn't know of course, I was just a boy.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about the cooking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh my mother used to cook. Mostly.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Who did repairs or improvements to the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh - a joiner, or whatever wanted to be done. No
ne of the family did anything like that. A joiner would come and do the repairs. And a painter would paint.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you have a nanny at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well this - this maid - only it wasn't a special job or anything, but she - used to do some }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 child minding}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 . The same one as did the house, and - and she used to look after us as well. Some of them are still alive today you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did they dress you, bath you, things like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, the maid did that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How much did you see of your parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh 
- most of the time really. I mean we lived with them. But because I mean - we didn't really live in the parlour. I mean somebody came for a cup of tea or something well they were taken straight in the kitchen. We only used the parlour on Sunday. It was ca
lled the - the Sunday parlour anyway.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you have any jobs to carry out around the house to help in the house, you or you brothers and sister?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, I didn't because - I was about ten when I started going into the factory, with the oil. Not to the place where it is }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4857542\charrsid11011264 now}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
, the old place. I started going there on a Saturday to work with it and bottle and things like that, just to help them out. And I used to get the odd shilling for that, which was my wages on - for the Saturday. And a shilling was qui
te a lot in those days, and I'd buy fish and chips or something.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 After you left school you went on and worked in the factory did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, that's right, I sort of grew up into the business.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did your brothers and sister have any jobs to do around the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Well my brother, he was the clerk for many years, you know, with the oil business, but then he got a job with B.P. as a representative and so he left the business. And then after that my other brother, the one nearest to me, he went 
into the office, and I used to travel with the oil. I went to North and South Wales. And my brother did the book keeping and things and I did the travelling. And I was on the road for about fifty years.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember if the older children helped you
 with things you found difficult when you were a child, did they help you put your clothes on or help you to eat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, I don't think they did. No they didn't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you have to help them, do things for them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh no I didn't. Except that maybe the maid used to - tie my shoes for me when I was small.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you have to go to bed at a particular time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, my mother was quite strict about bedtime, she used to send us to bed about - seven - to half past seven.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Who put you to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh the maid used to put us to bed. Or my mother sometimes you know, as it went.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How old were you when you went to bed on your own?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 I didn't sleep with the maid. No, a maid used to put me to bed. Oh I must have been about eight or nine years
 old I suppose, when I went to bed by myself that is. You see, I used to sleep with my brother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did your other brother and sister have separate beds?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How many people were there in your bedroom?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh just me and my bro
ther. And the other two had - bedrooms of their own. And my mother and father had a bedroom. But to tell you the truth my brother went to Liverpool for a bit to learn the grocery trade. And then he came from there and took charge of the shop. And then my 
sister went to London, in the dairy business she was, that was after she married.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you have a bathroom or did you have a tub in front of the fire?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh it was a tub in front of the fire. I don't remember a bathroom at all. No, we didn't have a bathroom at that time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How often did you have to have a bath?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh we had our bath two or three times a week.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 When did you have clean clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh we had clean clothes every week. Yes, every week. But I mean if we'd been playing football 
or something then maybe we'd need - clean clothes - a whole set of clean clothes in the middle of the week. Or if we got wet or something.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Where did you eat your meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh in the kitchen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Everyone was there together with the maid?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Was there any occasion on which you didn't eat in the kitchen?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Well if - visitors came you might have a meal in the parlour, and we'd used the best china, and we'd get a hall of a warning not to break the china. It was something
 like Crown china and the whole set'd come out on a special occasion, and that would always be in the parlour.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What sort of cooking equipment did you have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 An oven and an open stove, an - an open fire. We didn't have a stove of any sort. There m
ight have been a paraffin stove there, 'cos in the first period I remember paraffin stoves, I remember them coming out, they used to have double burners on them and I remember that in the kitchen. But then I don't really think that - there were paraffin s
t
oves in existence when I was little, I'd become quite old by this time. I was about thirteen or fourteen. And I can't remember a paraffin stove before that. And after I came back from America I remember it, it had two sort of big chimneys and two burners 
on it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What time did you have breakfast?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 We used to have breakfast somewhere about half past eight. In order to go to schoolboy nine.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Were all the members of the family present }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4857542\charrsid11011264 for}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  breakfast?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes? They were. We had breakfast together. The - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 old man}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  would call us about quarter to eight and we'd come down to have breakfast.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What did you usually have to eat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well we usually had porridge. Not - packet oat porridge you know, but boiled - porridge.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you have something special for breakfast on any particular days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No I don't think so. We'd have bacon and egg sometimes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about dinner and supper, when did you have those?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, we'd have dinner about - midday, to half past twelve. You know, we'd come from sch
ool. And then we'd have tea afterwards. I'll tell you what we used to have for dinner too, we used to have - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 sheep\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
 head, and I really used to enjoy them. They only cost about sixpence. And it was a great treat, it made a dinner for everyone. Of course you don't have that now do you. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Was everyone there for dinner and supper?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, they were.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What did you have for supper?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh, cheese or something. Bread and cheese. Bread and jam.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you ever have anything special for supper or dinner on any special days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No. Sometimes we'd have fish or something.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you have a Sunday dinner?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes. A leg or something.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did your mother or the maid make bread?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes. My mother did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did they make jam?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about bottling fruit or vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
They'd make - rhubarb jam and gooseberry jam and blackberry jam. I remember them doing those. And I used to have to collect the blackberries and I remember them making gooseberry jam.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about pickles?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Oh yes, they did. And I remember one time, I wanted to go out and play football and my mother had left me stirring the jam. And the jam was in this big copper dish. And my mother had left me there stirring this and I wanted to go out and play fo
otball. So of course I went off. I didn't stir it and of course the jam was ruined. I got an awful row when I got in.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about wine or beer or medicine, did they do any of those?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No I don't think so. The only thing we did have at that time - i
f we had a cold or something we'd have ginger rhubarb, mixed with Indian Brandy. And it'd be like a sort of punch. And we'd have some of that before we went to bed. And I remember an old lady giving it to me once and - and it was Indian brandy you know, i
t
 was - it was strong and I was only young, it was like drinking whisky. And I remember seeing the ceiling spinning round, I was quite drunk. And then there was this old boy, he used to live here you know with the doctor. And every Saturday night he used t
o
 call at the Co-op until I told Mr Pritchard of the Co-op that - that - you know, this old boy was drinking this Indian brandy - brandy or spirit, it was light - lighter. And he already had drinks in the Penguin and he called, you know, for the stuff in t
h
e shop. And - and Pritchard had noticed him coming to - to the shop and buying all these boxes of this medicine. And - and I told him, you know, he's drinking it, you know, drinking it like whisky. It's just like whisky you know, I said to him. Especially
 
if he's had beer. And that top of it, he'll be - he'll be drunk out of his mind. And you know, what old Johnnie was doing was going to the shop and for about sixpence he'd get about half a pint of this stuff. I remember once my mother giving me a dose of 
t
his ginger rhubarb, I was so drunk I saw the ceiling turning round. I'll never forget it. I remember going round afterwards pretending I'd got a cold and trying to persuade my mother to give me some of this medicine. But the old lady understood and she di
dn't ever give it to me in such strength as she had before.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did your parents - grow fruit or vegetables at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, they didn't grow anything like that, because there wasn't a garden that belonged to Liverpool House to tell the truth.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 So they bought fruit and vegetables did they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember having any tinned fruit or vegetables or dried fruit and vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Very little, there wasn't very much like that to be had in that period.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did your parents keep animals at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, 'cos my father had a farm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 This is when you lived in Liverpool House?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What animals did you have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 We had - cows. I don't think we had any sheep. We used to sell milk you see. And we had horses to sell coal with. And we use to churn.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you have hens?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, we had hens, we had scores of hens.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 When did your father start working the factory full time and give the farm up?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Let me think now, well he started - in the house up at the top of S
tation Road, started with the oil in about - 1893. And then he bought an old Army hut down in Caernarvon and he - and he deposited this hut up at the top of Station Road. And all - we moved it to where - to where - to where it is now and - that's the only
 
building of that size that ever - that's ever been moved in Wales without taking it to pieces. And we moved it - with rollers along railway bars, and I remember the quarrymen going to work in the morning and saying, oh look, old Morris is trying to move h
i
s building, and they said - they were sure it would collapse. And he had a crane - a large crane at one end and a - and a crane at the other end and we shifted the factory over what must have been a distance of a hundred yards. And all that was done witho
ut pulling it down. 'Cos the - we had to move it because they were going to build those two new houses, you know. And we shifted it down to where it is today, it must have been about thirty or forty yards, and we did that without pulling it down.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Who looked after the animals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Oh well we had a servant, a farm servant, to look at - that was to look after the animals, so we had another one to look after the horses, and they used to - the servants used to help with the - taking the coal out and the fl
our out. So it was quite a big business then. In fact this - the history of the business is written down in Welsh in - a book called the Cwn Y Crymru Coch, which means Red Wales or the Red Welsh. And I've got some of those in the - in the house, it was li
ke a periodical, and there's a picture of my father in it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How many servants did you have altogether?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Oh well there were two or three. There were two who worked you know with the farm and the shop, and - and one that went out with the horse and - and - took the coal around.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did they live in the house with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Well some of them did and some of them didn't. The people who worked in the shop were local. And they lived at home. But one did come - he was the son of my - father's sister, from Frawsfynydd, and he used to stay with us every night.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 And they ate with the family too did they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, yes. Except for the local ones, they went home for dinner.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How many days of the week did you eat meat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh - eating meat? I thin
k we ate meat every day. Bacon or something anyway. And we'd have a leg or something on the Sunday. Maybe it was two or three times a week.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you have any tinned meat at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well we used to have this sort of bully beef which cost about six and a half - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 sixpence}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
 ha'penny a tin. We'd sometimes get this bully beef, and we'd make a sort of hash out of it. I think that's the only thing that I can remember that we used to get that was tinned, oh except for tinned salmon. Tinned salmon was about seven and a half then.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did the children and the parents and the servants get the same food?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, they did. Oh exactly the same food as we did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 And the servants ate with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, they did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Were you allowed to talk at mealtimes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, we were, except, you know, if there were visitors and then you couldn't talk across them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Were you allowed to choose what you wanted to eat out of what had been cooked or did you have to eat everything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh you had to take what was on the table. You couldn't sort of turn round and say, oh well I prefer an egg.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What used to happen if you left something uneaten on the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well my mother used to threaten to give it to the dog and then of course we'd at it rather than let
 the dog have it. That was a sort of signal to you to eat it - in order that the dog shouldn't have it. And we used to eat it you see then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 If there was something on the table you wanted, like the salt, could you ask for it or wait until somebody offered it to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh well it was always on the table, the - the salt and the pepper were.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you just take it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, that's right. Yes, we just used to take it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Were you allowed to ask for a second helping?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, if you wanted to.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did they expect you to hold the knife and fork in a particular way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did they expect you to sit in a particular way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, they did too. But we didn't have any sort of fuss with serviettes or anything. We didn't have those. Not at that time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Were you allowed to bring toys or books to the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No we weren't. Not at meal times anyway.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Were you allowed to leave the table when you wanted to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh no. You had to wait 'til everyone had finished. And we never
 said grace before a meal unless there were visitors there. And if a minister or something came well then he'd - he'd - say grace. I mean, we were just an ordinary family and we didn't really - ask for blessings much. But if a minister came well then my m
other or father would ask him to - to - say grace.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you always have the same places at the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
No I don't think so. But wait a minute, no, I think you naturally went to - to the same place and the same chair. But it wasn't that special }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4857542\charrsid11011264 either}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  because if there was a friend of mine with me, we'd been playing or something, well then he might sit in my chair.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Who used to serve the meal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh my mother did as a rule. She was a very good cook. Unless of course my mother was ill or - or ha
d to go away, then of course the - the maid did it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 In what order were you served? Did your father get served first or something?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh no, everyone had it together. Oh no, yes, of course, my father was given his food before we had it. He got it fi
rst and then the children. But maybe - if my father was in the shop and we came home from - for dinner on a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 school day}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
, well then we might get our food on our own, you know, me and my brother, in order that we could go back to school quickly.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Was your mother an easy person to talk to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Yes, she was. She was very popular, and she was exceptionally kind, I mean, if someone came to our house or something she was very kind to them.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did she show affection to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, she did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Was it easy to share your worries with her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, you could tell everything to my mother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about your father, could you talk to him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well, not quite so easily really. I mean, if you'd broken a window or something it wasn't very easy to te
ll him. I mean, I could tell my mother but not my father. She'd just say to me, don't say anything or you'll get a beating - from hour father. Go - go to bed and don't say anything about it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did your father show you affection?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you talk to the maid about things that worried you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well you'd chat to her, I mean, if you were }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 courting}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  or something you'd tell her about that. Or she'd ask you about it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How would you say your parents expected you to behave towards them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 I don't know. They thought - you should respect them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How did they expect you to behave to your brothers and sister?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well something the same I'd say. Not to fight too much, I mean, they didn't mind the odd fight.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How were you expected to behave towards the maid?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh well they were pretty strict with the maid.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 But did they say anything to you about how you were to behave towards her? Were you supposed to respect her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, yes, we were. Yes, we weren't allowed to use the fam
iliar form of you, we had to say the polite form. And the thing was we couldn't say, Jeannie when my mother was listening, we had to say Miss Jones or whatever it was. Until we got a bit older you know. But - when my mother was listening we couldn't - cal
l her by her Christian name even.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How did the maid expect you to behave towards her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well I mean she - expected you to respect her.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did the maid tell you how to behave towards your brothers and sister at all or towards your parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 O
h yes, she did, she'd tell you. Yes, she used to teach us things because I mean she was older than us, so she did. And she said, remember to be - be home by such }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 and}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  such a time or something like that. And you know, she'd dictate some things to you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 If you were hit by another child were you allowed to hit him back?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
No, we weren't to do that. We weren't allowed to hit back. I mean obviously I did. But - you know, I wasn't allowed to. And I didn't believe in turning the other cheek, I mean, I gave as good as I got, as soon as I had the chance.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did your parents and the maid tell you not to hit back?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes. But I certainly didn't keep to that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What type of person do you think your parents hoped you'd grow up to be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh I don't know.
 That's beyond me. But I remember - an old man coming round and - he used to sit us up on the counter and read our heads you see. He was a fortune teller in a way, and I came home from school and he put me on the counter and he read my head. And he said l
ike this, this one's going to travel a lot, he said, he said, this }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 one'll}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
 never be poor. He won't be able to save money, he'll spend them but he'll never be in want. Some sort of luck or some sort of money is going to come to this one, and it'll come all th
rough his life, he said. And it was a fact too. And he won't get much illness either, he said. And he hit - hit it right on the head actually, because - I mean I have traveled a lot.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did your parents consider that some things were important in life?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 You mean like going to chapel and things? Oh yes, they wanted you to go to chapel.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember the maid teaching you that certain things were important in life, did she have much influence on you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, I wouldn't say really that she had much - you know - influence.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 But would you say she had the same sort of attitude as your parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, yes, she did.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What did your parents think about swearing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh we couldn't swear.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about the maid, did she mind?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 W
ell I mean the - the maid used to swear, I mean she used to swear in my hearing although she didn't do it - in the hearing of my mother and father. But she'd say you know, diawl - devil, you little devil where have you been, so late coming into the house?
 And things like that. But I mean if my mother or father were around she couldn't do that. Oh you little devil, you've got wet, you're coming in absolutely soaked. But of course she'd never say that if my mother and father were about.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 If adults were talking were you allowed to join in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, yes, we could. And sometimes they used to ask you direct questions. Ask you what you thought about something.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 If you did something that your parents disapproved of what happened, how were you punished?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Well, if you'd done something out of place well you were sent to bed. And you'd get a beating with a birch rod and be sent to bed and that was it. Or maybe you'd go without supper. And that was quite a punishment too.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How often did this happen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well it used to happen very often actually.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did your mother and father punish you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did the maid do it at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, she didn't. She'd protect us in fact if we'd done something, she - wouldn't tell on us. And she wouldn't -
 you know, she'd tell you not to say anything and she wouldn't say anything. And I'd do the same to her you know, if I'd seen her out with her lover or something - I - I wouldn't say anything about it. 'Cos she'd come to me and say, look, don't tell your 
mother you saw me. And of course I wouldn't. I'd keep her secret. If I'd seen her in the pictures or the circus or something, I wouldn't say. And - that was only fair after all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember a particular occasion on which you were punished?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No I don't think I do.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember how you felt about being punished?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Yes, I do. I mean if you were punished wrongly then it irritated you, and you went more stubborn. That's if you'd been punished wrongly. Now I remember that happening at sc
hool, you know, somebody was accused of copying another person, and I remember very well something like this happening. There was this girl, she's died now I think, she went over to }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 
Patagonia}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 , and she sat in the desk next to me and the teacher said that I'
d copied off her. And I hadn't. And he came up and he gave me a hell of a slap and I - and long go in schools they had - slates which you wrote on with a - a wooden frame round them, and he had the blackboard, this was in - in Llan school, and he gave me 
t
his - this great slap. And I hadn't copied. And as he walked back I picked up this slate and I missed his head, the frame came off, and the slate had stuck right into the blackboard. And I - I ran out of school and the headmaster and - he were after me. A
n
d I never went back to school. I'd have opened his head up if I - if I'd hit him. And I went - I went home and I felt very bad about this and I told my father what had happened and he went to the school, he couldn't understand why I wouldn't go to school.
 And my father told him - that he'd given me the third degree and that I hadn't told lies and I hadn't }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 copied}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
 and I'd - I'd been hit wrongly. And the only thing that I could do, my father explained, was to pick up this slate and throw it at him. It's lucky 
it didn't hit him in the head, otherwise it would have opened his head up, because the frame came off you see, as the - as the slate was flying through the air, and it went - stuck in the blackboard and I never went to school after that. I went to Blaunau
 school then. And he told Mr D.R. Jones, you know, that I hadn't copied, my father did this, and he also asked the girl who I was supposed to have copied off whether I had and she said no, so the case was quite clear. I hadn't done it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Would you say you received the ideas you had about how to behave from your mother and your father or would you say one was more important?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 I'll tell you what, when I was young - as a child I used to mix a lot with older people, with adults, you know - there was this
 little house. Well you know there were two houses, they've been pulled down now, in the village next to the Abbey Arms, well there was an old cobbler who used to live there, Mr Williams he was called. He was an old boy living alone and we used to go ther
e
 and mix with the old people. Specially during the South African War, we used to go there then and I could hear them talking about the South African War and I was only a boy about eight or nine years I suppose and I'd hear them talking. And - then there w
a
s another house that we used to go to, John Davis the tailor, and - I used - I was the youngest one there. And I remember, you know, I used to hear conversations there, you know, it's the time when Socialism was starting to come here and there'd be a crow
d
 of them, young - young lads most of them, you know it was the time when the Socialist first came, although I had no idea what Socialism was then. And there was a big debate in John Davis's house, he was a great Liberal. And I heard it, I didn't really ta
k
e much interest in politics at that time. And - as I said, you know, John Davis was a great Liberal, and Socialism was only in its infancy at that time. There were really only two parties you see at that time. There was Conservatives and Liberalism, and -
 
and there wasn't even a Socialist candidate you see. It was just in its infancy you see. And there they were and they were reading from Kier Hardy and I remember listening to them, you know, they were - they were boys from the area they're dead now of cou
rse.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How much influence would you say that the maids had on your upbringing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
I mean - I don't know, there were so many of them. You know, in the period when I was young there must have been at least twelve. They're alive now a lot of them and th
ey'll never pass me either in the street. I ask them how they are and they have a little chat. Some of them are in their eighties now, but I always talk to them. 'Cos one of them lives just down the road here, opposite the butchers shop. Well in fact she'
s the sister of - of the maid that came to us. Well in fact both of them were, her sister and - and she were - were maids for us. When I was young that is. A lot of maids came, you know, to our house. During the time that I was young.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How did you feel towards them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well I don't know, I mean, you were quite friendly with them and you'd tell them things and confide in them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about birthdays, were birthdays different from other days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, we used to have a special }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 tea party}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 . And schoolchildren would come home with you to have a party. Sort of special do you know, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 tea party}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 . I remember that well.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you have any presents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh well, yes, the children would bring a few things. And you might get something from your mother and 
father. Something new, a tie or something. Or socks or something like that. Well they weren't socks, they were stockings in those days weren't they.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember anything that the family did together on Christmas Day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 You mean something exceptional?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Just tell me what Christmas Day was like, what did you have to eat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Oh well, yes, of course I mean Christmas Day was a big day, we'd have a goose or something. Of course we'd have a special dinner every Christmas Day.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you have any musical instruments in the house at all?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, there was an organ. And I had - what do you call it - a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 gramophone}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 . Well I think it was one of the first ones that ever came to Llan.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 When was that, how old were you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 I was about ten I thin
k. And you see what I did was - to go for a walk on the Sunday, up towards Penffrith, and there was a caravan there, they were gypsies, and the gramophone was going, you know, inside the caravan and we were just kids, three or four of us, and we were list
ening to it. And then the lady called us in, this gipsy, and we sat in the steps of the caravan and was listening to the gramophone. Well I'd never heard a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 gramophone}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  you see, and then the son came in, very smart boy he was, and the father, and they'd been 
looking for the pony that was up on the mountain, you know, they'd let - let it go and it and wandered. They came in and I remember getting an orange and an apple from this old lady. And they had a beautiful caravan. And they were chatting. And the son sa
i
d to me, you know, he was quite a lot older than me, he was about eighteen or nineteen, very smart chap he was, he said to me, look, I'd listen - I'd like to listen to Welsh singing. And I asked him if he'd like to come to chapel with me, and he came. He 
s
aid, you know, if you wait 'til I change. And he went in the caravan and got changed and he came to chapel with me. And everyone was looking - and everyone was completely bowled over by him. He had black hair, jet black hair and a navy blue suit and what 
transpired was that I bought the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 gramophone}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
. And about forty or fifty Edison Bell records. I bought those for fifteen shillings. In fact he was giving it away because it was worth a lot more than that. And what happened, after he came to chapel with me, was
 that my mother and father asked him back for supper and I'll never forget this, he gave my father a recipe. It was a recipe for how to grow - hair on a horses knees, after its fallen over and - and taken the hair off its knees. And I've still got this re
c
ipe now and it's a wonderful thing. And of course you mix the oil with this stuff that he told us about. It's the simplest thing you know and I'm doing an experiment on the local landlord, Mr Bellringer, 'cos he's gone bald and I'm trying to grow his hair
 
with this stuff. And - I give - I've just given him a second lot you know and he's experimenting with it. I'll tell you what, one day I went down to the Grapes and there was a dog there, sheepdog, and his - the whole of his back was completely raw. And yo
u
 know, the - the girls who lives in the Co-op, she'll - she'll tell you, she knows the - the story. You know the one. No, no, no, the other one you know. Yes, Sandra. She'll tell you. She knows this story. And I said to Sandra you know, what's the matter 
w
ith this dog? And she said, oh we've taken him to all sorts of people and vets. And I said to her, look I'll cure that dog for you. His back was completely raw. And I just said you know, I'll cure that dog for you. I'll make you up an ointment, I said, an
d
 I'll send it down. And you use a rubber glove when you put it on, I said to her, or else get a paintbrush, a clean new paintbrush and paint it on. It'll be a bit messy but just dab a bit on. And did that for about a fortnight, and it'll cure it. And it d
id. And his hair grew back. And she came to me and said, look, somebody else wants some now. And then there was a dog that had the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 mange,}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  remember it was - it belonged to the Cooks, you know, the - the people who own the explosives factory in }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 P}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 enrhyn. Yorra told me about it and I went down }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 there}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
 it was a small terrier, and all his hair had come off. And I cured him too. And they invited me to supper and everything. They wanted to pay me back for what I'd done. Well at the moment you see I'm experimenting on 
old Bellringer - hair. He's just had the second tin from me, and his hair is starting to sprout just here. And he was saying, you know, that he could feel something there. My stuff had started to work up the roots. And I'm sure his hair will grow too. He'
s hoping so anyway 'cos he's had a second tin from me. And I'll told him he'll have to wait 'til he's finished the treatment before results start happening.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Who played the organ in your house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh my father played the organ. And he used to play the organ in the chapel too.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Was there anyone on the family who sang?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, I don't think so. No I don't think so, except for me, I was the only one that sang.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember making music together as a family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No I don't, we didn't. No we didn't have anything like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did your parents play games with you at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes they did, ludo or snakes or ladders in the evening.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did the maid play with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you have any books in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, plenty of books.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about newspapers or magazines?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, we had those too. I remember the Christian Herald, that was always there. My mother was the one that used to get that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember your mother or father reading?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well I remember seeing my mother reading the Christian }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 Herald}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 . You know, it was very much her thing that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did they read aloud to each other or to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No they didn't. No, they used to read, you know, together, but - quietly.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did the maid read to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, she didn't. I never saw the maid reading - to us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember a funeral in the family at all? When you were young?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No I don't. Not in our family. We all lived pretty old.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did your parents take you out to visit friends, relatives or neighbours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, they did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you go out visiting with the maid as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Yes, I remember the maid used to take us down to Maentwrog for a holiday or something like that you know, we'd walk all the way down there. Just for the day.
 And we'd have a picnic. And the thing was, you know, we'd got up Talsargau you know, along past Maentwrog. And my mother would give us a little money and there was a shop in Maentwrog village, and we'd go in there and buy - an apple cake, a great big app
le cake and a bottle of ginger beer. And we didn't take tea with us, we had pop instead you see, goodness we did look forward to - to - being taken by the maid for this picnic.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you ever remember going shopping with the maid or with your parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well we were sent to the shops - ourselves.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you ever go and visit the maid's family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
No, I don't think we did. Only we'd often call in her parents house, and one maid we had, well I was great friends with her brother. And he'd come to our
 place and I'd go over there to theirs. They used to live on Penbryn in Ffestiniog. Yes, he was a great-pal of mine and I've got some fantastic stories of my exploits with him. What had happened was that we'd both been punished for something or other, I c
an't remember, he'd been punished by his mother and I'd got a punishment for something. And we were so cross we were going to go to Australia. And somebody had told me when I'd been working in a hayfield there, you know, over by }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 Bryn Llewellyn}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  that there wa
s a circus in Port Madoc and I asked old Robert Williams the cobbler, where do they come from? And he said, oh they come from Australia. You know, there were lions and things in cases and I wanted to know where they came from. And I remember hearing the l
ions roaring over from - the other - other }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 valley}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
 opposite to where we were in the fields, the hayfields, and I'd taken it to mean that, well, Port Madoc was Australia. And I remember telling - saying to my friends, right, we're off to Australia. And I had 
this little lorry which had four wheels on it. A little wagon. And we set off for Australia. And my mother said, right, go, you know. So we packed. She gave us a sandwich. And I'd made a sort of lamp on this lorry with a tin and a candle in it and we went
,
 we set off down the hill out of Ffestiniog, the Alltgoch and the lorry was going down the Alltgoch, it was really champion. And we were going to Australia, with the packs on our backs we were off. And then of course we got to the flat. And of course we h
a
d to pull the lorry along the flat. And we got as far as - a farm about - half a mile along the road, the flat bit of the road. To Llechrwyd and it started to get dark, and we turned to each other and said, what shall we do boy? We were quite frightened. 
A
nd so we turned round and we at back. But we didn't know how to go into the house, I mean, we were going to Australia, and we'd come back. In fact we weren't going to go into the house, but there was this old dog kennel that we knew of, so we went - we we
nt to the dog kennel to sleep, and we took our lamp with us, with it's - you know, it had a candle in it, and we went into the dog kennel and there was some - straw }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4857542\charrsid11011264 there}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  and we fell fast a sleep. And then - my older brother just happened to be passing and 
they didn't know where we were. And - and Moy, you know, and I were asleep and of course we didn't realize the candle was burning down and if it caught the - caught alight - caught the straw alight, we would have been burnt in there. And I think my brothe
r
 must have heard us snoring, and he saw the light, and he got hold of my legs and dragged us out of there. And asked us what the devil we were doing in there. And we were taken back to the house and my mother asked - oh so you're back from Australia, what
 
happened? Didn't you like it there? She was pulling our legs. And we went to bed quite sheepishly in the end. I told that story on the television you know. Yes. And it's quite true you know, absolutely true. Yes, it was - it was a - you know, it was a woo
d
en dog kennel that we slept in. I mean we were quite little so we obviously we cold sleep there. But we never realised that if we'd given the light a kick or anything that would have finished us of. It was only tiny little shed so we - we'd have been fini
shed.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 When you went to visit the maid's parents what did they call you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 You mean the family? Oh they just called me by my name.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you like going to visit them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you ever remember going out with your father alone?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Yes, I - I mean I used to go a lot with my father, specially when he was traveling. He had a pony at that time, a little pied ball pony, it was a beautiful cream colour, and we had a horse and cart or a van and - and horse, and - and this is how my fathe
r started to travel to South Wales. And he used to set off from here before school closed. And - it would take him two or three days to get to Aberystywth. And he'd got to Dolgellau first then to Machynlleth. But you see I couldn't set out with him becaus
e
 the school hadn't closed yet, and so I had to wait 'til school closed and then I went by train, I must have been about ten or twelve, and I went by train from here to Aberystwyth, and they put me in the charge of Jones the Guard, and my mother, you know,
 
made me a pack and everything and I set off to Aberystwyth and if my father didn't meet me at the station then I was - to go up to a shop Hughes and Jones, he was an agent of ours, he was a saddler in fact, he used to sell this oil, and I arrived at Abery
s
twyth and there was no sign of my father. Obviously he'd failed to arrive. Because you know he'd been traveling around different shops and he hadn't been able to arrive in time, and I started asking in Welsh, you know, and nobody understood me. Nobody und
erstood me, they were South }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 Walians}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
. And eventually I cottoned on to the fact that I should ask in English. And sort of said you know, could you direct me to Hughes and Jones please? And I happened to ask a man who was in fact a North }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 Elian}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 , and so I asked 
him in Welsh could you tell me where Hughes and Jones is? And he understood me. And he told me. And I started crying, I thought I was in a foreign country. See, they were all South }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 Walians}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 , they didn't understand me. And - somebody came up and asked me why
 I was crying and I said that my brother should have come to meet me. And they said, where do you come from? And I said, oh from Ffestiniog. And he turned to me and he said, little boy, they don't understand your language. It's - you're from the North, yo
u're in the South now. These South }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 Walians}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
, they just don't understand you you know. And he - this man says, well I happen to come from the North and I - and I - I happen to be going - going to go past the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 shop}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  so I'll take you up there. And he took hold of my hand and we went up there. And after a bit my father arrived. But I felt sure I'd landed in a foreign country.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember going on any trips with your parents, Sunday school trips?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well I remember going down to the South with my father
 with the pony. And I remember my father had bought, you see, in the front of his cart - he had a sort of box, which kept the horses food, and my father bought a hundred apples - a hundred weight of apples and they were green ones, and he put them in this
 
box where he kept the chaff and things for the horse, and I remember thinking at some point, mm, I think it's about time I had an apple, so I went into the box and stole one you see. Then I had two or three or four. And you know, time went by and by the e
n
d of the week I'd eaten a hundred apples, I'd eaten a hundred - a hundred weight of apples in a week. And those were green too. And of course I didn't know how to tell my father. And my father didn't believe me, he said, you can't, there must be some left
. And there was only - an empty }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 sack}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
, I'd eaten the whole lot. He just couldn't believe it, you know, I'd eaten five, six, seven, eight in a day. I'd eaten - a hundredweight of apples in a week, and those were green too. And he didn't understand how I didn'
t have colic or something, in fact he was quite frightened. And he used to tell the story, you know, to other people about me. Because he was supposed to be taking the apples home.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did the maid ever go on trips with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh I remember going for some trips, yes, I mean if we were going - car or something well the maid would come.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you ever go away on holiday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, we did, we used to go with mother to Llandudno or to Dganwy. Yes, my mother and my brother and me used to go.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How many times in a year would you say you went away on holiday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Oh about two or three times I'd say. At Easter or summer holiday or something like that. But as we got older well then we had to go into the hayfields in the summer. And I've got a very good 
story actually that I told this one on the wireless, on the television. Old Rob - Robert Williams, the cobbler were - and I were working in the hayfields, the lower hayfields, and my father and I came up from the lower fields to stamp on the haystack you 
s
ee and I heard Williams the cobbler and some other boy they were very keen on beer and they - what they were supposed to be doing was lifting the hay up onto the stack you see. And what they did you see was-to send me up with this two gallon can that they
 
had, send me up to Tilsaf, which used to be a hotel. You know that don't you, that it used to be a - a hotel? And - he - they sent me up saying, go and ask Ellis Williams - no, Ellis Edwards - if you can have a tin full of diod dial. That is - a drink mad
e
 up of all different sorts of leaves. And they sent me up with half a crown. So I was to ask for a whole tin of diod dial Oh yes, he said, I've been running out of this leaf drink, he knew what I really wanted was beer. And I took it down, and I carried t
h
is thing all the way down and I knew it must be beer because of the amount that I'd got for half a crown. Anyway I gave it to them and I thought, oh, they're mean people, they didn't even offer me a drink. And then - I was on top of the - the haystack sta
mping and the things was that what these two were doing was hiding the tin in the - the side of the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 haystack}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
 so that my father couldn't see. You know, in case he saw this beer can you see. And I thought, you know, that's funny. And I could see them sitting 
round there, and I came down off the haystack, both of them were having a smoke or something and I came down and had a good swig of it, and I came down again and had another one. I heard them say - God, the beers going down very quickly, do you think the 
little devil's been drinking it. And the next thing they saw }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 was}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
 me drunk out of my mind on the top of a haystack. And they didn't know what to do. If my father came up and saw me you know, and I was falling asleep on top of the haystack, because beer was v
ery strong in those days, and I remember them saying, this little }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 devil}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  got hold of it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Could you tell me how you used to spend Saturdays in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh I used to go to the pictures in Blaenau, they were silent pictures then. I used to go up 
with the half past six - train and then walk back, there wasn't a bus or anything. And the pictures at that time were in the Park cinema, you know, and they were always silent pictures.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What did you do on Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh I used to go to chapel on Sunday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How many times did you go?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh three times.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you wear different clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, I did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Were you allowed to play games on Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh no, we weren't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Your parents thought it wrong to work or play on Sunday did they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Yes, that's right. But on Harvest Thanks giving Day, which was on a Friday, you know, it was on a weekday, there used to be a football match. And we weren't supposed to go to it but we used to escape up onto the top of the hill up there and play - 
and play football rather than go to chapel in the - in the afternoon, because you see the football match was in the afternoon of Harvest Thanks giving Day, so we used to change into our old clothes and escape out through the front door.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did your parents go to chapel?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes they did, both of them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What denomination was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh, Independent.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How often did your parents go?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh my mother and father used to go quite - conscientiously twice or something on Sunday. But my father used t
o go three times because he used to go to Sunday school too, he was a Sunday school teacher.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 And you went to Sunday school didn't you?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes I did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you go on the Sunday school trips?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes. We did. Sometimes but not very often becaus
e there wasn't much - talk of Sunday school trips then. In fact Sunday school trips are something quite recent.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember any other social activities organized by the chapel in which you participated?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well every Monday there was a sort of 
- society for young people. And then there was a sort of a - a debating meeting, you know, somebody put forward ideas or - something about something, and we'd go to discuss it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you belong to the choir in the chapel?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes I did. Yes, I did, and - Williams had a - a pretty good choir.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What did you do with the choir, did you compete?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, we didn't compete that much. Sometimes there'd be a competition in - the - Christmas }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16650296\charrsid11011264 Eisteddfod}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 . I've got tickets upstairs for a concert - the Cantata
 of the Birds, which goes back to 18 - oh I've forgotten, 18 something anyway. It definitely went back to the last century.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Was there a temperance club which belonged to the chapel?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No I don't think there was a temperance club, but we did have t
his thing, and it was something that, you know, I was against very much. But when you were about five years old you used to go to the Band of Hope, and you had to sign a thing to say that you'd never touch beer or alcohol, I mean, what did a five year old
 child know about that. And, you know, you had to sign this thing saying you're going to be teetotal all your life, and you've never even tasted beer. At five, I mean it's ridiculous. You had no idea what it meant.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember any other clubs that were organised by the chapel?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No I don't think so, except for the band of Hope. We used to have the magic lantern though. Somebody from Blaenau would come down.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh you know - show slides, showing pictures of the Bible and things. You know, sort of silent pictures.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you have to say grace before meals?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Sometimes, not very often.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Who said grace?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh well - we took it in turns, sometimes my brother, sometimes me. Sometimes my father.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Were you taught to say your prayers before you went to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, we were.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you have any family prayers at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well people did have that, specially - at the time of the - Revival. That came back into fashion in a way. At the time of the Revival. And
 everybody did then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did your father take an interest in politics at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, very little. The only thing he was, he was on the council, he was a county councilor, but he didn't take much interest in politics.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 You don't know what his ideas were?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh he was a Liberal. Definitely a Liberal.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you know why he was a Liberal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Well the thing was you only had two parties at that time. It was either Tory or Liberal. You didn't have four like you have now. There were only two in that
 time And of course you see the Tories all went to church. That's how it was in those days. Everyone who went to the - to church was obviously a Tory, at that time you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about your mother, did she take an interest in politics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, she didn't take much interest either, but I'm sure she would have voted Liberal like my father.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Because your father voted that way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, that's right. I mean she would have done the same I'm sure.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember them voting in a general election before 1919?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
1919? Oh yes, I remember elections. Before 1919. But I don't remember when I got the vote. I must have been twenty-one, and let me think, I was born in, when - 1888 was it, I don't know.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Was it 1919 then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes I think so, I t
hink it was after I came back from America that I got the vote, and I voted in that election. Anyway I was in America for 1911, 1912 and I don't think I voted before that. So there must have been an election just after I came back. As far as I remember Ll
oyd George was in the Cabinet then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 If your parents had voted they would have voted for the Liberals wouldn't they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 In some areas in those days men felt that they were in danger of losing their jobs or their houses if they voted differe
ntly from their employers, have you any recollection of this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, yes, they did. Yes, that was a fact.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember your father being under this sort of pressure to vote in the same way as his employer or landlord?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well I don't think m
y father - as an employer - interfered in any way with his servant. Because you see we had - servants then working on the farm. He never interfered. He never told them to vote Liberal. He didn't believe in that. He - he felt that men ought to - vote the w
a
y they wanted to. But there were people who did, I mean, take Lord Newbury for instance. I remember - an old boy with Lord Newbury, he was the church warden, and Lord Newbury went to fetch him to take him down to - to the hay on a Sunday and the old boy r
efused to go. And - Newbury reckoned it was a demand so he got the sack, because he had refused to go to work on a Saturday you see. Because he didn't believe in working on Sunday, and so he got the sack from Lord Newbury.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember if your mother or father were a member of a political party?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
No, I don't think so. I know my mother wasn't for sure, 'cos she didn't really take any interest in politics. But I think my father was a member of the - of the Liberal party 'cos he was on the committee, and he took an interest in that way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did he do any work for the party before an election?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, he did quite a lot like - that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did he do anything apart from election times?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, I don't think he did, not with the party. Nothing lik
e that. But I'm sure he helped at the time of the election. And I remember them organizing committee meeting and having them in our factory.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 When your mother or father weren't working how did they spend their time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well my father you see, well he kept the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264 shop, before he started the oil}
{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  business }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264 there,}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
 he kept the shop in Liverpool house. And after the strike in Blaenau when my father and three or four other ringleaders - had to leave, they couldn't get their }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264 work}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  back, I don't remember when this
 was though, I don't remember what year, but this is fact, I remember when I was chairman in the hall, but anyway, E.D. Hughes the butcher's father, well anyway he was one of the ringleaders, and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264 E}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 llis Hughes too, they both worked in the quarry, and they w
ere one - some of the ringleaders in the quarry, and because they were ringleaders you see they didn't get their work back in the quarry, and so one of them opened a butcher's business, and he was fairly successful, and Ellis Hughes started to sell coal, 
a
nd he was fairly successful, 'cos the thing was that - that the men had gone back to the quarry without demanding work for these people. You see they had no backbone, they shouldn't have gone back. They should have said, you know, we're not going back unl
e
ss these two go back. There wasn't enough backbone in them though. Today of course they would. But you see, in that period they were too frightened of losing their jobs, and of course there was no trade union. I think my father must have been around thirt
y when this happened.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did your mother have any interests outside the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Well - she was - must have been some sort of committees and things with the chapel. But I don't remember her taking much interest in politics or anything. Only things concerned with the chapel, and I don't think she took much interest in anything else.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 She didn't go out to enjoy herself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, she used to go out.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Who did she go with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well she used to go with Mrs Davis. That was her friend and they'd
 go up to Blaenau or else they'd go to Port Madoc for a trip, you know, as it was in those days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What time did your father finish his work in the evenings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well I mean we had workers then in the factory. And - oh he'd give - give it up - after t
ea, and you know, as he went on - got older, he - he'd have to give it up about teatime. And then maybe he'd go to a - prayer meeting on - on Monday, or the Seate on Wednesday and he'd go there. And you know he'd read such a lot. You know, lots of books, 
and so he'd come in and read in the house.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 When did your father first take over in the factory?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Oh it was in 18 something. It must be down somewhere. Well it must have been about 1890. It was somewhere around there. It was something, you know, round there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 You mean before you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, it was before I was born. You see, he'd started with the oil before I was born.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did your father go to any clubs or pubs at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No he didn't, he was a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264 teetotaller}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 . He wasn't narrow but he was a teetotaller.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 And your mother too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well my mother liked a - you know, a drink now and again.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did she go to pubs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh no, she wouldn't go to a public house. But she'd have a drop of whisky in the house. And we'd get some, us kids sometimes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did your father take part in any sports at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No. I don't think so.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did he go to the races or bet?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, nothing like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember your mother or father belonging to a savings club?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh no, there was no - mention of a savings club in those days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Nothing towards sickness, funeral, boots and shoes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
No. My father used to play he organ though, in the old chapel at Saron. It was a small chapel. You know, the small one before this one here. You kn
ow, where the shop is now, the drapers shop. The little boy who used to live there's just died. Well there used to be a chapel there a long time ago you know, and he used to play the organ there. And that's all been recorded. But - the thing is about - yo
u know, when there were funerals - a long time ago, well there'd be a collection in the church for the - for the funeral you see, to pay the parson. A sort of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264 offering}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 . You know I mean you never see that happening now 'cos the family pays. And you'd go roun
d and people would throw in a shilling or half a crown even onto this plate you see. I mean I remember that well. It was called an offering.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How did you get on with your brothers and sister?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh we were friends. We used to fight sometimes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Was there a particular one you felt particularly close to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Well remember this, that we were step-brothers and sisters 'cos my father had married three times. You see, I was the only one from the third wife.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Who did you play with, with your brothers and sisters or with neighbours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh I used to have friends. My mate at that time was a boy called Cadwgan. He's gone to America now. Do you know Cadwgan Jones? }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4857542\charrsid11011264 Anyway}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  he's gone to America now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Where did you play?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh I used to play in th
e street. Play marbles, play poles. No, not poles, hoops. And it wasn't - it was nothing for us to go all the way down to Maentwrog which is two miles away with the hoops. We used to play - we, you know, we used to see the girls playing London on the road
, I mean, on the main road, you know, you couldn't do that today. And we'd play marbles. London was hopscotch. I mean there weren't }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264 any}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  cars or - motor cars or anything then. And we played cricket up under the railway bridge. And you see, the thing is we - 
we'd run up towards the turning, up towards the top of Llan Ffestiniog towards Pant Llywd and then we'd run back towards Bethel chapel here. And we'd play cricket there nearly every night. And we'd play quoits, you know, we had - we played quoits in those
 days, it was very popular. We'd either play that in the schoolyard or up where we played cricket.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Were you allowed to get dirty when you played?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh well you'd get a row afterwards. I'll tell you what we used to do too, there was a big slide, we 
used to call it the big slide, but it's gone small now. You know the Allgoch, the hill out of Llan Ffestiniog mentioned before, you know, on the left hand side going down, and we'd go down and play on that slide.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Were you free to play with whoever you pleased?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes. There were no restrictions or anything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Your parents didn't disapprove of you playing with some children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you belong to a youth club at all, the Scouts or anything like that?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No I don't think I belonged to the Scouts. No I didn't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How did you spend your leisure time when you were at school - did you have any particular hobbies?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, just }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264 kicking}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  a football I think.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 You didn't collect anything or keep a pet?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well yes, I had rabbit
s and things. I used to keep rabbits. And I used to have a tortoise too. What else did I have, tortoise and rabbits - and dogs. We always had dogs.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you do the garden or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, I did, we had quite a nice garden when we lived in Pen
gwern Villa. We used to plant lettuce and all sorts of things in those days. I used to be in my element doing the garden, but I haven't any - desire to do it now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you do fishing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh a little. I used to enjoy it very much, but I never caught anything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you go for walks or go bicycling at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Yes. Once - once the bikes came. I remember the first bike that I had. It was a Coventry Cross, three pound ten it cost. I was about fifteen I suppose. I'd had a little bike, a sort of tricy
cle before that when I was thirteen, and I was the first in the village to have one, and that was a tricycle. Don't know what it was, I've never seen one since. And of course the children from the village used to come to play with me just so they could ge
t
 a go on the bike. Just like they are with my - son's son now. You see, he's got this little motor car. What do they call them? You know, they run on petrol, it's like a sort of miniature car, but of course he can't take it on the main road but only on th
e private road at the back here. You know, you must have seen them, these little small cars. And of course the kids all come round to play with him just so they can get a go in it you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you do things like fishing, walking and bicycling with your friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you take any interest in sports?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well golf, yes. I used to play golf, I was quite a crack player in fact. Yes, I won about three cups with golf.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about when you were still at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh I played football at school. After I lefts school I - I joined the golf club.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about going to the theatre, to concerts or music hall?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well I did after I went away from here. But of course there was no theatre or anything here. But if I went to L
landudno or Liverpool for my holidays or something then I went. And I went to the Isle of Man when I was young too. Three of us went when we were very young.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 And you remember going to the pictures?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did your parents give you pocket money?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Oh yes they did. Oh I'm not sure, it must have been about - five bob or something. a crown. And the train was only about threepence ha'penny, and then you went to the pictures. It was sixpence for schoolboys. I mean you got fish and chips for a
bout sixpence. I mean you were well away - on five bob for a night.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 And you got this regularly?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, I used to get it, yes, as pocket money.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 You've already said what you would spend it on haven't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 You know, the pictures and chi
ps - sometimes the chip - cart or - the chip - car would come down on a Saturday and we'd look out for that, and you'd get a whole bag full of chips for a penny in those days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did anyone come in to help your mother apart from the maid, did friends or relatives come?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Oh yes, there was a - a Mrs Davis who used to come, to look after mum. But the thing was really that we kept a maid at that time, and since we kept the farm at Bryn }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264 Llewellyn}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 , it had about two or three fields, we had cows in and sold milk in that - at that time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 If your mother was ill or had to stay in bed what happened then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh well, the maid would make food for us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did your parents have any relatives living nearby?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well my father had a brother who lived in Trawsfynydd.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 But no one lived in Llan Ffestioniog?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you see much of your relatives at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Oh yes, we did, and my mother had her - her brother who was a vet in - in - in Balla. And I used to be able to go there for my holidays, I thought the world of going to Balla.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did your parents have a lot of friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well they were scattered everywhere really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you think they shared the same friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How do you mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did they have the same friends? Or did your mother have her own special friends and your father his special friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Oh well my mother had her own friends, you know, in the farms and things. You know, she'd go over there for tea. Well the thing was they bought things in the shop and they became fri
ends that way. The - wife might come and have tea at our place and then my mother'd go over and have tea with them. Maybe the people from Hafod Fawr, that's a farm outside Llan Ffestiniog. And my mother'd go there to tea. And - I'd be allowed to go with h
er, or else we'd }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264 go to}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
 Rhoswen, again a farm outside Ffestiniog. I remember once we went to Rhoswen and a big blizzard blew up, and we had to stay there the night. I couldn't get home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did the friends get invited to your house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Often?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Well the thing was that they came to the shop to get groceries and things. When my father would say, well go through. Go through and have a cup of tea. And then of course, you know, invitations were exchanged.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did your father keep the shop after he started in the factory?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Well no, he gave the factory up when it became - the shop up when it became too much work, he had too much work to do in the factory. And what he did was to sell it to the son of a brother of his. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264 And he'd been in Liverpool and started to go rough. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 And so my father's brother persuaded - my father to sell the shop to this boy you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 When the friends came to see you were they offered something to eat or drink?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, no, there was no beer or anything. Only tea.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did they have something to eat too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, they did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Were there any special days on which they came to your house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, not particularly, I mean they came just as somebody goes to a shop. They came to get their groceries.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Would you say that the people - that were invited to your house were your father's friends, mother's friends or friends of both?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh I think they were friends of both as far as I know anyway.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did friends come without invitations, would neighbours come too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes. Yes, they did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 You said your parents went to visit friends and neighbours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Yes they did. You see, Thursday was half day for them in the shop and they'd say, you know, where shall we go? We'll go to Bryn Rhug. Or we'll go to Hafo
d Fawr, two farms outside Ffestiniog, or my mother and father would go for a walk to the farms, and they'd have tea there. And of course we'd be at school at that time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 People tell us that in those days people made their own amusements, do you remembe
r your parents getting together with friends and neighbours to play games or make music?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No I don't think so, I don't remember them having any interest in anything like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 A lot of people divide society up into different social classes or gro
ups, in the period before 1918 do you remember feeling that some people belonged to one group or class and other people belonged to another one?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, I would say that. Yes, I - I'd say that they did.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What would you say were the differences?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Well it came down to what - class distinction as far as I know. I mean, the high and mighty turning in their society. And then the ordinary people. And the ordinary people sticking together. And that was quite obvious. I mean take for instance somebody 
like Walker Davis, well he was a pretty rich man. And you see they all mixed together. I mean the common man didn't mix with them, I mean he wouldn't be invited to - Caer Blaidd for tea. It's a small sort of manor house. And then there was Ellis from Pen 
Y Mount. And - and he was another big nob, and they }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264 mixed}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  together. I mean the pub it was just the same, they'd stick together.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What class would you say you belonged to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh well I'd say I was in the working class.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What type of people belonged to the same class as you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well the quarrymen and the shopkeeper.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What type of people belonged to the sort of big nob class?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well the stewards of the quarry, and the manager, and that crowd, and doctors.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember being brought up to respect some people differently from others?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
No I don't think so, but there was one thing that I remember - but I remember coming to the house one day, and - I'd called somebody by his name, you know, Jack Jones instead of saying Mr Jones and 
I got a slap from my father for saying it. 'Cos I said Jack Jones instead of Mr Jones you see, or Tom Jones or whatever it was, and I got a - a slap for that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 And you were always supposed to say Mr were you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, yes, I was supposed to say Mr Johns Jones, and not Jack Jones. I mean, it was 'cos I was a boy and he was a man you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 This was because you were younger then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, that's right. Yes, he was older than me so I had to show this respect. And I never did it again I assure you af
ter being beaten that time. And it was the same with women, using Mrs. 'h yes it was. I mean you couldn't call somebody Ann or Mary Jones. You know, I mean a woman now, you had to say Mrs Jones or whatever it was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember being taught to bow or touch your cap, who did you have to do this to?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Oh well, to the big nobs you see. Now you're getting to that class. Like Davis Cadlly and people from Blaenddol. And you had to nod to them and touch your cap.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Were they landlords?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, that's right, they were big nobs anyway, or in the quarry and things. Oh yes, you had to, you know, do that to them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember saying sir or master or madam to anyone?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes I do. And Lord too. Lord Newborough.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you ever remember people saying this to your parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
No, I don't. But I'll tell you who did. And they still do it today, are these gipsy types. And these are very good at saying sir to you. Even to just an ordinary person they'd just say, yes sir. And you can tell the class of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264 gypsies}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
 today, they come up to me and they say to me, shove me two gallons of petrol in the tank - please. It's always shove - these ones you know from Manod. Shove me two gallons in they say. And the - the others, you know, the ones that come from th
e other side of Denbigh, well they're just the same. I mean some of them do say give me, but - once you hear the word shove then you know he's a gipsy. You know, you can recognize him like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Who would you say were considered to be important people in this village, what type of people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Well the doctor say. And the quarry managers, the ministers, preachers, they were important people. The schoolmaster, the policeman. They were sort of people that you looked up to.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you ever come into contact with these people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, you used to mix up to them - mix - mix with them. Naturally.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you know why they were considered important?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 I don't know, unless it was their status due to their financial position. In a way they were a st
ep above the ordinary working man. And they'd have - you know - a - a pretty good wage. But then the quarry owners - I mean they were something apart, from this, you know, you didn't see them. People like Walker Davis you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Who did the shopkeepers mix with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Well as far as I know I think the shopkeepers mixed generally with everyone. It was part of their thing to get customers you see. They mixed with everybody. They had to.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about the ministers, who did they mix with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 You see 
in the old days the - the ministers used to come - come round you see, come and visit people, you know, some - about every two weeks - just to see how you were. You know they'd come round just to shake hands or something to see how you were. But of course
 that's gone out of practice now. Very few come round now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about the teachers, did they mix with the people of the village?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 You mean the - schoolteachers? Well, yes, they did. They used to mix you know. And you see nearly every teacher would
 be made into a leader in the chapel almost immediately, that was a sort of prevalent idea.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did the farmers mix?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well they tended to stick together, the farmers did, more than anything that's what they used to do.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about the employers, the employers of the quarry or any sort of employers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well you see, the thing with them was that they were sort of a step above. They were the people you bowed to.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What sort of people would you say went to church, you've already said that they were Tories?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, well - yes, the - most people who did go to the church were Tories.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 But was there anything else about them which distinguished them from the chapel goers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No I don't think so. Not as }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264 far as}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  I know. You could say one thing,
 that the high class and the low class in the church tended to mix more than - than they did in the chapel say. I think you could say that about the church, to tell you the truth. There wasn't so much class distinction within the church.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 You mean amongst the churchgoers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about the chapel people, what sort of people were they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well - I mean - today I'd say that they were rather sort of dry godly people, say - you know, God said this, God said do that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 In yo
ur area would you say that people within the working class had the same standard of living or were there distinctions amongst the workers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, not amongst the workers. In order to get that sort of distinction you'd have to go to the class above, to t
he stewards and things. You see the workers were - were one with each other. Because you see - people like the stewards didn't mix with the workers hardly at all, in case they lost respect for them, they wanted to keep the upper hand.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 You don't remember feeling that one group of workers felt they were superior to the others do you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No I don't think so. I don't think that that happened.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember some families being described as rough and others as respectable?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, yes. There were families, I suppose you'd describe them as lower class, and there used to be a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264 barracks}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  here. You know, where - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264 Payne\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  shop is at the moment. It wasn't obviously a barracks then, but - it's a very old Army encampment and - in fact it was a sort of do
ss house that was built up on - on top of the old Army encampment - Army building. And of course you - you looked at these people as sort of lower class. You know, they were tramps that turned in. And you see it was from this place that Thomas Jones set o
u
t with Mary Burton and you see she - she was murdered by him on Manod mountain. I've still got her picture actually. I've got her picture with the story attached, you know, she was murdered on the - side of the mountain. I think that's the only case, I ha
v
en't heard of any others. Of murder in those - Merioneth. I don't think - oh yes I do. I remember he used to work at your house, he was working on the shed, you know, next to your house. And he went home to Blaenau and he killed his wife and the little gi
r
l, and one little girl ran away and he killed the dog. You know, he used to work on roofs, you know that old shed that's just next to your house, you know, where they used to keep carts. Well that was where he was working and he had a - a - a roofing hamm
e
r, and that's what he killed them with. I don't know if you remember this but I remember your father asking me. Do you remember the sign - pub sign that used to be - by the stable? With Tyisaf on it? And I said, yes, I did remember the sign. And I'll show
 
you where it is too. And your father, said, oh well, I'd like to get hold of that sign. And I said, look here - the most likely place to find it is - considering - you know, considering this chap that killed his wife - and I think he's still doing his tim
e
 now - go - he said - to the back of the bank, no, I said that, and he - the man used to throw all his rubbish out there. You know, when they were altering the house and everything - changing your house into a house. And I said to him, you won't have to d
ig very far and you'll come across that sign. And he went and - he found it. Oh did it have Newborough Arms of Tyisaf? The thing was you see, somebody had told me that it was there, and I told him to go and then held told me that he'd found it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember any distinction being made between craftsmen and labourers in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No I don't think so. No, I don't think there was any distinction between workers and craftsmen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember a distinction between rockmen and labourers in the quarry?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No there wasn't. Because, I mean, I - as far as I know the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264 rockmen}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  and the labourer mixed together. I don't think there any sort of antagonism between them. You know there's a lot of stories about the quarry. There were - very educated peop
le there. It's very interesting story.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Would you say that your mother and father had the same attitude to people of different classes, did they see eye to eye?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes they did - they agreed. You had to you see if you were in business. I mean onc
e you're in business you have to - you have to be like that don't you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you think your mother saw herself as belonging to a particular social class?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, I don't think so. No, she didn't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Was it possible at that time to move from one class to another?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How do you mean now?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Say if you were a worker, was it possible to move up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
I don't know. Well, yes it was like this. Say you were a son of a quarryman starting out in a quarry, and then he might pack it up in the quarry and go
 into the ministry, or go to be a banker. And you see like that he's changing his status isn't he. Do you understand? And it was possible to do that, because then he'd be mixing with a different class of people.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember somebody who did this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh there were several of them who did. You know, who - who were workers who became ministers.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 From this village?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes. And bankers too they became.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember somebody being called a real gentleman or a real lady?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes I do. It was people like Mr Bolton and Mr Walker Davis, the quarry owners. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid4857542\charrsid11011264 They}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  were called real gents.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you know why they were called this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 I don't know, unless it was their way of life - and they way they treated the - servants and things.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 You mean they treated them well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Yes, that's right. I mean take Walker Davis for instance - Bill Woolford's father - used to work for him, and after he died he left the house to him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember seeing a policeman around?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes I do. There were one or two policeman here.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What did you think of him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh I was frightened of the policeman.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How did he treat people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh the policeman was very important man. It really depended on the policeman though, there were differen
t types of policemen. There were some who'd give you a summons and take - you know, young lad in front of the magistrate. But say somebody like Tom }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264 Lloyd}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 , well he'd just give you a beating and send you on your way. And that would be the end of it. It just 
depended on the policeman you see, if he thought that a - a beating would do you more good than sending you up in front of a magistrate, because they'd do was give you a lecture and you'd do the same thing again. And the things was if you got a - a beatin
g on the behind for - with a stick from Tom Lloyd well it did you more good than any magistrate.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Was your house rented when you were a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No it wasn't. No, Liverpool House belonged to us and we bought Pengwern Villa, and then my father built 
these two houses. No, he didn't - pay rent for a house, he did pay rent for the farm though, for the fields you know. He paid it to - paid it to - Miss Slight, who used to live in Bryn }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264 
Llewellyn}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 , you know, where the old }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264 people\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  home is now.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you remember ever thinking your parents had difficulty in making ends meet?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Well I think it was a pretty tough period then. But I couldn't really say that I'd ever felt the pinch. I never felt the scarcity and shortage. I wouldn't like to say that. Because of the shop you know, it meant there was always enough food.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did it make any difference to the family if your father was ill?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, I don't think it did. I wouldn't say that it did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you ever get any help from charity?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, never.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 If there was somebody in your area that people disapproved of tremendously, was there any special way in which they showed it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well, yes, I mean say you did something that people disapproved of and you were in business, well, they wouldn't buy f
rom you and then it was just bye-bye. They'd go and buy from somebody else's shop.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
You don't remember people making a very loud noise outside the house of a person the disapproved of, like rough music, in order to try and drive them out of the area?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, I don't remember anything like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember people making }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264 effigies}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 ? Or straw men?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Oh yes, I remember them making straw men. Yes, I do remember effigies with - I remember particularly one - there was this woman who was married a
nd she was - she had a lover. And you see what some of the boys did was to - make a straw effigy of - of the boy that she was courting, and he was married too, and they made an enormous fire and of course everybody understood what had happened. It was in 
Bellevue you know. There was quite a stir at that time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember having lessons from your parents or from a private tutor before you went to school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well I used to get the odd lessons from my parents.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 But nothing formal with a private tutor or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh no. No, nothing like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How many hours did you have with your parents before you went to school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well we didn't have that much really. The one thing we did, we had more time in a way because we had to come home fr
om school to get our food. But today I mean the children leave and - they don't see their mothers until four or half past four. Because they have dinner in school.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How old were you when you first started school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh I must have been about five I suppose.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 When you started what time did you leave in the morning? And when did you come home in the afternoon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well I used to leave to reach school by nine o'clock. And then you came home at - at midday to get your dinner. And you had a break a
t eleven 'til about quarter past eleven. And you had an hour for lunch and went back at one. And then you finished school about four.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you always go to school in the afternoon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Unless of course I played truant. I was a very bad one at school in fact. I was a really - a real devil.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 and it took you about three or four minutes to get to school didn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What sort of school was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 A primary school. Yes, it was very much the same as today. In fact - there 
were two schools in this village you know. There was a church school down, you know, at Ysgoldy, the schoolhouse, which is just outside the village. You know, where Professor Poston lives now. And there was Davis and a couple of other teachers who used to
 teach there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 That was a church school was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 And you always walked to school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Who went to school with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh I used to go by myself. Unless you happened to meet someone and then you'd go together.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What did you feel about school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 I didn't like it you know, I used to play truant. I really didn't like school.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How did you feel towards the teachers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh I got on all right with them. I got a good conduct certificate onc
e, and it's strange 'cos I was the - the naughtiest devil there. And you see this is how it happened. They used to let the class choose who was the best boy and who was the best girl. And they told us like tomorrow morning you can vote, and what I did was
 to go and fetch a whole bag of sweets and I gave a sweet to everyone that voted for me. And of course when the ballot came through - the - the worst devil had been }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264 chosen}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 , that was me. Just because I'd given them sweets you see. And old D.R. he couldn't un
derstand it, it was just because I'd given them a sweet to put my name down. I've still got it upstairs you know, the good conduct certificate. And I think Mrs Turner got one at the same time, you know, the lady. I remember it well. And you see I ended up
 marrying her sister.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember if the teachers emphasised some things were important in life, things like manners and tidiness?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, yes, they did. I mean to - we were }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4857542\charrsid11011264 taught}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  to bow to the big people, you know and if you see so and so take your cap off, and the girls were taught to curtsey.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about tidiness and being punctual?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, you had to go to school quite }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4857542\charrsid11011264 tidy.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  Otherwise you'd get a telling off. It wasn't any good for you to turn up with a black collar.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did they emphasise ways of speaking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
No I don't think so. There was no sort of Welsh Nationalism or anything. We didn't have that in school in those days. I mean nobody told you to speak Welsh or English, you could speak what you liked, it was mixed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 If you did something that the teachers disapproved of what happened?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Oh you'd have to stand out. And you'd get a slap. You'd have to hold your hand out and you'd get caned. Or I'll tell you another thing we used to get, there was a teacher and she th
ought me and Cadwgn had copied, and what she did was to call both of us out and she'd make us stand in front of the blackboard and then bring the blackboard down on our heads. I mean think about something like that. And I told Cadwgn before - just before 
s
he did it, to move his head to the side, and of course the blackboard fall down and landed on her foot - on her corn in fact, and she screamed the place down. She nearly had a fit. The blackboard had fallen on her corn and I was crying 'cos I thought I'd 
k
illed her. And then of course D.R. came round, the schoolmaster. He - he didn't understand what had happened. But that whole business stopped after that. Yes, she was just about to do it and I remember telling the boy to move. And of course the blackboard
 fell on her corn. Oh I was a terrible devil at school.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did the boys and girls get the same punishment?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes they did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 For what sort of things did you get punished?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 I've already said about copying, or if they thought that you weren't t
rying to do your sums, or if you hadn't done your homework, correctly. Maybe you'd go out to play and not tried.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about for playing truant, were you punished for that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did your parents take an interest in your schoolwork?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Oh yes they did. You'd get a sort of report to take home, after there'd be an exam at school. I think that came once a year. And you'd take those home and your parents would look over them, just to see that you'd made some progress.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 They didn't ask you what you'd done at school though every day did they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh no, they didn't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did they go and see the teachers or the school at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh they didn't interfere, I mean if I came home having had the cane, they felt that I must have done somethin
g. And I mean I didn't interfere with my own children if - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264 Gwyneth}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
 or - my daughter came home. The only thing that I did do - and I thought it was really unfair - my daughter came home for her dinner and she couldn't eat, and I pressurized her into telling
 me what the matter was. Well the thing was that - if you did something wrong in her class then you were put to sit by a certain girl. And the thing was that this girl smelt terribly, you know, they - they live here today, but I don't want to say who they
 
are of course. And I said, do - is that what they do? And she explained yes, that if you did anything wrong then you were forced to go and sit by this girl because she sat by herself 'cos no one wanted to sit with her. And - and I was watching for the tea
c
her coming out of school and I went up and told her I mean was this a fact? Yes, she said. I said to her, look, I mean it's your - it's your duty to - to report this girl to the medical officer of health and not to make a fool of her. And if you do someth
i
ng like that again I'm going to report you for doing it. That sort of thing isn't right, I said. I didn't understand my little girl, she couldn't eat her food. And then she told me what was happening at school. And you see that was the punishment. Well ob
viously that was a stupid - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264 thing}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  to do, 'cos it showed the - the girl up. And of course that stopped afterwards.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember if the children came from the same types of home as you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, I think so, I mean they were all children of workers. I mean the thing was everybody worked then, it was the main thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember the teachers singling out some children for different treatment from others?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No I don't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember any gangs or groups at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, there 
were gangs, I remember it was very bad between the children from Cwm Cymfal, which is a valley of farms, and the children of Llan village. And specially if we had - had snow or something, there'd be snowball fights and fighting because you see the boys fr
om Cwm Cymfal were very strong. They'd been brought up on the farms. And sometimes there'd he terrible fights. And arguing and fighting. They were very - very sort of - strapping lads, and a lot of them, 'cos they'd been brought up on a farm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember some children being left out of anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
No I don't think so. But I'll tell you what there was to be seen in this school. A lot of this used to happen. The thing was that the master was a Leader in the chapel and he was a Methodist. And if yo
u weren't a Methodist then it was very obvious because you didn't get so much attention. And you'd find that out when there was an exam. And you'd find out that the children at the top were always Methodists. Until an inspector came, and of course he was 
i
ndependent, and I think probably there were quite a lot of scholars who were sort of suffocated in that period. And that is a fact because it was very obvious if you were trying for any job. And that's been, you know, prevalent 'til very recently. If you 
w
eren't a Methodist. You see, if you weren't a Methodist - if you weren't a Methodist you must have seen it yourself, for example in an election. In the election for a particular ward. Take for example Pengwern. And I remember - Heffin coming out against y
o
ur father, and I said to him, you haven't got any hopes you know, you haven't got any hope at all. And I was right too? Because your father got in didn't he? And I told him at the time that he wouldn't get in, but the thing was that he blamed the chapel p
eople you see. He blamed the chapel people for not voting for him, and they should have voted for him because he was a Methodist and so were they. And of course your father didn't go}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264  to}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  chapel did he. It was funny but that's what happened. The thing was you see that }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264 Heffin}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  wasn't popular. And of course the farmers carried your father as well.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you go to a different school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, I went to the Country School for a spell, oh and I didn't like it there.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How old were you when you went there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh I must have been about fifteen I think. Fifteen or sixteen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 That was when you left was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 When did you start in the County school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 I think I went from here when I was about thirteen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you go to be there by nine?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Yes, I used to go up - on the train, because there weren't any buses then going to Blaenau. Used to get the half past eight train, and then we came back with the train, a special four o'clock train, and this train used to bring us ba
ck, all the school children, and the Traws children - Trawsfynydd children too. Because there were a lot of children going up to that school then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you go to the grammar school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well there were two, there was the higher grade school and the c
ounty school and I went to the higher grade first. But it's all one school now isn't it. Yes, that's right. The high grade - higher grade school was -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 You mean the old secondary school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes. And then the county school was the other side of the road.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 You went to the county school did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
No, no, I went to both of them, the higher grade first and then the country school. You see, you had to pass to go from the higher grade to the county, but I didn't stay in the county very long, I didn't like it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How did you like these two schools, the higher grade and the county?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Well the thing was I never liked school, ever. I played truant at every possible opportunity, and I used to tell lies, and I'd escape to any fair that was going. I really didn't like school at all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you take your food with you to school? What sort of things did you take?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh a sandwich or something. I don't think we took a flask, I think we were given tea there, yes, I'm sure we did have tea and we just 
took a sandwich with us. But the people from - the farmers from Cwm Cyfel, well they'd bring buttermilk and bread, you know. In a tin. That was their food. And that was their food, it was shot and - bread and milk. But that was - I remember that in the pr
imary school but of course I went home to dinner then. But it paid them because they looked over well on it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How did you feel towards the teachers in the higher grade and the county?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well maybe you made more of a favourite of one than others. It
 depended entirely - some were sort of strict - more strict than another say.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember them emphasizing that some things were important in life, manners or tidiness?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, yes, they did. And not to smoke. And not to swear. And things li
ke that And to go to - to bed early. We used to get a lot of things like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did they emphasise ways of speaking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, no, not that, they didn't emphasise ways of speaking.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about punishment, did that happen in the higher grade and the county school? Was it the same sort of punishment in both schools?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
No. In the county you were much more likely to get a hundred lines for doing something bad. And you'd got detention. But then we used to get that here too. We'd have to write out a s
entence a hundred times say. And it would take you about half an hour. That was the punishment at that time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did girls and boys get this sort of punishment?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, they did. It was quite the - just the same for girls.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 For what sort of things were you given lines?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Well - for instance the teacher might write on the board, it's a lovely day today. And you'd have to write it out a hundred times. But as a rule it was sort of, I must not do this again, you know, you'd have to write about so
mething that you'd done. And it would always allude to that you see, I mustn't do so and so. For instance if you'd copied it would be, I mustn't copy again. And you see you'd write it out until it sort of sunk in.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What sort of things would have done to deserve these lines?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Oh you might have been late for school. And there was a thing at that time, a good conduct certificate, in fact there was a flag to be had, which was given to whichever class had least absentees, and you see they would get - a 
flag if - everybody in the class had been to school every day. But if one person - had gone home because he'd been ill then - of course you lost the flag. In fact this flag ceremony happened in the primary school, not - not in any of the secondary schools
.
 And the flag would then go on to a different class. And then you see what happened if you'd - if you - on a Friday, if your class had been in attendance all week then - you could go home at three o'clock. You'd get half an hour off. Half an hour earlier 
than all the other people. I remember those sort of regulations at that time.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did your parents take an interest in your schoolwork after you left Llan and went to Blaenau?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No I don't think they took much interest in your tasks or your homework. 
They'd just look at your report to see that you were advancing. But I don't think they were any the wiser after having read the report.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did they ever go to the school or to see the teachers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No I don't think they ever went up to Blaenau.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Would you say that the children in the higher grade came from the same sort of home as you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes I would, I mean, it was mixed but - yes, they were. There was no sort of distinction to be seen in the schools.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Was the county the same?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, it was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember some children being singled out for different treatment?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No I don't. You mean for different subjects?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did the teachers make favourites of some?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No I don't think so. But - yes, maybe there was some, say there was a
 - fairly bright chap in the school and maybe the teachers did take more interest in him. He might keep him after school for about half an hour and give him extra lessons. That used to happen at that times, I mean, the - the teachers saw that that chap ha
d got abilities and obviously wanted him to carry on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember there being gangs or groups in this school?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh there was - there was - enormous amount of fighting between the two schools. It was really terrible, between the higher grade an
d the county.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How did it feel to move across to the county?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 I don't really remember. Maybe you thought you were more of a man going over to the county, you thought you were sort of big - big man.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember children being left out of things in either the central or the county?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No I don't. No I don't remember. No, I don't remember them being left out of things.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How old were you when you left school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 I'm sure I left when I was about fifteen. I escaped from school in fact and I refused to go back.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Would you have stayed if you'd had the opportunity?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
No I wouldn't, I didn't like school. And my father didn't really feel he - ought to make me go to school, I just - rioted and played truant and I didn't learn anything
, I just played. And he felt it would be better for me to be working. Yes, my father really wanted me to - to start working. And I started working quite early.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you take part in any part time education after this, did you go to night school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, I did go to night school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What did you learn, what subjects?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh I did arithmetic and history. To tell you the truth quite honestly what I feel is that I travel}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid13961525\charrsid11011264 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 ed a lot when I was young. I went to America with a choir, and I think really th
at that was the most - the main education that I had. I went out to sea, and I think really that - that's been more of a schooling for me than - than actual school was, and obviously I learnt English that way. I saw the world you see. And that's really be
en more of a school - schooling for me than being in a school was 'cos I saw different sorts of people.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you regret anything about your education?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes I do regret that I didn't do more at school.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you think it did you good to go to school, that you benefited from it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh there's no doubt about that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Only you still feel you learnt more after school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, yes, I do. Well in terms of my social life I certainly did, I learnt how to mix with people. I mixed with English people
 and learnt English.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you have a part time job at all while you were at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Well the only thing I did while I - while I was at school was to go and - work in - in the factory. I used to go over there and bottle or something. And that way I'd get some pocket money. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264 
I'd do it on Saturdays and after I came from school, unless I had - some homework to do, or I wanted to go and play. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 I'd go there to work you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 And you worked for your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How many hours did you work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh maybe two hours in the evening, I'd come home from school about four and maybe I'd work 'til about six. And then I'd go off to play.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about Saturday and Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, I used to work Saturdays.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How much did you get paid for doing this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well once I'd started working I used to get about ten bob. I used to get ten bob for the week you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 That was after you started working though? Full time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, that's right. And while you were young at school I me
an you used to get about five bob's worth of pocket money, and then as you started work you got ten bob, fifteen bob and that's how - you know - it went. Which was a lot of money in those days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 You didn't give your pocket money to your mother or anything did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, no. No I got those to spend.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you get on all right with your father, working for your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, yes, I did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you like the work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes. I was in my element.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did starting to work part time for your father change your attitude to school? Did it make you more keen to leave?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, I was very pleased to leave. I didn't like school at all and I was very - I welcomed being able to work up in the factory.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 When did you start to work full time for your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Oh I started when I was about fourteen, while I was at school still. Oh you mean full time? Oh that was after I left school, I must have been about fifteen. Fifteen or sixteen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What exactly did you do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 I used to bottle and label and things like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How many hours did you work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 I must have worked what - about seven hours a day. I'd go there by about nine and sort of stick to it 'til about four I suppose.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you work Saturdays as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes. But only Saturday morning. Didn't work on Saturday afternoon.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you get holidays with pay at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
No, no, we'd never heard of that. But when I went on holiday I got pocket money, which was - might as well have been pay really. But they didn't actually have anything called holidays with pay at that time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 And you got about ten shillings a week?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Yes, and then I started off on ten shillings but as I did more work and went ahead then I got more. And it went up to a pound or two pounds, you know, as you went on. And a pound was a lot of money in those days, to - to a young goy that is.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you feel that your wages were fair?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, I was quite satisfied with it. Because things were much cheaper in those days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you give any to your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
No I didn't. I had a money box in which I put - put some you know to save up for going on a trip or - going on holiday. Rather than spend it all. And the - and as my wages got more and I was earning about two or three pounds my father tol
d me that I ought to open an account in the bank, I mean I didn't know how to - how to open an account and I went to the bank and the old boy there, Jones he was called - what was his name, was it Tom - Thomas Jones I think, and he was very pleased and he
 
shook hands with me. As if I was one of his most rich customers, and there I was taking ten bob or a pound along. And he spoke in English and he said, will you come and see me again? And - put a little bit more in and you know they grow. The more you put 
in the more they grow. But don't take them out. Not if you can help it, he said. He was giving me a lecture in a way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Was it just you and your father who worked in the factory at this time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh no, there }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264 were}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  two or three - workers there as well, servants.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How did you get on with these people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh - O.K., except that I pulled their legs, and did bad things.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How did your father treat you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh - all right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 And you felt O.K. towards him did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, yes, I did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How did you feel towards the work, did you like it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Oh yes, I was in my element, yes. This is what's so hard you know, I've been in the business for so long and I'm talking about retiring now, when I'm eighty you know. I'm eighty in October. And it's
 a very difficult thing to do, it's like putting a brake on in - in a motor car, when you're going at eighty miles an hour, you know, that's how I feel. I feel unable to give it up you see. And I said I'm going to give it up before, but I'm definitely thi
s time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did starting to work full time change your attitude to school? Did it make you regret that you'd left?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, it did. It did. It made me regret that I hadn't - I hadn't gone on. After about two - you know - no, to have gone on for about tw
o or three more years and I could have gone to college and everything. But still I mean I was working so there was nothing to it. And the thing was my father had for - would have - paid for me to go to college and everything. I think my father wanted me t
o be a preacher.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Since the first world war that's been the only job you've done isn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes. I've been with the oil - all through my life.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Would you have preferred to do another job, if you could go back and live your life again?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Wel
l - in my judgment I think I would have liked to have become a vet, or a doctor. My father was just the same. He wanted to be a vet or a doctor. And I've told you in - that - the story of my father's life in the War Office and Naval Review. And that's ver
y interesting. Yes, he wanted to be a vet you see, or a doctor, that was what he wanted to do, like me, but he couldn't go because it would cost them }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264 too}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  much. And his mother wouldn't give him permission. And that was when he started to experiment with animals and that's how he started with the oil you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you do an apprenticeship or training period with your job at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No I didn't, I just went into it naturally.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you belong to a trade union at all?;
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, there wasn't a union in those days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you think that workers and employers see the world in the same way, that they have the same interests?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, they don't, and I was talking to one today, Edward Jarret Jones, he's retired now, and he was telling me that every - ever
y now and again in the quarry the - there's a - a monthly bargaining system, and that if a quarryman takes a job then he's required to make a contract for a month's work. And you see what used to happen at that time was that if he made a - a good wage, on
e
 month they'd try and put it down, and - you know, you'd done really good work and made very nice slates for the master, the whole thing would be reset and you'd be pulled down. Your wages that is. But the thing was I mean if you'd made a good wage then y
ou'd also made a good wage for the master because you'd produced a lot of slates. But that wasn't the way they }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264 looked at}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
 it at all. But the thing is that since the unions come to the quarry it's changed. And the steward come round to fix the price, oh well 
the steward's nobody today. I mean they say things like this but with much worse language, who the hell do you think you are, what the hell do you think I'm going to do working for that sort of price. Go to the devil. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264 That's}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  how they talk to the stewards t
oday. But if they'd have done it in those days they'd have got the sack. Ned was telling me you know, down by the garage. And the things is I mean no one'll go to the quarry now you see. It's very difficult to get anyone to replace the people there, so th
ey've gone more }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264 independent}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
. And especially miners you know, they're in short supply. And they - he was telling me about some bloke there that's earning seven pounds a day. Yes, he said. I mean, he's a very good worker. And that's the way that the talks to 
the stewards you know, who the hell do you think I am. And he earns seven pounds a day. I mean, you couldn't talk to them in the old days like that, you had to say sir to them and pull your cap off and that sort of thing you know.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you think there's any division of interest }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264 amongst}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  workers, or would you say that all workers see the world in the same way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Well, you know, I don't mean to say that - the thing was that at that time there were very bright blokes in the quarry. And they used to mix 
together. They'd a very close relationship. And the thing was that their college had been the - the cobbler's - workshop or the blacksmiths. That's where they'd go. And I learnt a lot when I was a little boy going to the cobblers }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264 workshop}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 , you know, the on
e that - they've pulled down. You know, the two houses below the Abbey. There might be as many as a dozen people there, old people talking. And I'd listen to them talking, talking about the South }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264 African}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  War, talking about Madam Powell, and I'd sort of tak
e it up as if I was a tape recorder. Yes, the cobbler was a very well educated man. And I had quite a good college there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What do you feel about trained craftsmen, like the blacksmith or the cobbler, did you respect them more because they were craftsmen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Oh yes, I mean take a joiner for instance, or a doctor or something. But I mean - say - a blacksmith or a joiner, well they'd sort of come into the working class, not like a doctor, 'cos that's a step above. A doctor and a preacher as I was sayin
g. Or a bank manager, I mean you have to take your cap off to a bank manager.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 But you didn't feel that craftsmen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, I know what you mean. No, you didn't feel that a craftsman was a step above. A step above labour - labourer. They'd mix with e
ach other and that was it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Would you say that working full time changed your general attitude to life in any way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What you mean, comparison with yesterday and today?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How had your job played a part in determining what you are, has it changed you at all, has it taught you anything?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Well yes of course. My works always been the same, the same routine. It's not the same as if I'd been an apprentice in a shop or something. My work has always been the same routine.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you think this had affected you, has it given you particular ideas, a particular type of ideas?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well I don't know, I don't know if I can say about that. I couldn't say about that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you still live at home after you left school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did starting to work full time change your relationship with your parents at all? Did they treat you differently after you started working?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How do you mean now? Except that, you know, after I got married of course and left home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about your relationship - with your brothers and sister, did that change? Did they think you'd grown up or something?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, I wouldn't say that that didn't happen. We all pulled together.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you spend Sundays any differently after you started working, did you still go to chapel?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, I did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 And to Sunday school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Yes, I did go to Sunday school until the - the world of the motor car came and then once you could get in a motor car you could escape. And so then you'd escape on a Sunday down to Black Rocks or
 somewhere. Black Rock Sands.? Because I mean - there had changed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you take an interest in politics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
No. Not much. I wanted to go on the council - like my brother, but - so I didn't have any time for politics. So I didn't want to go on - on the council. What I wanted to do was enjoy myself.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you change the way in which you spent your spare time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, I mean as I was saying I started to play golf. When it was fine that is. I'd go up onto Pen Cefn, the golf course, every night and
 I'd play golf up there.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you go out in the evenings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, I'd go out for a ride or something.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Who did you usually go with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh you'd go somewhere with the boys, you might go swimming, or to Borth Y Gest, it's a beach. And you u
sed to swim in the rivers round here too, in the summer of course.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you make any new friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, they were really the same friends as I'd had all the time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you bring your friends home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes. And sometimes strangers - I'd meet someone and bring them home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you make any particular friends at this time, girls or boys?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No I don't think so, not until I started courting. And I was a real flirt in those days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did your parents expect to know where you were?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 W
ell - yes, I mean say you were late coming in, there were three of us, David, my brother and Gwilliam who was older still, and you see, what we'd done was make a patent for this door and so whoever came in first put a little thing on the door with one, tw
o
 and three on it. It was my idea in fact. Because otherwise what happens was - that - if I came in I might have to wander all the way up to the attic to see if David was in order to know whether I should lock the door or not. So what happened with it if I
 
came in first I put the thing on one. And then if David came in after me he'd shift it to two. And so when Gwilliam came in he knew that he could lock the door. And the other thing was that before we had this you might have to get up and go downstairs to 
l
et somebody in who you'd locked out. And the other thing we used to do if we'd been late, been courting or something, we used to be late coming in and we wouldn't want the old man to know that we were late and what we used to do, there was a big clock in 
t
he passage and we'd come in to supper about half past eight and we'd stop this clock and we'd stop the pendulum and them you see he wouldn't hear it - it - sounding eleven o'clock or - or midnight. And then when we came down in the morning we'd just give 
it a little push and it would be back to normal again. But the problem was that we forgot a couple of times. We forgot to }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264 give}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
 it a push in the morning, you know, when we came down about half past eight which was just about the time that we'd stopped it the
 evening before. And the old man was worried that the clock had stopped you see, and he said, oh there's something the matter with this clock. And we just sat there like sheep. And it he took it to a clock mender, this old boy that mended clocks, old Assa
f
 they called him. And old Assaf came here and he took the clock away and cleaned it and then he brought it back and set it off again. And of course the same trick went on and the old clock stopped and my father said, old Assaf hasn't had much fun with the
 
clock. And we were there, nearly laughing. And - old Assaf took, the clock away and he brought it back and he said, look Morris Evan, I can't see anything wrong with this clock, it goes fine when it's over at my place. It was us that was stopping it you s
ee, and he never understood either.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 When did your father expect you to be in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Oh he expected us about eleven o'clock. And I remember quite well we'd had a lecture one night, and I was late. And I started courting you see, the - the missus lived over in Bodwyn, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264 
just down}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
 the road. And we used to have stone hot water bottles and I told the maid, Jane or Mary or whoever she was, to leave the kettle on the stove and - so as I could fill up the hot water bottle before I went to bed because it was cold
 in the winter. And - anyway I had a row with the missus and came in and - the hot water - the hot water bottle was there, in fact I've still got it, it's over in the pantry. Anyway I filled it up and I went up like a mouse, 'cos it was that night that I 
-
 I'd had a lecture from my father about being out late. When I got to the top of the stairs and dropped the hot water bottle and it clocked all the way down, and my father left out of bed, thought somebody was breaking in, and I was crouching down at the 
bottom of the stairs. I said to myself, God if I'd have known this I'd have gone to bed with cold feet. It rolled all the way down you see, it was round. It rolled down from one step to the other.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How old were you when you got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 I was about twenty-six.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 And that was in 1916?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, and I was in the Army.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How long had you known your wife?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh I think we started courting when I was at school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How did you meet her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well you see she lived just over the road.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you save money before you got married?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Yes we did. I'd saved - because you see, I - when I went to America with the choir. I got quite a good wage. I got about four pounds I think.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Was this after the war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, before the war. I went - to
 America in 1911. 1912. And we toured America and Canada you see. For about six months with the choir you see, and I got four pounds a week. And you see, on top of that you got your food and your hotel and everything. And you didn't really want to spend v
e
ry much. And so I saved at that time, I couldn't spend them. And I used to drink at that time too. And I saved during that six months. I sent it all home to the bank in Blaunau, I sent about forty pounds home. I thought I'd done really well. And I bought 
a lot of present.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did your parents help you set up house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, I'm sure they did. I'm sure they gave us something, things they didn't want you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How long were you engaged for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 About a year I think. The thing was she lost her father when she was fairly young.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Could you tell me what the wedding was like?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well I was in the Army you see, and I came home, I got a special }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264 license}
{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  in order to marry. I got married in a chapel in Bangor, and I remember the - the preacher there, he
 was an old devil, he took the two pounds off me even though I was a soldier. And I was a soldier too, and he took two pounds just to marry us in this little chapel.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you have presents and guests?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, we did. You see I got married in - in the house of a cousin of my - my wife's.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you have a honeymoon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, I spent my honeymoon in Caernarvon. It was Christmas, I remember that, I only had five or six days leave too.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Where did you live after you married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well you see 
I was in the Army so I went off but the missus came up to London, 'cos I'd got a sleeping out pass you see. And she came down to London for about three weeks.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What happened when you came out of the Army?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh I lived in Bodwyn with my - mother-in-law, then. You know in Station Road.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How long were you there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Oh well it must have been for a year or two. No, wait a minute, I was there for more than two years. And then my father died and my - this house left to my mother. And, you see, my b
rother got the next house, he was older than me. Yes, and we watched, you see, we'd watched my father making his will. And I told you about how I got Tinant didn't I. Where John is now. I got that. Rather than having to pay rent you see. And then I came h
ere. And you see after my mother died then I - then I went - then I came here, I mean, my mother lived with us for a little while.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you know when that was?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, I can't remember.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How old was your wife when you married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 She was about a year younger than me. She was about twenty-five. And I was twenty-six. That's how it was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did your wife have a job when you married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, she was a nurse. She was a matron in a hospital.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Is that what she's done all her life?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did she work after you married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
No. Yes, she did. Yes, when I went to the Army she got a job as a foreman with the forestry Commission, when I went to the Army. She was in Betws Y Coed. In fact she planted - oh well she supervised a lot of - those old trees that have been planted }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264 over}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  by Betws Y Coed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How did you feel about working after she married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Well she went because she felt it was rather boring at home, and someone came to her and begged her to go and so she went. She liked the job enough she said. She was in her element.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How did you feel about your wife working?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Well I didn't like to see her go I must say. But it was boring for her to be home 'Cos she didn't have anything to do, and they wanted to people to go then at t
hat time, and of course I mean she was well educated, yes she was and there's no doubt about that. She'd have made a smashing teacher. Or a doctor for that matter. And she got quite a good job with the Forestry, with a quite good wage.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did she do a job after that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Don't know if she did - a little nursing maybe. It wasn't private nursing though. I think she did some sort of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264 auxiliary}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  nursing during the war. I think she did do something like that, 'cos of course you see I was away for three years in Egypt.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How did your wife feel towards the work, did she like it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you have any children? How many children did you have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 We had three. Win, and then Rhianon and then Gwynedd. He's the baby, you know, the one that's here.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 When were they born, were any born before 1918?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No. They were born after the war.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Were the children born at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, they were. They were born in Llan.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you have help from a doctor?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 A nurse used to come, sort of midwif
e, she wasn't qualified though. But this old lady, I mean she wasn't really a - a proper nurse but she used to come and she was the one that was with Wyn and with }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264 Rhianon}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  because the missus wouldn't have anybody but her.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you help at all with the birth?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
No, I didn't do anything. But I can remember going up to get Doctor Jones. Up to Blaenau, and I had a Ford at the time, an old Ford in the garage here, and these Fords were very difficult to start and it was the winter too, and I went up to - f
rom Bodwyn up to - the garage to give this car a turn, keep it warm and then an old nurse came out and told me, you know, you'd better go - go up to Blaenau to get the doctor and I went and I brought the doctor down and I'm sure I wasn't four or five minu
tes bringing him down 'cos I mean the road was clear and he said to me, look - he was really frightened you know, I'd come down there like the devil, he said, to me, look, I think I'll go back with the workers}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid13961525\charrsid11011264 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  train. This was after he'd been, you know, to 
my home and had a cup of tea and everything. And he said to me, and I knew it was an excuse, just to spare you all the trouble. He said, this petrol's very expensive. But really he was just frightened. He was frightened 'cos I'd driven down there like the
 devil. I mean I could have killed him.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How soon did your wife get up from her bed after she'd had a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh how much was it, it was about ten days to a fortnight at that time I think.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How did you manage when she was in bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh well we had - somebody come in to help you know. A sort of maid you know. Just - just while she was in bed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you get any help from neighbours or relatives at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, we had very good neighbours at that time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What did they do for you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh they'd help, they'd come round you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Fetch messages and things like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes. Yes, they did, fair play to them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 You had a nurse?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes. Yes. And she used to come round for quite a spell afterwards.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How long did she come for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh it must have been for about a month.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How much did you have to do with the children when they were babies under one year old?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh I used to do a lot with them when they were young and they - I'd take them out for walks.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you give them food or bath them?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No I didn't bath them, the missus did that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about changing their nappies?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, I did that, and I washed them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 You did that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, not all the time though, but I did whenever the missus was ill or anything. I didn't mind doing that at all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 And you played with them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you put them to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about getting up at night to quieten them down?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13961525\charrsid11011264 Wyn}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  was terrible at that. After we'
d gone to bed he'd wake up crying. And - I made sure that we had enough gripe water in the house, always, in order to shut him up. He just cried, there was nothing the matter with him. And I remember walking round and round the room trying to get him to s
leep. And I can remember saying many times, if this little devil doesn't shut up I'll throw him out the window, and then the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264 missus\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  take over and parade round and the little devil wouldn't go to sleep. He was really terrible about going to sleep.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you take them out without your wife?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Oh yes. I'd take them for walks in the pram on a Sunday, you know, while the missus was doing the dinner or something, it was very easy to take them for a walk.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How did your wife manage with the housekeeping before 1919?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well to}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13961525\charrsid11011264  tell}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
 you the truth - her mother was alive then, and it was her mother that did most of the housekeeping, because you see I lived with them. And the thing was - I used to pay for the coal while I was there. I didn't actually pay 
anything to her as a lodger, I used to pay the electricity and the coals and - and the thing was that she used to buy this coal off this old lady who was a real Jew. Mrs Jones from Manod House. And I remember the goods came to one pound and a ha'penny and
 I gave her a pound,}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264  in fact}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  I've told you this story before haven't I. I don't know changing a pound just to get a ha'p}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13961525\charrsid11011264 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 nny. I never went back to that shop, and I }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15991843\charrsid11011264 told}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  my mother-in-law what a devil of a woman, you'll never see me going into that shop again. I mean I'd have preferred her to say, you can owe me a ha'penny.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How much did you give your wife as housekeeping?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh I don't remember you know. As far as I remember we had a joint account and if she ever wanted anything well she just took it.
 Yes, once we were married we had this joint account you see. She wanted something new she'd just write a cheque for it. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13961525\charrsid11011264 
The thing was that I used to do a lot of the shopping - most of it in fact,}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11011264  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13961525\charrsid11011264 the groceries and things, then I used to pay for them. }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 But then she'd pay for the milkman. And she'd have the money in the house you know to - if somebody came round selling tickets for something the missus always had money in the house. I mean }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13961525\charrsid11011264 that}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  was nothing fixed about, you know, that she got so much - so many
 pounds a week. Mean if she wanted a coat - a new coat or something she'd just go out to Blaenau and get it and I'd say, Doll, you've got a new coat. And she - and how much was it. And she'd say and I told her that's very expensive. That's all I used to s
ay you know, and why didn't you get a bit cheaper one.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How many rooms were there in the house you lived in first after you were married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 One, two - three and a big attic. That was three bedrooms and an attic and - two rooms downstairs.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you have any relatives or lodgers living with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 There were one or two of - the missus' sisters but they went away to nurse and thin.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you pay anyone to help you in the house before 1919?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Wait a minute, a - a lady from Bellevue used to
 come in and wash. For us. The missus didn't wash her - the clothes and there wasn't a laundry in those days, and this old lady used to come round every Monday to wash, and am other lady from Bellevue used to come to sew. She used to come occasionally you
 know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 They didn't live in with you though did they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, they didn't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 You hadn't had children then so they didn't have any duties looking after children.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No. But, you know, Mrs Jones, Bellevue, well - say you wanted to go to the pictur
e or something well she'd come round, you know, after we had children, to babysit.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about shoes, did you have new shoes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, we were always buying shoes. I've got lots of them now. Don't know how many pairs of shoes I've got. I must have
 about twenty pairs of shoes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you buy them locally?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you ever mend shoes yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, no, we went them to the cobbler, if they needed mending, but usually we bought new ones.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you help in the house with cleaning or cooking or washing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, not really, not unless the wife was ill. And then of course I'd cook, you know my own dinner or something.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about doing the fire or decorating?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, I used to do that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 And repairs and improvements to the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Yes, I did some of those too. And of course I'd wash the dishes. I used to paint you knows. I mean I've just started painting this house now. I love painting in fact.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you help with the children, did you put their clothes on or bath them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, I never did that, the missus did that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you read to them or tell them stories?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, I used to tell them stories.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 And you said you took them out without their mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes I did. As I said, I used to take them out on Sunday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you look after the children when your wife went out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, I mean if the missus went to the pictures or something then I did the baby watching.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did the children have regular jobs to do around the house to help you or your wife?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No they didn't. No, there was nothing they did as far as I remember.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 When did the children go to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well they used to go to bed fairly early. When they were young they went to bed about eight I suppose.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Who used to put them to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Me sometimes. I mean some of them wanted me to put them to bed and others wanted their mother to put them to bed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did the children share a bedroom?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, the girl had a bedroom of her own. And the boys had the other bedroom and we had t
he other bedroom. In fact there were four bedrooms you see, and a big attic, this is in this house here.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 So did everybody have their own bedroom?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, that's right. Yes they did. After we moved here.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you have a bathroom?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes. We had a bathroom. That was downstairs.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 When did the children have a bath?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Well, as far as I remember when they were young they used to have a bath every night. You know, they used to have a bath in the kitchen when they were young as a rule. In a tub. They didn't go in the bath, not the big one.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How often did they have clean clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, they used to have those every week. Or even more often than that. 'Cos when they played and everything they got filthy.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Where did you eat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh in the kitchen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Was there any time when you ate in another room?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Only when we had visitors and then we might make tea or dinner in the parlour.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Where did your wife cook?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well when we were down the bottom there in Tinant we had a s
ort of lean - to with an American stove in it. With paraffin, and she used to cook on that. It was worked by paraffin. And of course those are out of fashion now.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 When did you have breakfast?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh about half past eight in the morning.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Was everyone of the family present?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, they were.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What did you usually have to eat or drink for breakfast?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh porridge and bread and milk and tea - or coffee.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you ever have anything different on special days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No I don't think so, we'd have ham and eggs sometimes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about dinner and supper, when did you have those?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh - midday. And supper about half past seven.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Was everyone present then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes they were.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What did you usually have to eat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh we'd have stew and fish, you know, anything that came, and pickled herrings other times.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you have something special to eat for dinner or supper on special days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No I don't think so.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you have Sunday dinner?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, we had that. We'd have a leg on Sundays and roast potatoes and carrots.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did your wife make her own bread or did she buy it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well sometimes she used to bake herself, it was much better bread too.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about making jam or pickles?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, she used to make jam and pickles too.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did she make wine or beer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No she didn't make wine. She didn't make beer either.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about making medicine for the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No I don't think so. We used to buy medicine - medicine that we needed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about bottling fruit and vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, she'd do that you know, blackberries and - and plums and things like that, yes, she'd do that. And of course she made jam too.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you grow your own fruit and vegetables or did you buy them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh no we used to buy them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you ever remember having tinned fruit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, not really, not many, there weren't many in that period - at that time. Not like today you know. There weren't many to be had then.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you keep any animals at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, we didn't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How many times a week did you have meat to eat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, every - nearly everyday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you have any tinned meat at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, we did. We used to make}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13961525\charrsid11011264  hash}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  out of a tin of corned beef. We often did that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you ever get any extra meat from poaching, did you go out poaching yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No I didn't. I didn't go poaching.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you ever remember your wife having less to eat so that your children or you could have more?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No I don't think so. No I don't remember that, as far as I remember everybody had the same.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 You don't remember you getting more food than the rest?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Except that I suppose I got more than the children because they were pretty young ten. You know, and we didn't have equal appetites.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13961525\charrsid11011264 children\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  manners at the table, were they allowed to talk at }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13961525\charrsid11011264 the table}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, they could. But not across somebody - some visitor or anything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Were they allowed to choose what they wanted to eat or did they have to eat everything on the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh they had to eat what was in front of them or they had -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What was your attitude if they left something uneaten on the plate?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh to tell you the truth not much was left on the plate. Not when they were young because they were growing and they ate well.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 If there was something on the table that the children wanted like the salt, could they ask for it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Could they have a second helping?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, if they wanted to.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about holding the knife and fork in a special way or sitting in a special way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, they were trained to hold the knife and fork properly. And told not to put the knife in their mouths and things.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Were they allowed to bring toys or books to the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, they couldn't, not at meal times.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Were they allowed to leave the table when they'd finished or did they have to wait until everyone had finished?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, they had to wait 'til everyone finished.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did the whole family sit down at the table to have a meal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes they did.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you all have the same places?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes we did. Everybody went to be same chair.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Who served the food out, your wife?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Was there a special order in which it was served out? Did you get your food first and then the children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Yes, it was something like that. From - eldest to youngest. Unless the children wanted to go to school or something as they got older you know, and then of course they'd have their food first.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What happened to the children when they were too young to feed themselves, where did they eat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh they'd eat in the kitchen and the youngest one would be in - in }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13961525\charrsid11011264 it
\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  - in his chair. You know, the high chair.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How old were you they when they joined the rest of the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 You mean at the table? Oh they must have been between three and four years old.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 When the children were small do you remember feeling that there was a correct way and a wrong way of bringing up children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 I don't know. But of course - except that 
they were - you know, they were taught - taught things at the fireside as it were. Because in that time, you know, the - the - the birch rod was around. That in fact was king of the fireside. But of course it's gone from there a long time now. I don't thi
nk you've ever felt the birch rod have you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you think your wife had the same ideas about raising children as you did?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, as far as I know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you talk to her about the ways of bringing up children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No I don't think so. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Was there anyone you used to talk to when you were worried about the children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well I used to talk with the wife - if it was something about their education or something. I mean I used to talk to her about that.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Was your mother alive when your children were small?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Yes, she was. Yes I mean the children used to come here to her when I lived in Bodwyn. 'Cos it was then that we came here to live with - with my mother. It was later, after my father died I mean. And the children used to come here
 a lot before that to get money from the old lady or sweets. And if he didn't get anything then we would - swear at the old lady. This is the eldest boy.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you ever ask for advice from her as to how to bring up children.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, I don't think so, 
I don't think she interfered at all. 'cos you see my wife had been a nurse so she was used to it, she was experienced. And you see she was the eldest of about seven or eight children, and so she'd got experience in the family, her own family, amongst the 
children.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Would you say that your mother and you had the same ideas about how to bring up children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 I don't know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you raise your children the same way as you'd been brought up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes. Yes I did. Yes, it was the same.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about your mother-in-law?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Well she was a bit different in her ideas, she was more strict. More strict than my mother. She was more Christian in a way. She was more strict about going to chapel and things than my mother that is.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you see a lot of her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Yes because you see after she buried her husband she came here to live with us. You see, my - my missus' mother died here. She's a very nice woman - it was very easy to get on with her.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you ask her for advice as to how to bring up the children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Well she used to advise us very often, she'd see the children doing this and that, which was different to the way she'd been brought up and she would interfere.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you think she had the same ideas as you?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, different. Yes, she was much more strict as I said before. She was much more disciplinary.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Could you - tell me how you thought the children ought to be brought up, what did you feel you ought to do for your children, what sort of things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well I mean we tried to bring them up as we'd been brought up ourselves.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you feel you ought to show affection to them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about providing safety, giving them enough food? Or disciplining them? How did you feel towards those sort of things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, I mean you had to see that they had the right things to eat and had enough to eat.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you want them to share their worries with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh they'd tell us their problems, and they'd ask for advice.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How did you want them to behave towards you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well we expected them to respect their mother and father, and they did, fair play to them. They'd been trained to do that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 When the children were small do you remember leaving them when you went out, or did you leave them with a babysitter?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Oh yes, somebody came - we never left them alone. We never left them alone. If the missus and I went out to a concert well then somebody'd certainly come here and do baby watching. We never left them in the house on their own.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you allow the children to join in conversations when adults were talking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, they could. I mean if there was some debate going on well we - we'd like to get their views.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you bring them up to consider that some things were important in life?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, we did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What sort of things?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Well we taught them to go to chapel. Because I mean their grandmother, the missus mother, well she was pretty - Godfearing and she made sure that the - the children went to chapel. And that they got up to go to chapel in the morning.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 If another child hit the children did you encourage them to hit back?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Yes, I mean I used to say to them not to - take anything from anyone. I did because I don't believe in the story in the Bible that if you get hit on one cheek you show turn the other one. I believe in hitting back.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Were there any children in the village that you discouraged your children from play with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, no, I don't think so. No, the children were pretty good in the village.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 If the - children did something you disapproved of what happened, how did you punish them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh I'd teach them a lesson, I'd send them to bed or something.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you birch them at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, sometimes - if they'd done something really wicked.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How often did this happen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh very rarely. But, you know, say they'd fought with someone and there was a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid13961525\charrsid11011264 great}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  trouble in the village or they'd broken a window or something.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did your wife punish them in this way too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, she did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Would you say the children received their ideas about how to behave from both of you
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes. Yes. They did. Yes, I would say that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How much did your wife work after she had children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 I told you about her going to the Forestry when I was in the Army.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 But you hadn't had children then had you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
No, no, we hadn't had children then. No, we had children after we - after I came out of the Army. The thing was, during the war you know, they - they - put some pressure on my wife, they either wan
ted her to go into the Army - to do nursing or - or to go into the Forestry you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 But did she work after she had children at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, she didn't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 When your children had a birthday would it be different?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, they had a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13961525\charrsid11011264 tea party}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  and they were allowed to invite friends in.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 And they had a special tea did they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, that's right, they'd have a cake for something.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did they get presents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, the children that came to their tea parties used to bring something small for them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember if you did anything special on Christmas Day with your children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Well we used to go collecting money, wishing people a Happy New Year. You know, we'd got round the - they'd go round the shops - and round the houses collecting money and wishing everyone a Happy New Year.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Was Christmas Day special?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well, you just ate at Christmas I think. We'd have a goose and a special dinner.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you have any musical instruments in the house at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes there was an organ. Oh my father used to play the organ. I didn't play the organ at all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did your children play?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, they didn't really take much interest in music. There was a gramophone here though. Which I think was the first }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13961525\charrsid11011264 gramophone}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  that ever came to this area.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about singing, did you and your children sing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well I sang of course. I was very fond of singing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember the family making music together at all?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No. No we didn't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you play games with your children at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes I did. Ludo or draughts. Snakes and - ladders.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did your wife join in too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes she did. And we had a special game then in those days, you know, blow football. Yes - and we used to have lots of fun with that.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about books, did you have books in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh - yes, we had a whole bookcase of books. And the children had their own books too, you know, these }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid13961525\charrsid11011264 children\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  books.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about magazines and newspapers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh we used to get the Christian Herald still.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Was this after you married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh we had the Christian Herald as long as my mother was alive. That was her newspaper you know, that was all she read.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about you and your wife?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh we used to get the news of the World.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about magazines?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, there was the - wasn't it called the penny Pictorial, it's stopped now. We used to get that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Where did you get these magazines and newspapers, from the village?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, from the village, there was a shop called - David Roberts, book - Bookseller. That's where we used to get them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you belong to the library?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Yes. There was a library here then, you know, it belonged to the council, and I used to get books from that sometimes. But I wasn't a great reader at
 that time, but I did used to go to the library sometimes to see newspapers. But I don't really remember getting very many books out of the library. I wasn't very interested.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you read aloud to the children at all or to your wife?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No I don't think I did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you take the children out to visit friends, relatives and neighbours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 You - and the wife?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about taking them shopping?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, sometimes the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13961525\charrsid11011264 kids}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  come with me in the car to go up to Blaenau, or maybe to Llandudno.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember taking the children out by yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Oh yes, sometimes we'd go down to Blackrock Sands to swim, and maybe the missus couldn't come. Maybe there was a visitor here or something. And then the children would come with me. Just to swim or something.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Would this be on Bank Holidays and things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you ever go away on holiday with the children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, yes I did because we had a caravan then down at Blackrock Sands and we used go down and stay there. The whole family used to go.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How long did you go for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Oh it depended, sometimes we'd go down there for a week. And then we used to go down nearly every weekend. You know, go down on a Saturday and come back Sunday evening or - or Monday. We practically lived down at Blackrock Sands then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What did you usually do at Blackrock Sands?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh not very much except for walking around.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How did you spend Saturdays in those days, you've already said you went to the beach?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Oh yes, and we used to go down to Port Madoc to shop. And we might come back in the evening then. And then we'd come back and make supper. And then of course we didn't go to chapel very often on Sunday, especially if we went down to Blackrock, ever
ybody did that. We used to go to the sea on Sunday so - as long as it was fine.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 But if you were at home on Sunday did you go to chapel.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did the children have to wear special clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, they wore their best clothes on Sunday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you feel it was wrong to work or play on Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Well - we had to pretend that as long as my father was living. But you know as I got older, well I didn't - I didn't take much notice of Sundays.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you allow your children to play on Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 You went to chapel, was it still the independents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How often did you go?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well I used to go morning Sunday school and - and - evening as long as I was around.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about your wife?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Oh yes, she used to go in the evening. She didn't go in the morning though, because she'd want to be preparing the dinner in the morning. And then sometimes the preacher would come round to - to have dinner at that house. To have - Sunday dinner, and so 
she'd have to stay in to make dinner for him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about belonging to the choir?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Oh yes, I used to belong to the local choir. And also to the Royal - Royal - Moelwyn Male Voce Choir. That was the one I went to America with. I was the youngest person in the choir actually.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 You still went to the same chapel after you married didn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Yes I did. And in fact the wife - the wife changed, you know. She was a Methodist before we married. But after we married she became an independent with me.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 You say the children went to Sunday school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, they did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did the children go to evening and morning chapel?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, they did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you say grace before meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh sometimes. Not all the time though. But anyone or somebody - a - a visitor there you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about saying family prayers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, no, we didn't do that. No, we only did that in time of the Revival.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 But after you married you didn't?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, not much after we married. Didn't have time for that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you teach the children to say their prayers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Who taught them, you or your wife?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh the - the wife as far as I know. Yes, she taught them to say prayers before the went to bed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you take an interest in politics at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No I didn't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What were your views?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well I've been a Liberal all my life really. I took a bit of an interest in Liberal politics.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about your wife?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh well she was a liberal too.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did she take an interest in it?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, I mean she took more interest then I did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Why do you think this was?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Oh - well you see she took more interest in sort of council business. She'd read the report of the council in the Courier, the Rhedegydd, and she'd get at some o
f the councilors if they came round here, and tell them they were wrong on such and such a - or something else, and she'd preach at them, you know, specially if she disagreed with something that the council had - passed. I didn't take much - much notice m
yself, but she did. She was very keen, and she'd tell them point blank too.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 You said you voted in the general election didn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, that's right, after I came back from America.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you feel that you were under any pressure to vote for a particular party?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
No, I didn't feel anyone was pressurizing me. I mean my father didn't say to me, look you've got to vote for Haydn Jones, the Liberal candidate, but somehow we'd been brought up to it. We - we'd been brought up in a atmosphere of L
iberalism, and then of course you only had two parties you see in that time, at that time, there weren't four like there are today, there was only the Tories or Liberals. And you see the thing was that nearly all non-conformists were Liberals, the - the c
hurchgoers were Tories.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Were you ever a member of a political party?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, unless I was a - a member of the Liberal Committee. I was a member of that for years.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you work for the Liberal party at election times?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes. I used to drive cars and things.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 But you didn't do it apart from that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh no. No I didn't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did your wife do anything for the Liberal party?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, she didn't. Not - not at election time because the children were young and she had plenty of work in the
 house. I mean, there were three young children you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How did you spend your free time when you and your wife were not working?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 You mean in the evening? Well there wasn't television or anything then. But I used to get a lot of pleasure liste
ning to the gramophone, I'd set that to sing. And I got a lot of pleasure out of that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you go out in the evening at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, we'd go for a walk if it was fine. Sometimes we'd go in the car and walk another time. And then a tennis court w
as - was made and the missus and I used to play tennis, in the evenings. There was a pretty good tennis court you know, down where the council yard is now. There was a little tennis court there. And then there was a tennis court in the - the Pengwern fiel
d, you know, in the field there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 When did you finish working in the evenings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh we used to give it up about five - half past five, something like that. I'd have tea and then, you know, I'd finish.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13961525\charrsid11011264 How many days in the week would you stay in, in the evenings?}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well I mean it depended so much on the weather. If - if it was - fine you went to play golf or - if it was raining maybe you went fishing.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you go to any clubs or pubs at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, I used to go to the pub.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How often did you go?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well I mean I didn't go }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13961525\charrsid11011264 every night}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 , but two or three times in a week maybe. You know, when - when I felt like it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did your wife go with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, she didn't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you ever belong to a savings club or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No I don't remember there being one.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you ever take part in any sports? What about cricket and football?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, I used to play cricket and football. I used to belong to a sort of little local team with the other boys you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about shooting, you said you did walking, and cycling?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, I used to cycle a lot. I used to like going for a ride on the bike.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you go to the races or bet at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well we used to go down to - Pwhelli every Bank Holiday to - the - cycle races there. We used to cycle down to Pwhelli.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about horse races?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No I didn't go to horseracing much. There weren't many. Chester was the nearest place you could go.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 And you didn't bet or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, I didn't bet.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you go to the theatre, to concerts or music halls at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Yes, if I went to Liverpool or to London or something, yes, then I would go to the theater. I liked to go to the theatre or music hall. I really enjoyed it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about going to the pictures?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Oh yes, yes, we did. Especially when we were courting, we used to go to the pictures nearly every Saturday. Me and - a friend of mine who lived next door, and he was courting so all four of us used to go up to Blaenau on Saturday. We used 
to go up on the half past six train and then walk back, 'cos there weren't any buses or anything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you have any hobbies after you married, did you have any pets?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, not as far as I remember.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you collect anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about gardening?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
No. No I didn't do much of the either. We did have a little hot house though, just next to here, and I used to be quite interested in doing things there. We got some fantastic grapes there once, and we had tomatoes and cucumbers
. And I did take a bit of an interest in that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did your wife take an interest in anything outside the home?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No I didn't think she did, apart from, you know, being interested in the council.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did she go out to enjoy herself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh well I 
mean she'd go to Blaenau to shop and things, but that was really the only thing. Or maybe she'd go to port if she wanted something new. Or if the children wanted shoes or something. But as a rule we went out together.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 You said someone came in to help your wife with the washing and the sewing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Oh yes, yes, that's right, that was when the children were small. And somebody came to babysit when we wanted to go to the pictures in Blaenau.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 And was she a friend or neighbour?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, she was a ne
ighbour of ours. That's what she used to do, she used to go round different houses babysitting. You know, that was her livelihood, our house on Mondays and somewhere else on Tuesdays.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 If your wife had to stay in bed how did you manage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well I mean you know the children used to go off to school and - you know, I'd make - the tea or something, I was quite good at that.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you have any relatives living nearby? You had your mothers didn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 And you saw a lot of them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 And they came to see you at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 And you went to their house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you have a lot of friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 You mean me personally? Yes, I had lots of friends, sometimes they came here and sometimes I went to their house.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you and your wife share the same friends?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, we tended to have our own friends really. She was friends with women.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Where did she go to see them, to their houses?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, to t
heir houses. You know she mixed with the same friends that she'd had at school, and we were the same, we mixed with our friends, I mixed with my friends.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 How often did you bring your friends to the house after you married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh I don't know, say it was raining they'd come here and play a game of cards.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Were they offered anything to eat or drink?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, yes, they were. They'd have supper or tea with us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did they come on any special day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh no. Just on some day that suited them and suited us. And I'd go to see them when it suited.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Who's friends came most, yours or your wife's?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh mine. Oh but then her friends did come too.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did they come without invitations?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, yes, they'd make sort of visiting calls.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did your neighbours come too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 And you went out to see friends and neighbours too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes. I said - that's what I said.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about making your own amusements, you said friends and neighbours came round to play a game of cards,
 did you usually do that sort of thing with friends and neighbours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, we did. Not regularly. 'Cos say it was raining, well then I'd go to their place to play a game of cards or they'd come to see me.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did you make music with them at all?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh no, no, not much music.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Was your house rented? It was yours }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13961525\charrsid11011264 wasn\rquote t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  it, your father built it. And you stayed in this community, you've been in Llan all your life haven't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, apart from the time I spent abroad.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Do you remember }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13961525\charrsid11011264 having}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  a struggle to make ends meet?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Yes, I remember you know after I married - and I was on my own in the business. My brother had died, and it was pretty tight then because I got - I got into trouble with the court over some formula, it was to do with 
the formula of the oil, the percentage wasn't right. You see, our suppliers, we'd been buying this certain thing for years and then some public - body analysed this stuff and they found out that it didn't contain the percentage of - of - you know, stuff t
h
at we said it did. And I was in - two sort of court cases about it and it cost me two thousand pounds 'Cos you see I had a barrister to defend me. And the thing was you had to gather collect all bottles that had been distributed and were still unused in o
therwise you would be made liable, because you might get a summons from some other county. And the thing was I had some of my products in foreign countries, I had some in }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13961525\charrsid11011264 Patagonia}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 . And you could get - you could cop it over there then. Specially after they'
d read about the case, they'd just say, uh uh, I can analyse this one now. I've seen a report about it. And so the thing was the best thing to do was to see out new stocks and - and then you were clear you know, and that cost, you know, about three millio
n pounds. Three thousand pounds. And take }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13961525\charrsid11011264 B}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
oots the chemists for instance, in fact they were very good about it, and they had the stuff you know in different branches. And what they did, fair play to them, they collected all the stuff up which saved me a lo
t of trouble, they collected them into their own depot, one in Nottingham and one in London, and - and then I replaced them. And they sent - my old stuff back and of course I paid the carriage and everything and the thing was they gave me a month or six w
e
eks to collect all these bottles. I couldn't obviously, you know, I hadn't - I had North and South Wales, and I had to leave it and I said, look, it's impossible. You know, I told them my goods are scattered all over the country - and in foreign countries
 - I just can't do it. The court said well we'll give you three months to do it. And they said, after }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13961525\charrsid11011264 that}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
 just look out. Or you'll cop it in another county. And you see they got me in Anglesey the second time. And it was a stupid thing anyway. A trifling t
hing. It was just some argument between two inspectors, and it wasn't even as if there was anything dangerous in - in the - in the mixture. But then of course they took it all up and that was it. And they found an analyst and - the analyst said to them lo
o
k I really can't see what all the fuss is about. And - then - you know, they asked him, you know, what is your opinion of Morris Evan's oil? And he turned round and said, well I think it's wonderful. And that did a lot for me, it was you know, it made thi
n
gs go in my favour. And when he was asked if there was any danger in it he said, no, none at all. You can take it internally or externally the analyst said and - and he said, I can't understand what all the fuss is about. And you see they fined me twenty-
five pounds. And then I had the cost of the barrister on top of that, and that was up to two hundred pounds, 'cos I had a solicitor and a barrister.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did it make any difference to the family if you were ill?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 No, I don't think it did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 You were never out of work because you had a business of your own?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
No. No I wasn't you know, once I'd started in the business. I spent most of my time traveling in fact with the van. And my brother stayed at home in the office. And then we had men working i
n the factory, actually making the stuff up and, you know, my brother supervised that because it was patented.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 And you never had to have help from a charity or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh no. No, we didn't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Could you tell me what your children have done, what sort of jobs they've done, all their lives?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Well they didn't take much interest in the oil business. They went in - you know, to the line they're in at the moment, they were - became mechanics. Their main hobby was motor cars. And I remember say
ing when Wyn was very young - I said to the wife you know, you watch out, he'll become a mechanic you know. And I'll gibe you an example of this too, I remember it well. 'Cos we had this biscuit barrel you see, and - it had a top on it with a - with a scr
e
w in it. And I remember the little devil, he was only - two or three years old and he undid the screw. He put it in his mouth and he nearly choked on it and the other time you know we had a - a fender in front of the fire, a sort of copper fender, and the
r
e were sort of copper knobs on it and there was a sort of piece of gauze round it with screws in it. And of course he played with it, and he undid the nuts and screws and put them in his mouth, and I said to the missus you know, I'm sure he'll become a me
chanic. And that's what he's done. And his whole life was motor cars.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 And that's what Wyn and Gwyndd did wasn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Both of them are independent now, - they've got - they've got garages of their own. Although they worked in partnership for - for 
a long time, in fact 'til about three years ago.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about your daughter, what did she do?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
Oh well she went to college in Colwyn Bay. And the thing was I felt she'd be very useful for me in the business you see, and so I put her through colleg
e. But after two years she met her husband, and he was in the Flying Corps, he was a cadet, he was a cadet pilot in fact, and it was her first - boyfriend really, and, you know, so }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13961525\charrsid11011264 Nan}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  got married and - she's quite happy too. And he's got a good job as a pilot.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 But she didn't work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
No, no. I bought her a typewriter though. I gave about seventy or eighty pound for it 'cos the one I had was terrible. And I couldn't do anything with this new one because - you know, it had different keys on it. You k
now, I prefer the old type of typewriter with different knobs. I couldn't do anything with the new one I bought it specially for her you see, but you know, after she started courting she got married before long and that was it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Is her husband still a pilot?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh no. No }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13961525\charrsid11011264 he\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  not, he's a draughtsman now. Yes, and he's in the three thousand four thousand a year bracket too.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What about your brothers - what jobs did they do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Well one was in the business you see, the oldest one that is, until 
he got a job B.P. and - you know with the petrol people, and he became a circuit manager for }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13961525\charrsid11011264 that.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
 After being in the business for what - six or seven years. Or maybe it was more. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13961525\charrsid11011264 Anyway he was with B.P. for - for - for many, many years, and he left the bu
siness so my other brother - went into it. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
He'd been in college in London. And the was that on my father's death well the business came to - to us you see, and so the brother was in the office working on the clerical side and I did the travel}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid13961525\charrsid11011264 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 ing }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13961525\charrsid11011264 and}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264  he ha
d two or maybe three people under him, bottling and making the oil.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 You had two brothers didn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, and a sister.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What happened to her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh well she's just died, about three months ago in fact. Her daughter was here the other - y
esterday, you know, she's from Allenford. She came to see me, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13961525\charrsid11011264 she\rquote d}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
 come up to Penryn or something to see a cousin of hers. I heard her shouting at the bottom of the stairs, 'cos you see I usually go to bed about - four o'clock 'till half past five you see
, every day I did that, and I heard someone shouting you see and I recognized her voice and she asked if she could come up and I said, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 What was your sister's job though? Did she do anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Oh yes, she used to keep a milk business in Lond
on. Her husband was a - an expert with dogs. You know, he used to train dogs and make a great show of it. He had excellent dogs himself.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did he do that professionally?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, he did, after he lost the milk business you see. They made a lot of mone
y in the milk business, this was in London you know, and they kept a shop, or maybe it was two shops. And so he gave up the milk business and went in for kennels and bred dogs. Yes, and what happened was he took a dog to - oh what was the name of that Ind
i
an Prince - oh I can't remember now, but anyway he flew this dog out to home and he went with him. But I think you know what happened was he had a bit of a spree over there because he came back and he caught something and he died fairly soon I can't remem
ber what the name was though, he was very well-known - you know, with horseracing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 You mean the Aga Khan?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, that's right. Anyway, they took the - he took this dog over to the Aga Khan. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid13961525\charrsid11011264 Yes, so he had very, very valuable dogs.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 This was your sister's husband?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, yes, that's right. Yes, he was called A.J. Edwards and he was a very well-known judge and things.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6242166 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Did your sister have any sort of job before she got married? Did she go as a servant or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12287980 FE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid854880\charrsid11011264 Yes, that's - I'm sure that's what she did, she went to be a servant in London. And that's when she met her husband.
\par }}