{\rtf1\adeflang1025\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\adeff0\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang2057\deflangfe2057{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}{\f38\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f39\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f41\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f42\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f43\fbidi \froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}
{\f44\fbidi \froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f45\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f46\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f48\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}
{\f49\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f51\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f52\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f53\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f54\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}
{\f55\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f56\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden 
Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs20 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}}
{\*\latentstyles\lsdstimax156\lsdlockeddef0}{\*\revtbl {Unknown;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid792229\rsid920634\rsid2384896\rsid3304264\rsid5244319\rsid7673867\rsid7680163\rsid8342617\rsid9848645\rsid10750940\rsid12126379\rsid13179849\rsid13920496\rsid14378793\rsid15017164}
{\*\generator Microsoft Word 11.0.0000;}{\info{\title Int 236a}{\author PRASAD3}{\operator lhorto}{\creatim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min8}{\revtim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min8}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords41406}{\nofchars236019}
{\nofcharsws276872}{\vern24613}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 http://schemas.microsoft.com/office/word/2003/wordml}{\xmlns2 urn:schemas-microsoft-com:office:smarttags}}
\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1800\margr1800\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0\ltrsect 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\donotembedsysfont0\donotembedlingdata0\grfdocevents0\validatexml1\showplaceholdtext0\ignoremixedcontent0\saveinvalidxml0\showxmlerrors1\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace180
\dgvspace180\dghorigin1800\dgvorigin1440\dghshow1\dgvshow1\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\splytwnine\ftnlytwnine\htmautsp\nolnhtadjtbl\useltbaln\alntblind\lytcalctblwd\lyttblrtgr\lnbrkrule\nojkernpunct\rsidroot3304264 \fet0
{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}\ilfomacatclnup0\ltrpar \sectd \ltrsect\linex0\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ltrpar
\ql \fi-461\li461\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid13179849 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\ul\insrsid13179849\charrsid16072257 Information about interviewee}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid13179849 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid13179849\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\ql \fi-461\li461\ri0\widctlpar\tx2057\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid13179849 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid13179849\charrsid16072257 Date of birth}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid13179849    \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid13179849\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid13179849  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid12126379 1899}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid13179849\charrsid16072257 
\par Gender}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid13179849           \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid13179849\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid13179849  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid12126379 M}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid13179849 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid13179849\charrsid16072257 Marital status}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid13179849 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid13179849\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid13179849  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid12126379 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid13179849\charrsid16544153 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid13179849\charrsid16072257 Occupation}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid13179849 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid13179849\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid13179849  
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid12126379 Clerk}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid13179849\charrsid16072257 
\par Geographic region}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid13179849 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid13179849\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid13179849  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid12126379 
Brightlingsea, Essex}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid13179849\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\qj \fi-461\li461\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid13179849 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2384896\charrsid15017164 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Could you say your name?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 My name is Verney - Verney, of {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}77 Colne Road{\*\xmlclose}
{\*\xmlclose}, Brightlingsea. I am seventy-two years of age and was originally born in the Borough of Woolwich.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You said you were seventy-two?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 I'm seventy - 1899. '99, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 What year were you married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 I was married in 1939. Just a few months before war
 broke out. Rather late because I had been - in the Army for years and abroad for a long while too. So that - one - well - didn't get entangled as a matter - no, I - as I say was born in Woolwich and lived all my life right up to 1915 in Woolwich. In - le
t
 me see - one two, three, four houses, all within a matter of - a quarter of a mile of each other. All within a radius of quarter of a mile. That was - well it was in the parish of Plumstead. But in that the portion of parish of Plumstead which was on the
 
border of the parish of - of the - of the parish of Woolwich. On the top of a hill which overlooked the barracks, and - Woolwich Arsenal. My father was employed in Woolwich Arsenal, he was a - a - he originally came from Hampshire, the same as my mother. 
T
hey were country people originally, although in their young days both of them left the village, my mother went into service in Margate and other places, Margate mostly. And my father - well he was employed on farms and then - when he was about sixteen I t
h
ink went over to Aldershot and joined the Army. His father found it out and claimed him out and he was dragged back to the farm - to the farms. But at about eighteen he left again and joined the Army and he then continued until - oh - about in the 1890's,
 
when he came - he served then in - Ireland, Jersey, India, and various other places. The consequence of that of course, practically everybody we knew, and of course Woolwich being a garrison town, practically everybody we knew were military people. And be
i
ng - close to the barracks, overlooking the barracks actually, I suppose for a great deal of time I spent quite a lot of my time in the barracks. As a mater of fact, the meals that I had as a schoolboy in - in the barrack room with the troops was - well I
 can't - I can't count them, I was always up there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Was your father an engineer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
No. My father was just an ordinary - ordinary labourer. He was - he first, when he left the Army became a - was - got a job on the London North Eastern railway. But he wasn't in that long before -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 What was he doing there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Just ordinary labouring. And then he got a job in - Woolwich Arsenal - as a labourer where he was then until - he was found redundant in the - 1950's, just after - just after the - after 
the - the last war. He - although he had about twelve years in the Army, he never fired a shot in anger, he never saw any wars or anything. He - he - wasn't called - he was on reserve when the Boer War broke out. But he wasn't called up for it because he 
h
ad broken his trigger finer, and consequently he couldn't bend it and of course in those days they hadn't - realised that you could pull a trigger with another finger. So he was never called up. But it was just - just before the Boer War that he - he got 
the job in the Arsenal and of course he worked then right through the first world war and the second world war there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 So in 1911 he was a labourer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Yes. Oh yes. As regards childhood well, there were only three of us in the - the family beside my mother and father. Sorry. Yes. Yes.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Your mother was a domestic servant?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 My mother. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Before she married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 That was the only job she had?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 That was the only job she had, well various jobs is domestic service, the last 
one I think was in - Margate. Where she was a domestic servant in a family who I believe were Jews. But - whether they were or not I don't know, not that it matters very much, but she was there for - oh, some years. Of course she and my father came from t
h
e same village, they knew each other as children. And strange to say, my father - and his sister married my mother - or at least, my father married my mother of course, and her brother married my father's sister, and we both lived in the same street, so w
e
 were an awful crossed family. But that's the not the only main wangle we had. I had another uncle - well no, two aunts. One married a man and the other one married his nephew. So we got further complicated 'cos I never did try to sort out exactly - where
 
we - exact relation - ships were really. But - that was just how things happened in - the country villages of those days. Of course most - my - holidays for instance were spent in the village. We never went anywhere - except to the village. And - of cours
e
 I do - sort of can remember - what village life was like before 1914. Yes. Mother - was - in - domestic service and - I don't mind telling you it gave her a jolly good - training for - housekeeping because - although we'd never got - there wasn't much mo
ney coming into the house - we were never without a meal, and a jolly god meal at that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 She didn't take in any work or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 No. Well - occasionally she did, once or twice. She used - did have a spasm, I don't know why it was - but she did t
ake in making soldiers shirts. And the remuneration was absolutely - putrid and she didn't carry it on very long. And then she also had another spasm, I think it was more by sort of talking to neighbours, she did have another spasm of sewing - the covers 
o
n tennis balls. But - she could never get on with that and - she never did that very long. But again that was - a - a very small remuneration, you - had to do a dozen I think before you got about sixpence. And - to stitch covers on a - on a tennis ball is
 
not a particularly easy job, because you can't turn the thing inside out to stitch. As regards the shirts, well they were the ordinary - the coarse flannel shirts the Army used to wear in those days and they were pretty heavy going. But she never did any 
outside work other than those two odd - two or three odd occasions.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did you have to help at all with work with the shirts?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh no. No, no. She did that because - as a matter of fact I wasn't so very old then and of course my sisters, who were youn
ger than me, were really - might as well call babies at the time you see. Oh no, we didn't, she - just used to do them at odd times. Perhaps she'd do a dozen in a - in a week.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 She wouldn't take them to the factory?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh no. No, no, she always took
 those because you had to go down in the daytime and of course I was at school. There was not a great deal of - outwork of that sort done amongst - any of our neighbours or friends. There were people in the street that used to do - sewing for - local tail
ors sort of outwork. Another friend of ours used to do work making whips - plaiting whips. Which - I don't suppose is done nowadays. They used to - the husband and wife - practically kept them - well, they - their only occupation. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7673867\charrsid15017164 And they'd - be - have lon
g strips of leather cut very, very finely about - well it depended on what kind of whip they were making, but it usually used to be from about a quarter of an inch wide at one end, then there was a sort of a long triangle and the other end'd be practicall
y - hairsbreadth. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
And then they - usually - they used to use about - six or seven of these strips and they'd be tied onto a hook on the doorpost and then they get across the other side of the room and they'd be - twiddling about, plaiting those in the most 
fantastic patterns. Four hours. And they'd do quite a number of those, and kept quite a lot of the saddlers shops and the - the horse people about in the district with whips, which was then of course an old - - one of the old - home - they were old countr
y people as well, but I can't tell you where they came from.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You knew them quite well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
I knew them quite well, oh yes, they used to live - I often used to sit in their kitchen and watch them - fascinated - making these whips, and then used to be
 fascinated to see the - lovely pattern they made and the closeness of the work and then they all had to be pipeclayed after they'd all - plaited them. Rubbed over with white clay - white pipeclay to make them nice and white. And they didn't stop white ve
r
y long after of course they got in use. But they had to be nice and white for the shop you see. Then they had to be mounted on these long things and - it was quite a - well I suppose it's - I've never heard of anybody making whips nowadays. No. Although t
h
is was in London by the way. But of course there were - numbers of horsemen about in London. And everybody had their horse and cart, and the tradesmen and that sort of thing. But - mother - mother and father never did anything of that. I never had to do a
ny sort of help to the house, although I did have little jobs.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Can you tell me what those little jobs were?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Well, yes - I often laugh about it now when I see the boys nowadays, I did paper round - newspaper round. I used to have to be up at six i
n the morning. And go on a newspaper round which extended from - well, practically here in Colne Road up to All Saints Church on the top of the hill, that's a mike and a quarter away. All uphill. And various side streets off it. I used to go out with a bi
g
 bag full of newspapers and there - then there were more newspapers than there are nowadays. Not only newspapers but magazines and periodicals and sometimes it was as much as I could do to stand upright with the bag hanging over my shoulder. I used to hav
e
 to deliver all those in the mornings and then get back home to have breakfast and get to school. That was every morning of the week, Sunday mornings I used to have to do the same thing, and - that was a bit heavier sometimes because - Sunday newspapers u
s
ed to be a bit thicker and there was quite a number of them. And then after I got home and had breakfast I had to go out and call at every house and collect the money. So consequently I was really up to about one o'clock on a Sunday morning doing that job
. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7673867\charrsid15017164 And I used to come home with a - weighted down with pockets full of coppers - pennies or - silver etcetera. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Then I had to check it all through with my book in the shop. And for that I used to get the princely sum of - I think it was three and sixpence. Bu
t - it doesn't seem to have done me any good although I don't mind telling you I used to hate it at times. Especially in the winter, having to get up in the dark and go out in the cold and frosty morning. And many's the time mother come out with me and he
lped, you know. But - I had that for some - some time, and then afterwards I gave that up, and I suppose when I was about - twelve or thirteen, I got a job in the - corner grocers shop which was grocers off }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7673867\charrsid15017164 license}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  of delivery and keeping the shelves in the shop - full and - crating up the empty bottles and all this sort of thing. That was after -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 That was after you left school?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh no, this was while was at school. Oh yes, all - all while I was at school. I left school - when I was fourteen, that
 was in 1913. And - a week after I left school I started a job as an office boy. Which I had to }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7673867\charrsid15017164 work}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 then from - half past eight in the morning - 'til half past six at night, except on Thursdays, when, being in a shop, the shop shut on Thursdays, early closing day, but on Friday }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7673867\charrsid15017164 nights}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 we always had to work an hour later and on Saturdays on 'til somewhere about ten o'clock at night. Then my - my original salary was seven and sixpence a week. After I'd been there a year - I got ten shillings a week, and I th
ought I was a millionaire. But - I carried on that job until - January 1915. When we had a clerk in the office who was of partly German parentage, and of course this was after the outbreak of the 1914 war, and this man would insist on speaking German offi
c
e and sometimes - speaking to me in German and one - he was always annoying me, and one day he annoyed me so much, I was sitting on the other side of a - sloping desk you know, on a big office stool, and he annoyed me so much that I picked up a ledger and
 
threw it at him I missed him it's true but - through that misconduct I got the sack. Well - I was rather horrified, I didn't go home and tell them I got the sack at home, but I finished up the week, got a weeks notice. Got my pay and - handed over the nec
e
ssary at home. Never said a word but I made up my mind that - well I'd have to get another job quick and - on the Monday morning - on the Saturday morning I went out as if I was going to work - instead of that went to the - the recruiting office. And - af
t
er walking round it about four times I summed up enough courage to - get to the doorway and then bumped into an enormous great recruiting sergeant who wanted to know what I wanted, so I said I wanted to join the Army. He said, how old are you? I said, eig
h
teen. He said, look old boy, go and have a walk round and make sure how old you are and come back. So I did, and came back and - I said I was eighteen and a half. So he marched me inside, and sat down and filled up a long form. Then marched me into - oh, 
s
aid go in there and get undressed and I opened the door and went in there and there was a whole crowd of about twenty men in there, all old enough - some of them old enough to be my father, all stark naked and I had to do the same - which was frightfully 
e
mbarrassing I can assure you. But - anyway from there we marched into a - into a real old - fogey of a doctor. I don't know when he - passed his medicals but it must have been - about the Crimean I think, but he looked at the papers, gave a huh, and I was
 
passed. Whether he thought I was eighteen and a half I don't know. Any rate, from there I marched into another dear old gent, a Major who administers the oath, I took the oath, was presented with a shilling, the famous Queen's shilling, which I don't mind
 
telling you I never kept, I spent. And two and six - ration money until - to last me until Monday, and a railway warrant to proceed to Aldershot, to proceed there on the Monday. Well I went home and - I then broke the news. Of course there was much - grum
b
ling from mother but father said, oh let him go, it'll do him good. - And so that's how I joined the Army. Within six months I was in Egypt. Three months later than that I was flat on me back nearly dead, from typhoid fever. But I didn't come out of the A
rmy until - I was in South Africa in 1919. When - it was a case of my seven years service, I joined as a regular soldier, my seven years service expired and it was a case }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7673867\charrsid15017164 of}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  either coming back to England - where things weren't too good - or signing on again
. At the time I had an offer of - the - joining the South African Airforce and the pay was very much better than a soldier's pay, Imperial Soldier's pay, and so I elected to join the South African Airforce, so I left the - British army one day and joined 
t
he South African - the South African Air force the next day. And so I had no really broken service, and I remained with them - until I was invalided out in 19 - 25 I think it was. Then I - well I went farming in South Africa for - somewhere about nine mon
ths and -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You mean you had your own farm?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
No, I went to - some very distant relatives - who had a farm. I went down there really to - recuperate from this nervous breakdown and - oh I stayed there until they sold the farm up. At least I helped t
o sell it up. I used to do the - selling of the produce etcetera to - the local - Indian merchants. The local - native store. But - after that I went down to Durban and - well I was out of work for - wasn't doing anything for a little while. And then I go
t
 a job on the South African railway, so I still became a government serviceman - servant and I remained there until - 1928. There I was in the - I was in the stationmasters office. I was in charge of - gangs of - native workers, mostly Indian. And - it wa
s at the time of course there was a great - political upheaval then, apartheid was really starting. But - we won't go into that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 When you were in the Army were you doing clerical work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 I was doing clerical work the whole time. I was - first - it 
was really funny, my - I was doing ordinary clerical work in England when I went out to Egypt I was popped in to a - a mechanical transport store, and I was in charge of the - of the spare parts store. At five different makes of lorries and quite frankly 
I
 didn't know the back of a car from another - from the front end. And - people - men used to come and - present me with - requisitions for spare parts and I used to have to dodge behind the partition, grab the catalogue of - the particular make and turn u
p 'til I found a picture of what the thing was they wanted. But luckily I never got found out. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7673867\charrsid15017164 I - I - carried on that - oh for a long, long while. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Until I went - I was taken sick. Then when I went out to - from there I went out to - Greece. I was again the
 mechanical transport but - I had nothing to do with the transport, I was then - orderly room clerk, I was in charge of the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7673867\charrsid15017164 orderly}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  room. Doing general jobs. And from there I went to - general headquarters where I was politely given the job of - of compili
ng statistics for the feeding of the whole Army in Greece and various other parts of the Near East. Gathering in statistics from all the various supply depots, the quantities of each particular food they had and then having to work it out at so much a - p
e
r man per day as to how many days food there was in reserve and if there wasn't - the - correct number then having to compile a 1 cablegram to the War Office in London calling for more supplies, which used to cause some great fun at times, especially when
 
we found that we had five million pounds worth of dried beans which we didn't want and - we cabled to the War Office telling them of this and asking them if they wanted them, which they replied sending us another five million pounds. We cabled back again 
s
aying we didn't want them and dash me if they didn't cable again and send us another five million. So that the - luckily we were at that time feeding refugees from - the revolution in Russia - so that we were able to get rid of the wretched things by feed
ing the refugees on them, much to their annoyance. But - that's rather rushing things a bit..
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 When you came back from South Africa did you carry on with office work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Yes. Yes. Yes, I came back from South Africa. I was - a year out of work, and o
f course I had no - Social Security then because of course I hadn't been in England for so many years. But - eventually I got a job with - the Automobile Association as a matter of fact. As a foreign touring expert because I was the only one that knew any
t
hing about Africa in the staff. And afterwards, I became assistant to the foreign secretary of the - Automobile Association, because I was there - I then carried on that - through the war, I wasn't called up for the last war - until - oh - in the 19 - lat
e
 1950's, when I gave up the job and took a smaller job to - because of various other things, and - carried on with the job then which - of compiling - information concerning touring all over the world really, I was - which was my job right the whole way t
hrough. So that I've always been in - clerical - clerical work you see. Right from - boyhood as you might say.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Could you tell me how old your parents were when you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh - oh dear, this is - I should say in the - about forty I should think. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7673867\charrsid15017164 
Thirty to forty. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Because - see - mother died in 1965 - no, no, 19 - 1956. She was then eighty-five. Well that's - getting her back to - 1900 would be - would be fifty-six - yes, it was about - the forty - because of course you see, they'd both been - wh
at shall I say - both being in service for a long while or working, father had beer in the Army and that sort of thing and - they were rather late - well as a matter of fact, quite a lot of people were rather late in life in - I mean, my uncles - my uncle
s were all - in the thirties - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7673867\charrsid15017164 forties}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 - before they - before they got married. Because of course it was a case of - well you had to have the sort of - some money behind you, and money was - difficult to get hold of sort of thing, that was the - that was the whole trouble.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 How many brothers and sisters did you have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Well I had two sisters, both younger than I. Let's see, there's only one left - living now and she's about sixty-two, so she was born - '71, she was born about 1908. Or so. The other o
ne died some years ago. But I know it was my job when I was a schoolboy at times to have to take them out in the pram. Thing I used to hate. We always had arguments when we grew up as to - I never took them out. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Andy brothers?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 No. I had no brothers at all, I was -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 The youngest was born in 1908?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 That's right, yes, that was my - my sister. I was the only son and the oldest. There were no other - no other children.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You told me you lived in four houses, do you know why you moved from house to house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Well, the first house we were in was the one I was born in - then from there - my mother and father moved to another house - which was bigger and they shared it with another family, an - an ex-Naval man and his wife, who had a 
son about the same age as myself. And we kept - we were in that house for some years, until the owner died and the house was sold. Consequently we had to - vacate it. And we had a dickens of a job to find a house, I remember. Eventually, we found a house 
w
hich was in - within about - couple of hundred yards of the house we'd - I was born in. Which was a big house, with a basement. We never liked the house, in fact, we were only there about six months because unfortunately we discovered after we got into th
e
 place the place was verminous. Anyway we got out of that and moved to another house the last house we were in - and which - my mother and father were in for over fifty - nearly sixty years - which was the last house we were in and there we - we kept, the
 
rent there was - let me see - about - I think when we first went into it was about twelve and six a week. When we left it - when - mother died it was about fifteen bob I think. But - there was very little - addition to it. It was owned by - a man - who we
 knew very well, he was a very - very good landlord actually. He was the owner of two }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7673867\charrsid15017164 confectioners\rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 shops in the town. And I always remember those shops. Because they used to sell some lovely boiled sweets, bit squares about two inches square, white and peppermint, very strong }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid920634\charrsid15017164 peppermint,}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 which we were always very fond of. And also - mother's favourite thing, almond rock. That was a large circular slab of toffee with a pyramid of almond nuts on the top. But - that - that was the only - the only reason we mo
ved was not - sort of - trying to - sort of come up or anything of that sort, it was merely - mostly had to in each case.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 When did you move into the last house, were you still at school then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh yes. Oh yes, luckily for me because the school was
 on the same street. So consequently I could - wait for the school bell to ring and then I'd run up the road to school. I was never - I was never late.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 When you shared this house were there two parts completely separate?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 No. No, no. They were - 
they were not - not separate by any means, except that - we sort of stuck to our own rooms except at Christmastime when we'd all mess in together because the front room and the back room could be thrown into one room by - folding doors. So to make room we
 used to throw them into one, although - the front room was ours and the back room was the other peoples.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You knew them before?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 I don't know how my mother and father knew them because he was in the Navy. And I know my father had nothing to do wi
th the Navy, I don't know how we came to - get - there was really - when I was - very young.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Before you can remember really?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Well, yes, I suppose - I can remember being in the house. Because I can always remember the famous occasion I had measle
s. And - they - mother and father brought a bed down into the - sort of - dining kitchen really - for me and it was placed in a bay window and the snow was on the ground at the time, and the other boy of the house of course was kept away from me but he us
ed to come outside the bay window }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid920634\charrsid15017164 and}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 - make faces and all this sort of thing and - one day, I know this }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid920634\charrsid15017164 snow was}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 on the ground and he enticed me out, I flung open the window and hopped out into the snow, covered with - I was covered with - measles and all I
 had on was a - a sort of night gown and we had a lovely snow battle until I was discovered and there was a shindy. I - I - but - it - it had no - no ill effects, that's the funny part about it, in fact I - it cured the measles. But actually - the main th
ing I dean remember of those, except of course Christmastimes when we used to join together for - for - sort of festivities, we were usually on our own but of course we used to have to make - make our own then. We had }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid920634\charrsid15017164 to press}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  the button or switch on or anything of that sort.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 The two families cooked separately did they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
No, we - we cooked in the - they both - both the wives luckily got on very well together, cooked both in the same kitchen. I think there were two gas stoves, but I won't be sure of
 that. But it was really a sharing of the house, the only thing is we - we didn't live in one another's laps, if you can understand what I mean.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 It must have been very difficult with meals, you didn't all eat in the same place?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh no, no. They -
 they ate their - their meals in their rooms and we ate our meals in our room you see. It was a - let me see - there were three rooms and a scullery downstairs, and - three rooms upstairs. So we divided them up that way you see. Yes. They - were then were
 there - oh - for some years really. I suppose I was about ten or eleven when we left there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 The other would have been away?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 No, no, he - he retired from the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7673867\charrsid15017164 navy}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 . A Naval man, he - he was working in the Arsenal, possibly -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 So there aren't any }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7673867\charrsid15017164 other lodger}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  or relatives?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Not then, no, in the last house there was. Because I was away from home and there was spare room and - mother did have - people in then. Mostly single people who she used to - cater for. But that was only - after - oh -
 there were some I think before - no, there weren't any before - any before 1914, it was after the last war really that she started to do that. Because of course father was out of the Arsenal then, he was - discovered to be redundant - before there was su
c
h things as redundancy pay and all the rest of it, and - he was employed - he was working on various building jobs in London - and that sort of thing, but to help along mother did have people in. As I say, mostly single men who she - sort of provided meal
s
 for as well. But I don't think she made a fortune out of it by any means, in fact, I think it was the other way round. Because - mother was one of those - she was a very good cook and she was always one of those and always believed in feeding the brute. 
A
nd she placed a plate of - dinner before you, you - well you just about saw the edge of the plate, as you can testify. And consequently I don't - I'm almost sure she didn't make any great - any great profit out of it. But - while we were children there we
re - never - oh there was occasionally - now and again we'd have somebody in perhaps to - meet some - sort of - emergency. We'd take somebody in for a little while.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Why would there be an emergency?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Well - I don't know. Perhaps - get some money to go for a holiday or something of that sort you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Your father was never out of work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh he was still working.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 If he was ill would he still get paid for instance?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Only - only - sick club benefit, you see. His wages should stop.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 That would be the kind of time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Yes, that be - that - although I can't remember father being ill - very much. I suppose he did have one or two - I can remember him having one or two goes of lumbago - but I can't say that he was really - very ill. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 But he was always regularly at work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Always regularly at work, oh yes. But I suppose his - wages were only - I don't know - thirty bob - two pound a week. I suppose - I don't suppose they were two pounds a week at times. You see, the wages were very low at that time.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Would she take in a soldier or someone like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Yes. Sometimes - or perhaps - possibly - the wife of a soldier who wasn't - entitled to married quarters. You see, sometimes it would be that, we'd - who' she'd take in. But nobody - never made a real business of it like some people did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did she ever have anyone to help her in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 No. Oh no. Except if she was queer or anything of that sort. Then - well my aunt would - my father's sister from up the roa
d would come in you see. Oh no - mother was always very independent like that. Neighbours were always kept outside the front door. She didn't want them coming in - poking their nose round. The neighbours used to come in of course but - not very often. If 
t
hey did come in it was usually a sort of - state occasion when they were taken into the front room and - tea was served on the best china and that sort of thing you see, a state occasion. But as for the sort of - as you get in some places - popping in nex
t
 door and having a chat, oh no. Although she was always ready to talk over the back fence or over the front gate - the front - front door. But always kept a certain amount of - aloofness from them. She never - never did mix much with - with the neighbours
.
 For instance, on one side of us we had - a Roman Catholic family, now I hope you're not a Roman Catholic - and - of course they were - always beyond the pale. On the other side of us we had a family who were rather - happy go lucky, they were a very big 
f
amily. The father - was working in the Arsenal, he was very much better position than my father, he was a foreman, but he was a big club man, political club man, he was a big Radical, Election days he'd always be walking about with a very large red rosett
e
. But - they never had sort of tuppence to bless themselves with, that family. And - although mother would talk to them she was always - rather looked down her nose at them. And - the same with quite a lot of other people in the - in the street you see, t
hey were that sort of - what shall I say - sort of social barriers really, people put up themselves.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Why do you think she thought she was superior like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh I don't think she felt she was superior, but - she couldn't abide title-tattle and - 
gossip - and she wasn't going to have everybody - gossiping about her around the street you know, around the town sort of thing. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 She didn't need help from neighbours ever?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh no. No. Oh - well she'd always got - my aunt up the road. And - 
they were both - both my father and mother were very healthy, it was only one occasion I can remember my mother being very ill, or twice - two occasions. But on those, well my sisters were able to do things in the house you see, and my aunt - under the su
pervision of my aunt, so that there was no - no need for - help or anything of that sort.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did you have to help in the house at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Yes, I was supposed to do all sorts of jobs, used to try - try and get out of them. Such as I only mentioned the 
other night of - cleaning the knives on the old - board with a piece of lino nailed on it and - sprinkling }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7673867\charrsid15017164 ofOakley's}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 powder - knife powder over them and rubbing the knives up and down. Usually that used to be a Saturday job. Sometimes I'd get the job of -
 chopping some wood. But - we weren't expected to do a lot in the house really. Oh, and pushing my sisters, yes, get little jobs like that. But - even that was not very often. Because as I say, I used to object to it so strongly that - I think mother gave
 
it up eventually. I used to have to do messages. Go up to the shop and get this and that and the other. And always - went out with my mother shopping because she was deaf. On one side. Well at least she was - she was practically totally deaf. And - of cou
r
se if she was in a shop, a noisy shop, she couldn't hear what was said to her. And so we always used to have to go out with her - and - sort of act as interpreter really. That was about the only jobs I ever used to get really at home. We - clean shoes som
etimes. Mostly father used to do those Sunday mornings but - sometimes I used to get roped in to do it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 What else did he do besides cleaning shoes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Well, he did the very little in the house. He used to look after the garden. He was - of course being a countryman}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid920634\charrsid15017164 , }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 he}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid920634\charrsid15017164  always}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 wanted to do - have a garden, and mother was the same as far as that goes. He used to - sometimes - for one period we did - keep chicken at the bottom of the garden. Which - of course, provided eggs and also - provided chicken f
or the pot. He used to grow quite a lot of vegetables in the garden. And - at one - well, during the first world war he did quite a bit of business on his own of - providing the local butcher with - rabbits. He had rabbits in the house. He only had one or
 
two which - we used to have for the pot. And - oh we bred and he managed to get - oh, quite a good - good supply. The local butcher found it out and offered him a good price for them so father used to keep the - local butcher supplied with rabbits now and
 again. But - that was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid920634\charrsid15017164 merely}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 a sort of - well, bit of pocket money job really. Although father would very often hand it over. But you see father was one of those - he was rather - what shall I say, happy-go-lucky - he didn't care what happened. Hail, rain 
or shine; as long as he - could have his pipe and his - and his pint of - beer at night. He didn't mind what - what we did. Or at least what happened I should say, he did mind what we did. I used to have to - very often go down to the tobacconist and get 
his tobacco for him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did you have to fetch beer for him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 No. No, no. No. He }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid920634\charrsid15017164 always}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  went out for that. Always went }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid920634\charrsid15017164 out,}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 unless there were any relatives staying with us - when - they - or some friends of his, one or two people used to come in, they
 used to have a - an evening playing crib, when there was always - he'd always go out and fetch the job of beer, it was only across the road. But - that didn't happen very often because mother used to object. And - I don't mind telling you we all objected
 
because you could never use the room for three or four days afterwards, he used to - smell like at - well, everybody smoking you - used to go in the room when they were playing cards and you could see across it. But - that was only natural. No, father - w
e
 managed quite well on what - father earned really. I know that sounds rather strange for those days and - the rates of pay and that but we did, mother was a very good manager, she was the manager of the house. I'm afraid the whole family was rather a - a
 }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7673867\charrsid15017164 matriarchic}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 family. Mother - mother ruled the roost, put it that way. But - we got on quite well and - as I say, I can never remember even - well, things were a bit tight, we were never without a jolly good meal. In the winter there was always - a large - 
pot of - soup on the hob, always. I can always - often remember going over to the local butcher for - three penn'orth or two penn'orth of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7673867\charrsid15017164 bones}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 , which were always brought home and put into the - stockpot. And - well they - even on Fridays when perhaps mone
y then run out, we always had a meal of some sort of other. A real country style, yes. Everything - it was mostly based on a country style of - of living. Occasionally we'd get something sent up from the country, but very seldom.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 What would you get sent up?;
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 A rabbit or something of that sort. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7673867\charrsid15017164 Very, very seldom though. }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 We only went down there once a year. And then it was a major operation. Because it meant writing round to all sorts of relatives, who could put this one up and who could put that 
one up, and we used to get down to the village - and perhaps father - find mother staying in one house, I'd be staying in another house, my sisters - one sister in another house and the other sister in another house. Just depended who got - who'd got room
. And then of course to get here - it meant - meant case of going up to London of course, getting across to }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7673867\charrsid15017164 Paddington}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
, this was from South East London up to - Paddington, and then down, and of course - to get to the village - well - we always had to arrang
e - the station we went to on the railway always had to be arranged according to - my grandfather's programme, because he always collected us in the trap. You see, he was - he was a sweep and did a - a big - connection with all the big country houses roun
d
 about, and - we always - it used to take weeks of arrangement, as to - where we should go, whether we should go to Newbury or to Aldermaston or to Mitcham or to Thatcham. Because just depended which - day he'd be at which house - and so on, and what time
.
 But - we used to go down there and then - he would - mother perhaps would stay with her mother. I'd stay with an uncle, and as I say, we were scattered all over the village. And at that time, I think - the greater part of the village were related to me. 
I
t wasn't a very big village and - there was a - the family goes back in the village for - well at least I've traced them back to the seventeen hundreds. And - the offshoots of the family I don't think there were many people that weren't related to me and 
o
f course - that was the trouble, you could never move in the village without somebody knew and it was always known what I was doing because - as I say, everybody knew me. But we always lived a country life then, thoroughly. Do - doing exactly the same as 
our cousins and - and uncles and aunts, going out collecting wood for the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7673867\charrsid15017164 woodshed - gleaning}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 - driving cows home, perhaps one of my uncles was a cowman, I used to go up and - perhaps help him drive the cattle home and - sometimes turn the - the handle of t
he separating machine in the dairy. I used to like doing that because they always used to say, well have a drink of milk, and I always used to put the - the beaker under the wrong spout so I always had a drink of cr}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7673867\charrsid15017164 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 am. But - we always did - we always did 
things like - like that and - I had relatives living in Newbury and - we'd occasionally go over there, well that of course meant going over in the carrier's cart. Which meant starting about - nine o'clock in the - oh - no - eight o'clock in the morning, a
n
d getting into Newbury somewhere about lunchtime, because we visited all the - the farms and isolated cottages for miles around on either side of the road and - every time you came to a hill you'd very often have to get out and - walk up. And - and that s
ort of thing. And then come home - well, you sat amongst all the - all the produce and - bundles of - reels of barbed wire, bundles of wire netting, sacks of lime, sacks of anything. Oh - all }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7673867\charrsid15017164 bundled}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  in the cart together and they all had to be delivered all
 the way round, you'd get home somewhere in dark. Somewhere about eight or nine o'clock at night, having left there about three and it was only seven miles. But - it used to be great fun and we used to - think it was a great - thing.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You went most years did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 We went most years, sometimes we'd miss a year.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 How long would you go for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Well we'd usually go for a fortnight. Sometimes longer. It just depended how long - the family could - put up with us and put us up sort of thing. But - it was of the days of course when - one had to - observe the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7673867\charrsid15017164 niceties}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 as regards the local inhabitants, such as - if you saw the vicar well you always had to - the ladies had to bob to him and the - men had to - either lift their hats or - pull - pull th
eir forelocks, if they didn't he jolly well yelled across the road and told you off. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Would that be different from London to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh yes. It was entirely different of course. I mean the - one of the cottages I used to stay in was - with som
e cousins of mine - was a thatched cottage, with a thatched roof. And lie in bed and hear - mice and birds running about in the thatch and - we were just under - underneath the thatch without any - sort of ceiling. The walls of that one were made of chalk
 
cob. It was a very old - very old cottage. And of course - there was no - sanitation. It was the wee house down the - bottom of the garden. And I can always remember one because it had a family seat in it, which - might surprise you, we had a large hole a
n
d a small hole side by side. I know - my mother and sisters used to be terrified of going there because - spiders and all sorts of things used to run all over you while you were there. And - it was also in the woodshed, so you had to go in there regardles
s
 of who was there or whether it was being used, to get some wood for the fire. And - of course water had to be carried - had to come out of the well, there was no laid on water. It was a case of going - well many times I've wound up the - the bucket out o
f
 the well and it - used to want some hauling up. Only to find when you got the bucket up there were a couple of frogs or a newt in it and - but of course you'd have to dish those out and carry the water indoors. It was perfectly - perfectly primitive life
 really and everything was - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7673867\charrsid15017164 horse drawn}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 of course, there was no - there were no cars and that sort of thing, I can remember when the carrier turned over to a motor vehicle. It was considered absolutely shocking, but - now of course it's on a main bus route.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did you feel that the people there were cut off from the stream of events?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Yes, they were. They were actually self contained, you see, I mean - their - well they used to have their newspaper of course, although - practically every - usually u
sed to be either the local newspaper, or else a Sunday newspaper, there was never - very seldom newspapers in the week. They used to - have their amusements, and we used to join in, such as the local flower show, which the high day and - everything else o
f
 the - the village in the summer, when you had sports and - everybody produced their best marrow and - all the other things. And we youngsters - I say we youngsters now calling myself one of the village - we used to be classes for us for - the best bunch 
o
f wild flowers for instance, and we used to go out for - hours scouring the - the downs all over the place for - all the wild flowers of different kinds that we could find and - you'd get an armful of them. Now you can't find them I mean - thirty or forty
 
different - species you'd find. On the chalk, yes, of course you'd get wild scabius and all that sort of thing. Then of course we always used to go - if it was in the autumn we went down there'd be nutting, used to go up the lane nutting and - and - black
berrying, and all those things, and of course all the - all my uncles and aunts did the same. For - for the - cupboard of course, running down into preserves you see. Well for us it was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid920634\charrsid15017164 
romantic,}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  I mean, I used to go out with my great-grandmother and - when
 I - I'm talking now of being as a schoolboy, I had - one, two - three - four - five - I had six grandparents living, including great-grandparents. One of them was a dear old lady - she was great on simples and herbs, and I used to have to go out with her
 
herbing. And used to get dosed with the beastly stuff afterwards too. And I - she lived in Newbury and I can remember having - going out with her, if I was staying with her, going out with her on Saturday - shopping, and it was always walking into - littl
e
 tiny shops you know and you pushed open the door and the bell jangled. And possibly stepped down a step and then it was - oh good morning Mr so and so, good morning Mrs Barrows, and quite a little chat before you got down to - what was wanted to buy and 
t
hen - it was always one little shop we passed, I can always remember gran - great-gran you to say, about - what about some lollipops? And I'd be marched in there and I'd have a - a pennyworth of lollipops, which used to have to last me a week, but they ne
v
er did. And of course we always used to have to collect the Sunday newspaper on Saturday. There was no Sunday newspaper delivery there. And in the house on Sundays all blinds were drawn at the front. And - the only thing we could do then to amuse us - we'
d
 go for a walk very sedately - or sit in the front room, and look at books, there was a big round table which was divided up all the way round the edge of it were - alternately books and a dish. The books were sort of Pilgrim's Progress and something of t
hat sort. The furniture was mostly horsehair - padded. And - sitting there in - sort of - shorts was anything but comfortable. Used to be purgatory. I used to be glad when Monday morning came. But -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 She was very religious then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Well, no, she was
n't religious, it was just the way - no, she never went to church. Not that I'm aware of. But it was just the way they'd been brought up you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 They all had their blinds down on Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Yes. Oh yes. I mean, she was ten - let's see - say I was 
then - say 1909 - well she was then - getting on for seventy, you see, and it was how they were brought up they just carried on - through. Oh no - I can't say that - any of my - she was another matriarch. Poor old }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7673867\charrsid15017164 granddad}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  - great-}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7673867\charrsid15017164 granddad}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 liked his - pipe
, but he was never allowed to keep - smoke a pipe in the house. He had to go and sit in the woodshed and smoke it. And - he was never allowed to keep his tobacco in the house. He always used to tuck down underneath the wood - underneath the water butt. }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7673867\charrsid15017164 Oh yes, she was a very, very strict old dear. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
And - the slightest - you know, used to when my throat's a bit dry, you'd get dosed with - blackberry syrup or - if you felt a bit hot well then you got dosed with ground ivy tea or something of that sort, some mo
st awful concoctions, the whole house - the whole cupboard was full of - she had a - a remedy for everything. Unfortunately I can't remember them now, I'm really sorry, of course I was only a boy at the time, and - I went away for so many years, she was d
e
ad before I came back. But really I had no opportunity of sort of - gathering - any notes on the - on the things. But - it would have - it would have been fascinating, yes, I quite agree. When - that was on my father's side - on - on my father's mother's 
s
ide. On my father's father's side I had a great-grandmother living. She always wore a poke bonnet, and always smoked a clay pipe. And a little clay pipe about that long. It just about missed her nose. She - well she died - ninety-eight. And - she was a ma
rvellous old lady, but I can remember even after I was in the Army in uniform I went to see her. Her sight was failing, she'd call out, who be }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7673867\charrsid15017164 'ee}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 ? And you tell her, oh I be George's boy. It was no use telling her your own name because she wouldn't know. I 
be George's boy. OH. And then we'd have a little chat. - And I was coming away, she'd say, I've got something for 'ee. And she'd march over to her big dressing chest, lift up her clock and bring out - a silver threepenny bit. And even after I was in unifo
r
m she'd always present me with that silver threepenny bit, as soon as she turned her back of course I used to shove half a crown underneath and she never knew. But she always smoked a - smoked a - and she was - she lived all her life - in the country, as 
a
 - as a - farm labourer's wife. And she could - do - gardening just the same as a man. As a matter of fact, at eighty she fell downstairs and broke both her legs. Before she was eighty-one she was out in the garden planting potatoes, on a crutch, and a st
i
ck. She was carrying the bag of potatoes - seed potatoes on the crutch, poking the hole with the stick, dropping the potato in and covering it up with the stick. And even up to ninety-eight - she always sat in a straight backed chair like you're sitting i
n now, at the table. And she always did the washing up. And woe tide if you - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7673867\charrsid15017164 got hold}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 of a plate and rubbed it over, if she saw you she didn't half create. And I can always remember - eight o'clock - night, she'd always pick up a candle and off she'd go to
 bed. Every night. Just - yes, just as dark was getting there, she always did - even she was - sort of girl. Oh yes, those days - they were peaceful, they were simple, but they were - they were marvellous really and it's practically impossible to really c
o
nvey to people - what they were like. Oh yes. I'm always sorry that - as regards that particular great - grandmother - I never really asked her anything about her younger days, because of course she was born - let's see - 1918 she died, she was a hundred 
- 1818, yes, she was just born round about the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7673867\charrsid15017164 Waterloo}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
. And - of course, again as I say I was only a schoolboy and - sort of - didn't - hadn't got the cheek to question my elders as the saying is, but - I was always interested in it and I would always have
 - if I'd - thought afterwards I would have liked to have really found out what she really did know about the place. But it really did take me back to - say - Waterloo really. But - it was - it was a - a marvellous time, I can remember even in London - wh
en people were ill, the streets outside the house were covered with straw - to deaden the sound, even of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7673867\charrsid15017164 horse carts}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 going by. That - I can remember - oh when I was about thirteen. In Woolwich, yes, or anywhere in London you'd find it. In - no, even in side
 streets if - the people could afford the bale of straw to put down you see. It was usually only done in - sort of people that were well off. But - oh I can remember in one main road, the whole street being smothered in - quite deep in straw. All for the 
m
atter of about a month. Because - men in the house was - was ill. And he was an old boy - he was a big house owner in the - place, and I can always - I can see him now, every Monday morning you'd see him driving round, he had a long white beard, and alway
s
 wore a square block top hat. If you remember what those were, not the ordinary - topper you see now, but it came up, about threequarter the height of the - of a present day topper and then the - the brim, instead of being a right angle, curved over the t
op - curved over. A block hat. Always with that, sitting in his trap driving his pony, and always his - man behind, sitting at the back with his back to him. He was going round collecting his rents. I can see him - picture him now doing it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 That was your landlord?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Oh no, that was not - not my landlord, no. Our landlord, he always walked round. He was - although he had a big house, very big house and that sort of thing, he never - sort of - you'd never think he was - wealthy, but he was. Quite wea
lthy. Oh no - of course the horse transport was - the thing - everybody - there was another job I did have once. When I was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7673867\charrsid15017164 schoolboy that}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  was helping the local greengrocer. I used to like that job because he - it meant getting up early in the morning and 
going over the market with him. To Stratford, that was on the other side of the river. And - then coming back and - well I used to have all sorts of jobs like filling up potato bin and - cleaning the scales and you always had to clean the copper scale wit
h half a - half a cut - with a cut lemon, rub the thing over with - with lemon, and then polish it, and it polishes up copper beautifully. But - I didn't have that very long really.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Was that just you helping him then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Yes. There was only myself.
 In the shop really. I wasn't - I didn't have it very long. As a matter of fact, I say - well, as I say, it didn't impress me very - practically forgotten until just then. But apart - well I didn't have - many jobs. I was mostly - I suppose, in the house.
 
Going out very much, we - I didn't go out with sort of gangs of schoolboys - or school pals. I was always a sort of loner somehow or other. Now and again I'd perhaps go out and join the boys in the street. Playing cops and robbers or - marbles or cigarett
e cards or something of that sort. But not very often. I used to - spend most of my time either reading or - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7673867\charrsid15017164 messing}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 about in that way. I was always a great reader. I was never allowed to read - the ordinary comics and - the Gen and the Magnet and the Marve
l and all those - boys books of those days. Father wouldn't have it. He - he didn't mind you reading the newspaper but he objected to you reading those things. Sexton Blake and all the rest of it, he - I used to read them, a friend of mine used to give me
 
a - lend me a bundle now and again, I used to smuggle them in the house and - usually used to keep them up the chimney in my bedroom. And then when I went to bed get one out and then get right under the bedclothes with a - well - later on with an electric
 torch and sort of have a read. Father found it out one day and I - oh I got a good beating. I was never - spanked or anything of that sort, but I got a jolly good talking to, and it was through that that I managed to get }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7673867\charrsid15017164 father}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  to - sign the letters and guarantee card for - so that I could become a member of a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7673867\charrsid15017164 
public}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 library. And then I was in my seventh heaven, I was more often in the public library that I was anywhere else. When I first joined it of course they had a system - whereby if you wanted a book 
you had to look up the catalogue, find the number of it and then - go to a large index stretching up to the ceiling where they had all the numbers of the books in. You had to look and see if the number of the book you wanted was in. If it was you could as
k
 for it. If it wasn't well you were unlucky. But later they got rid of that system and through the - had the open shelf system they have now. And - oh I was then in my - my delight. I used to get down there and - I never used to read much fiction. I read 
p
lenty of Valentine and - Robert Louis Stevenson and those sort of things but I was usually mostly on the other side, the non-fiction side. And - I usually used to - very often - well, mostly used to go for the top shelf which was usually - I used to have 
t
o blow the dust off the things but I always used to find most fascinating things up there. I think before I left school - I'd read - Martyrdom of Man, Reeves isn't it, yes, Elizabeth Road. I certainly do remember getting up - there on a ladder one day and
 coming across something and I sat down and glanced at it and the next thing I remember I then got to the end of the book, I'd read the whole thing through sitting on the top of these steps. And that was - one of Oscar Wilde's plays. But - I -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You said your father mended shoes in the house but that he didn't do other things, do you mean that he wouldn't do decorating or repairs?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 No. We never did - decorating. Because of course the landlord - we'd only mention it to the landlord and he'd send a ma
n in. He used to mend our shoes. Or boots. He used to mend - mend our shoes and boots and that sort of thing. Mother would mend our clothes. But as regards upkeep of the house - no, that was always - the landlord.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 And he did no cleaning?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 No, he wouldn't - oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Fires?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
No. No. They were always - always mother's job. I'm afraid he was rather the - sort of Victorian husband's - way of looking at life, that there was a woman's job and a man's job and the house was the woman's job.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 What about helping the children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Well - not very often. I - sometimes when I got to about ten, twelve, thirteen - I'd go out with him, but - then it was not very often. I do remember him - taking me up to London - on occasions, to various museums, if h
e had a - day off or something of that sort, or a Bank Holiday - we used to go up on the - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7673867\charrsid15017164 workman\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 train to - from Woolwich to London which used to cost them fourpence for - for the return. I think it's somewhere about three bob now. And - he'd take me r
ound London. I also - I always remember he did take me up to see - the Coronation of George V. Yes. Coronation of George V. We got up early in the morning and went up. I think we went up about six in the morning, and he decided we'd - stand at the foot of
 
the Duke of York steps in the Mall. We were right on the edge of the kerb and - got nothing in front of me until a rather burly London bobby came and stood in front of me and I, of course, childlike, started to make remarks about it. Then - any way it did
n
't move the bobby, but a few minutes later a rather burly guardsman came and stood just by me. Again I created, any rate - when the procession came along I suddenly felt somebody grab hold of me and before I knew where I was I was standing out in front of
 the guards, right out in front of the whole thing, I had a lovely view of the whole procession. But - things like that father would take me to. And - of course on Sundays, usually Sunday evenings, the whole family would go out - for a walk. }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7673867\charrsid15017164 A walk usually 
- say perhaps a couple of miles up more - we used to go to one place in - well, we used to go to North Woolwich and was a small park there, with a bandstand in it, there used to be a band play. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 That's across the river, on the opposite side of the river Tha
mes. We'd go over there occasionally. Of course that was high - great delight for us because - it meant crossing over on the Woolwich Free - free ferry. And then we'd go into the gardens and - next door to the gardens was a - a big public house with a gar
d
en and after the band - perhaps father and mother'd go in there and we'd all sit in the garden, we'd have a ginger beer or something and they'd have a - a little drink. Another place we went to was - we'd got to the - a place on the outskirts of - of the 
borough, a place called Penny on the Hill }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7673867\charrsid15017164 which}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  meant }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7673867\charrsid15017164 walking}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 across a big common, Plumstead Common and - through a little bit of country unbuilt up, it's built up now unfortunately, to a - a little country pub there which had a big garden and - while we ki
ds played about and perhaps had a ginger beer mother and father would have a drink. Bank Holidays of course we always went out to one of the fairs nearby, either at Blackheath, which meant walking about - let's see - Blackheath, about - four or five miles
 each way. But we'd go off in the morning and take our time doing it you see. We might have a - ride on the roundabout or something of that sort. But sometimes we didn't. Father would have a - go at the coconut }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7673867\charrsid15017164 shy}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 . Sometimes he'd have a coconut, if he did 
we were - we kids were - really - in the seventh heaven sort of thing. But apart from that, I didn't go out with my father very much.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Can you talk a little more about the fair?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 The fair? Well as - yes, it was mostly the - boxing ring and - the 
usual - swings. Swings, coconut shies - steam organ, roundabouts - and that sort of thing. Later on of course hoop-la came in and darts and - various sorts of other things. Throwing the ring over - over a prize. But they were very much later. It was much 
more - a simple and more manual - when I was a youngster.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 What about the kind of walk thing which moves?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Oh no, that was not - not known then. Oh no. Swings and roundabouts were the main mechanical things. Coconut shies, a boxing ring, sometimes 
some sideshows, like the bearded lady or the - or - or somebody with a - with a snake or something of that sort. And that's about all, except - of course you got - people selling - squirters, which was a - a tube like a - a small toothpaste tube, fill wit
h water and - of course the young fellows used to get hold of these and as they passed some girls they'd squeeze and squirt water over them, or the - oh what do they call the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7673867\charrsid15017164 things,}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  a stick with a lot of strips of coloured paper tied on the end? Like a whi
p, yes, which they used to go round and - flutter in the faces of girls and that sort of thing. But apart from that there was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7673867\charrsid15017164 none}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  of the - the gambling games and that sort of thing, although of course you used to get the - a three cards trickster or the t
himble trickster on the outskirts, but he was always - one eye on the - the job and one eye for the policeman. We used to go there, there was one at Blackheat}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7673867\charrsid15017164 h}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  just by the Queens Park, and another one was on the extreme of - Woolwich, going down river at a place called }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7673867\charrsid15017164 Bostall}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  Heath. They were both - ancient - fares by ancient prescription actually. Something after the style of - the famous Hampstead Heath, but - as I say, not so mechanical as they are now.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did you go down to Gravesend at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 N
o. I never saw the sea until - I went overseas in the Army in 1915, first time I ever saw it. Yes, the river steamer - I can - we always used to go down - as we went to North Woolwich gardens we'd always watch for the steamers coming home in the evening -
 
from Clacton and Margate. The Royal Sovereign and - the - other boats like that. All with lights on, and we used to - we youngsters used to think that was a marvellous thing. But of course in those days, I - the river was quite - fascinating because of co
urse then you had all the sailing barges. And you used to have those by the dozen - they used to tie up on the buoys just by North Woolwich, one of the famous buoys being called Salvation }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 
Buoy}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  where - when - ba}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 rges}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 began to go out and there was little work 
for them they used to tie up there. But at the same time - I used to go over there very often if - we didn't go away for holidays and - during the summer holidays I used to perhaps buzz off the day with a - something to eat in my pocket and I used to go o
v
er there and we used to walk along through - along the river bank, through the North Woolwich Gardens, and then along the river bank to - what is now the King George V Dock which was then just a small dock, I used to - we used to be able to walk in the do
cks, walk all ro}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 und them, nobody used to say anything,}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 now you can't even walk in the gate without you get chased, and I often used to sit on bollard there, I was only talking to a friend this afternoon about the same thing, sit on a bollard and watch ships
 being loaded or unloaded and - weave all sorts of stories in the mind as to where they were going and what - what they were doing and this sort of thing. And - oh I used to spend - quite a lot of time over there doing that. And another - occupation durin
g
 my - holidays sometimes as I mentioned the other night was to walk up to London. On my own. I'm afraid I was always rather solitary. I never had any close - sort of pals at school or anything of that sort. I don't know why. It was only I suppose really -
 they were fond - they were keen on kicking footballs and I used to hate the sight of it. We used to have to go to - what were called organised sports at school and I used to do my hangest to avoid getting involved. No, that was during the week. }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 We}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 e used to
 get marched up to Woolwich Common to play football and I used to hate the idea on - wet and muddy afternoon. I know in the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 winter,}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  it was very cold, the boys - used to - take what they used to call a warmer, and that was a medicine bottle filled with wate
r in which chili's had been crushed. Used to drink that to warm them up. Oh I remember that. But - we always used to go swimming - swimming and I used to hate that. School swim - swimming in the local swimming baths. But - I used to do all - all I possibl
y could to avoid - having to get in the water, I used to hate it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Do you think you got this interest in reading from your parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 No. My father would read the newspaper. My mother could hardly - well she couldn't read very well. She could always
 read as long as she - she read aloud.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did they read to you then?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 She read to herself did she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 She read to herself, she - she was reading the newspaper, she'd have to follow the line with her finger and read it aloud. And the
re always used to be a - bone of contention from father and mother, because mother'd get hold of the paper later in the evening and start reading something and father'd say, well I never heard that. I read that this morning. No - father was not a book man
.
 I - I can only remember him buying me two books in his life. And that was the History of England. Book about - I forget who it was by now. And another one was a book called The People Day, which was one of those sentimental - Victorian stories about a ki
d
die being - sort of - what shall I say - abandoned and picked up by some showground people and carried around. They were the only two books that father's ever bought me in a - in his life. But he never minded me reading anything from the library, it didn'
t matter what it was. He'd never even look at it and see what it was. So I could have been reading - something like they get today. No, he wouldn't have known. They - they - were rather - particular what they - put on the shelves.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did your father tell you stories?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
No. He'd sometimes mention - sometimes he'd mention about - his - times in India. But - nothing - even then it was mostly cricket. He was rather keen on cricket when he was in the Army and - it was mostly then but - I never used to take 
much notice of it. No, we were not - he was not one to - talk much about his experiences at all. He was rather - sort of kept things to himself, whether he thought it wouldn't interest anybody or not I don't know. But - neither of them - even my mother - 
u
sed to have the case of dragging it out of her, some of the things about her early life. I used to know - I knew most about Margate because - when we grew up and were at home - like after the war and that sort of thing she always used to worry us about ta
k
ing her down to Margate, a place I detest. But she always - of course, was thinking of Margate in her day and always wanted to be taken down there, but we - we never - never got her there. No, both of them were very - I say people were like that in - in t
hose - yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 If you were worried about something could you talk to them about it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Well - not always. I'm afraid - really - there was not much as regards children that we were actually worried about. I mean, if it was a case of - sort of somet
hing at school, well if you - got six or something of that sort, well if you said anything about it at home you were - were told - well you jolly well deserved it, or something of that sort, you got no sympathy, so you kept to it yourself. And we never go
t
 into - really any serious trouble. I did on one occasion, but - it was nothing to do - was not my fault really. That was when I had this newspaper round - after collecting the money once Sunday morning the dear old lady who ran the shop found it was abou
t
 half a crown out. And - I know she - accused me of sort of purloining this half crown and I - I said I didn't. And - I can't remember now whether I did tell mother or not about it. But - I know mother went to see her and after a lot of argument - the dea
r
 old dame went through the books again and found she'd made a mistake. But - that's the only time that I can - sort of - recollect sort of getting into - as a - as a schoolboy getting into any trouble. As I say, at school, if we got - if you got into trou
b
le there it was six or something of sort we were told, well you jolly well deserved it. Got no sympathy at all. In fact - quite possibly you got a - a clout on the side of the head as well, to - just to add to it. And - of course, as regards police, well 
-
 you didn't - regard the policeman as they do today. And the policeman caught you doing something he'd possibly give you a clout, and tell you not to do it again and you - sort of - well you didn't, and the next time you saw him coming you'd run like mad,
 but not because you were frightened of him, because you didn't want another clout.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Your parents didn't say they'd call a policeman?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh yes, they used to say that. Which was - very often it was a sort of commonplace, rather it took the place of 
the - sort of remark - send for Napoleon, sort of bogey man. I've heard - yes, the bogeyman but - when we were very little perhaps we'd get told if we didn't go to sleep the bogeyman'd come. Or - if you were sleepy, the sandman would come. But there were 
n
o really - sort of threats held out to - to one at all. Except you were sometimes threatened with a - with a clout or something of that sort. But it didn't come off. I can't remember my father chastising me at all. He'd sometimes would threaten to - take 
his belt off. But - -it never came to actually taking it off, thank goodness.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 So you were never physically punished at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh no. No. No. I can't - except for school. And then not very often. The last time I think the schoolmaster chased me roun
d the hall to catch me, because I objected. Oh no, I don't think - I don't think many children - not in our walk of life, I don't think were - were chastised very much. Of course in some families I agree with you, you might have got - the father was perha
ps a bit - brutal. But - I don't think there were - I don't - I can't recollect any - anybody I know getting sort of thumping good hiding sort of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Do you feel your mother could show affection?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh yes. Oh yes. She was - she was very affectio
nate. She - well sort of bestowed more of her affection I suppose on my youngest sister, more than she did on me or my older sister. She was the - my youngest was the sort of baby - well was the baby of the family and of course - was my mother's pet, she 
couldn't do any wrong. But - myself and my oldest sister, we'd often get groused at. And - get chased }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 after}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 - even after I'd married my mother would often tell me, look at me and say,}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 hm,}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 you don't seem to have washed yourself today - didn't she? Often used 
to say that. And - not privately but in public. She was very - very abrupt. But - she was quite affectionate, she - did everything she possibly could. In fact, I might as well say she was rather - she'd have fought like a tiger for us really.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 What about your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Well, he was quite all right, yes, he was quite affectionate, but he was quite all right, he didn't worry himself too much about the family. As long as things were going all right - there was a meal on the table, a roof over his head
 and that sort of thing, he was quite happy. He was - very - happy-go-lucky. Mind you, he would be a bit miserable perhaps we hadn't got a lot in his pocket but - it - it didn't last long.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 What sort of people do you feel that they hoped their children would grow up to be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh they all wanted us - myself for instance, they all wanted me to be a white collar person. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Both your father and your mother wanted that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh yes. Oh yes, and - my sisters, well - the same thing practically, b
ecause my eldest sister - she was a - secretary. And my youngest sister was a court dressmaker. Oh yes, they all wanted us to be - to be up, and there was all -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 They were ambitious for you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh yes. And there was always a certain amount of rivalry - between - her and her brother, who lived in the same }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 road}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
, who had - two sons and a daughter. And they never seemed to - sort of - rise at all. And there was always a certain amount of rivalry there, you see, the daughter there, my cousin, and my young
est sister, they both went in for a scholarship. My sister won and the cousin didn't. It was a great - it was great animosity for a long while - over that for instance, but that sort of thing, yes, went on but - she was always very - both of them were - a
s
 I say, they didn't want us to go through - their childhood as a matter of fact, you see. I mean my mother, although her mother was still living, her mother was one of those people that - although she had children hadn't any - time for them. And as soon a
s
 they were able to leave them at - twelve and thirteen they were packed off to live with someone else. And my father, his mother died when he was about - fourteen, fifteen I think and - consequently the whole family split up there again you see, and were 
d
istributed all round the village. So that they were determined that that sort of thing was not going to happen to us. Oh no, they were very - even when my sisters wanted to get married there was quite a - quite a to-do, as to - the - possibility of the yo
ung man - keep - when I got married, there was - oh dear, there was a terrible to-do, as to whether, you know, they could keep them - yes, whether they could keep them in the - the state they were used to and this sort of thing.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 What do you think they felt was the most important things in life?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Security. Something for a rainy day. And - well something for a rainy day, security was the - great thing. And - never to - owe people anything. Always pay your way. We never - I can't remember there being
 - of course, in those days - I mean there was a great deal of - what would you call - tallyman sort of - dealings. Men come round your door selling things and pay so much a week and that sort of thing. But - mother would never have that. Nor would father
.
 They used to say, if you want something, well - you've got to save up for it. And buy it with cash and not hire purchase or any of this sort of - they never would, although - in later life - they did get some things on hire purchase I know. But only smal
l things. But they were very - very strict on - on paying your way, never owing anybody anything and - being sure of a secure position.-
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Which of the two would you say were more influential on you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh I think mother was. Because she was the - she
 was the manager and she was the one that was always insisting and drumming it in. I don't think father worried himself too much about it. But - mother was the one, she was the more masterful - of the two people. More determined.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You say that you had these tallymen coming round, would you buy clothes from them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Well it was mostly clothes and household goods, linen and that sort of thing that they used to buy from them. We never bought anything from them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Where did you get your clothes from?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Well we used to go to the - to the shop.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You had new clothes did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Oh yes. Oh yes. Which might go a long way because - you see, we always had - sort of weekday clothes and - Sunday clothes. And Sunday clothes were always very carefully 
kept. You only had them on on Sundays. In the week - you'd have something - good and strong. And - sort of - long wearing. But - they were always new every time we had them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Quite a few of the people you knew would be wearing second hand clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Oh yes. Oh yes. You'd - sometimes - we might have something made over. Only mother was rather - good with the needle when we were youngsters, but I can't remember me having any - sort of father cuts downs as the saying is. I know for my sisters she'd ver
y often make a dress out of something else, out of another dress and that sort of thing. But never for me, I was always - she'd knit. We had jerseys and that sort of thing you see. And of course coming home from school - you weren't - if you were going ou
t - on any of these little job or even - or even playing in the street, you didn't go out in the - clothes you went to school in. You'd have to - something a bit more worn.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 So really you had three sets of clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Well, yes, you had three or four - three or four garments you could put on at a time you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 What about shoes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Shoes? Well - we didn't have so many shoes, we had Sunday shoes and weekday shoes. And father always used to mend those and he always used to do them up with Blakey
s, that's small pieces of - I don't know whether you know them - small pieces of iron perhaps about as long as that with long prongs on which could be nailed in you see and they used to come down the toe round the heel and round where the tread }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 came}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 . So that really the sole of your boot or shoe was - was iron shod really. You all - all had those.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Where did you buy them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Well you used to buy those at the local - leather merchants. Leather merchants you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did they have boot stores coming in at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Oh yes, you had boot stores. Oh yes. But - the - you'd go to the boot store to buy a new pair you see. But then after that I mean you didn't buy a new pair of shoes for a long while because father was always - always minding them, he'd
 go down to the local leather shop and buy a piece of leather you see about so big and quarter of a - whichever he wanted - whether he was mending his own or mine or somebody's. He'd come home with that and - well first it had to be soaked. Then he'd get 
o
ut his foot, I've still got his foot somewhere about the house, cast iron - sort of foot on a prong with went into a - a sort of pole and he'd get that between his knees, and boot on top of that, and then he'd - nail the leather on and trim it round and -
 so - mend the shoes you see. Mind you - sometimes - we used to - as youngsters we used to think they were - darned - clod hoppers, but - they used to last, they last a darned sight better than shoes do now as far as that goes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Can you tell me about washday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Oh yes, washday was always Monday. Oh yes, Monday was always washday. Cold meat and all the rest of it. Used to be a case of filling up the copper, and lighting copper fire. And that was of course the big old fashioned metal copper in the corn
er of the kitchen and - oh yes, everything had to be washed on Monday, and had to be ironed on - on Tuesday. Always had to be ironed and put away on the Tuesday. The place used to have - in the winter of course we used to have washing all over the shop. I
t used to annoy us as youngsters, no end. But - oh yes, everything had to be - household linen, clothes and everything else had to be - washed on - on Monday.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 What about bathing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Bathing - bath night was always Friday night, or Saturday night, a
nd that was usually in the - kitchen, in front of the - in front of the fire. Until we began to - get up and - I myself and father, we used to go down to the public baths. Of course mother and my sisters, they'd - do things at home while we were out sort 
o
f thing, used to get chased out to - leave the house alone. But, until I was about - oh I suppose - twelve or thirteen - I used to bath at home. And change clothes of course, that was always Saturdays - Sunday mornings we always change into clean clothes.
 Always. That was the law of the means and persons and couldn't be - that couldn't be - changed by any means, oh no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You mentioned earlier that there were three bedrooms, did you put yourself to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh yes. Oh yes. Oh yes, as far back as I can remember.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did you have to go to bed at a fixed time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Yes. Let's see, it was - oh usually round about - eight o'clock I suppose. Until I was - oh seven - twelve, thirteen - fourteen, then it used to be nine sometimes be ten. I usually used to 
- you know, let me read the - let me finish this chapter. Oh well, if your father comes in and finds you }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid920634\charrsid15017164 here }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
- so - it was always a bit of a battle between nine o'clock and ten o'clock going upstairs to bed. But it was usually, I suppose, before ten, put it that way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 What did your parents think about swearing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Well - father used to be a bit profane, mother never did. Father - one of father's favourite expressions was bloody, but I don't think it was really as regards - regarded as swearing. It w
as just an emphasis more than - more than actually swearing. I never even heard him use other words, as one does, four letter words for instance as they're called nowadays. And I certainly never heard mother ever use one. In fact we'd get - we as youngste
rs used - said damn we'd get chased. Oh yes, she was very - although not church people and all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did your father ever do any part time jobs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 No. No, he - he didn't do any part time jobs at all in his - in his - life, as far as - only after he reti
red, then that was during - during wartime, not when we were children he didn't. No, there was nothing of that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Your mother didn't go out to work after she was married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 No, she didn't. She did one or two little jobs at times - at home, home job
s - yes, tennis balls and that sort of thing - but she never went out to work, oh no. As a matter of fact I don't think there were many people round about us that did really - no, they were mostly - - the home sort of thing. Widows might have done or - th
at sort of thing, but - at that time there wasn't much in the way of - women's work for married women really. Not when they had children.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Where did you eat meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Well, we had - a - a kitchen which was our main meal - places, very seldom any othe
r room was used for - for meals except perhaps at Christmastime. Usually this kitchen was a small - smaller than this it's true, but it had the kitchen range in and opened into the scullery where the gas stove was and the water was. And so it was the most
 
convenient - in fact it was the main room which we all - mostly all lived in really. All our time - I mean there was a front room, but then, of course, front rooms were only used on sort of high days and holidays and special occasions. If - relatives arri
v
ed or - or called or something of that sort, then you'd - perhaps used the front room, or used to front room on a Sunday. But during the rest of the week it was always in this one room, everything was done there. Well - everything you could possibly think
 of, meals and everything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You mean on Sunday you had your meals in the front room?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
In the same room. In the same - in the same room. Except if anybody - we sort of had - any relatives that were staying with us or something of that sort. Then per
haps we'd use - a back sitting room, the sitting room that - sort of behind the - front room. Which - was really a dining room, but was very seldom used to tell you the truth.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 That's a third room?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Yes, we had - the house was - you came in the fr
ont door and you had a long hall which led to the stairs upstairs and then another hall - passage leading from that - oh off at a sort of - rather like that if you can under - follow me, which led into this - a kitchen. Well now there was a front room, or
 
a parlour as it used to be called. Then behind that there was another room. Then at the end of the passage was the kitchen and opening off that was the - was the scullery and - this kitchen had - had a door into the back yard and so did the scullery. Well
 
then upstairs - there was one big bedroom in the front, there was another bedroom behind that and then there was a third bedroom which came over the kitchen and scullery. And then the - behind the kitchen and scullery downstairs of course was the toilet a
nd the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 coal shed}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  and - various other out buildings.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 What was this middle room used for then?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Well - I suppose some people would have used it for as a dining room but we very seldom used it, except, as I say, at Christmas we might have - when we needed a larger table for - meals and that sort of thing. But otherwise we very seldom used it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 So you had quite a lot of space, that was the last of the four houses?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 That was the last of the houses we were in, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 The second one, the one you shared?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Would you again eat in a kind of living room?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Yes. That was a similar sort of lay out of the house, we had the front room and the kitchen, or at least a - a - well it was a kitchen really, which opened into a scullery. And
 then the other people had the room behind the front room which opened into the yard so that they could come round - through the yard into the scullery for their cooking and purposes you see. And then upstairs - there were three bedrooms. We had the front
 
room I think it was. The other people had the room behind it, and then we also had the third room which was again built over the - kitchen. They were mostly - mostly all houses were of that - of that type. You see. And we usually - with - when it was spli
t
 up, when there were two families in there well of case it was a case of making - the two ladies had to - sort of work things out between themselves as to how they used the cooking - facilities you see. Which sometimes in some - establishments rather caus
ed ructions but in ours I'm glad to say we usually got on very well together. And at Christmastime we'd - sort of - merge in together, and - do everything together and sit down together and we'd spend the whole evening together.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 So she had both a range and gas?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Could you }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid920634\charrsid15017164 describe}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  the meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Well - breakfast. When we were at school in the winter - I think the main dish was a large dish of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 Quaker}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  oats. Mother - was a great believer in - something hot inside one and we used to
 get - Quaker Oats. Other time - the summer it would perhaps be bread and butter. Perhaps bread and dripping sometimes. We were always rather fond of that. - And - on Sundays - we would perhaps - have a boiled egg. Or perhaps a - half a rasher of bacon. B
u
t - the was only on Sundays. The rest of the week was just, a I say, bread and butter, tea - very seldom was there anything else, perhaps we'd have some jam or something of that sort. But it was just plain. Dinner was always a hot meal. Of - well - we've 
h
ad - at least, I say always a hot meal, I beg your pardon, Monday's was not, was cold. Because that of course was washing day and - was using up the Sunday - Sunday joint. On Tuesday the remains of the Sunday joint would probably made into a stew. On Wedn
e
sday we'd perhaps have - liver and bacon, fried or - pigs fry. On Thursdays - well it usually be a stew again. And Fridays - well Fridays was always a sort of - composite day, you never knew quite what was going to happen because of course it was the end 
o
f the week and pay day was - pay night was Friday night, and money in all probability was a little bit - short. But we always had - a hot meal. Every day. Saturdays again we'd have - a hot meal of - oh liver or bacon or - something of - something in that 
n
ature. But always there was a - there was a hot meal, my mother always believed in - perhaps the old saying of feeding the brute, and - we never went with - we never went without, it didn't matter how tight - money might have got towards the end of the we
e
k, there was something. In the winter, one of her - great things was, she always kept a large pot of soup on the hob. It often used to be my job to go over to the corner butchers - man we knew very well, lived in the same street - and get - twopenn'orth o
r
 three penn'orth of bones - and pieces, which always went into this stockpot. Well, no, they were very often - the - rind off - pork, and - bones and - bits of - all sorts - pigs tails, all sorts of things like that. But they always went into the pot with
 
- into the soup with plenty of - of - lentils and dried peas and things like that, and consequently we always had - a nourishing - a nourishing meal in that way if there was nothing else than that, with plenty of - of bread and - a large bread pudding aft
erwards, if you ever know that was, usually used to make up a jolly good meal.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Would you have this soup and meat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh no. No, if we had the soup - which was as much as you wanted really because it could nearly - you could nearly stand your - spoo
n up in it sort of thing. So that - there'd only be meat - soup and then say this bread pudding or - a jam tart, or something like that. Mother was always - she was always a good cook and always kept plenty in the - in the cupboard as far as she was able.
 There was nothing elaborate about it, but it was always good - what shall I say - good plain cooking.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 And vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Vegetables, oh yes, there were always plenty of vegetables. Mostly - at one - at times, out of the garden. But - if not of cour
se they were from the local green - grocers, cabbage - cauliflower, potatoes, onions - well, pot herbs, which I often used to have to go and get. Pot herbs, well that's usually a mixture of - carrot, turnip perhaps a swede and - root - root - roots really
,
 which we - they used to call pot herbs, it was the general term, in the - in the trade, we often had two penn'orth of pot herbs. For tea, well that was we youngsters was bread and butter and jam perhaps. Sometimes - an egg, if we were good or sometimes j
ust the top off father's egg, whichever was the - favourite for the day, or who'd been good. And - sometimes }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 we\rquote d}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 have fish like a - half a kipper, that we as children and grown - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 mother}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 and father would have a kipper. Or - another thing - mother often used
 to do was specially on Saturdays, was haddock. I'd often have to go down to the market place and - get a haddock from - one of the - fish stalls, which was a well known noted man Or sometimes herrings. Sometimes we'd have - sprats, when sprats were about
. And - on Sundays we may have - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 shrimps}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 . E'd have to get up early and buy them from the - shri}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 m}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
p man that came round selling them live and have to cook them ourselves, boil them ourselves. Which always used to amaze us youngsters because you always bought 
them grey and when you boiled them they were either brown or pink. But - there was an old - old man, he was the chap he used to come round, he came from }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 Gravesend}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  really, he always dressed as a fisherman, blue jersey and always his seaboots and - a - a sor
t of sea yachtsman's cap, he always - always wore gold earnings in the lobes of his ear, I always remember that. And he always used to sell - sell these - those shrimps and - mostly Sunday mornings. No, the bell was always carried by the muffin man, that'
s
 another story. This - oh yes, we used to buy muffins, they used to come round, of course - that again was another Sunday morning thing, when the chappie would come round with a long tray of muffins on his head and his bell. Usually - you perhaps hear the
m on Sunday afternoons mostly, round - just the sort of - getting dusk, you would hear this bell and perhaps mother would say, oh let's some muffins, and one of us'd dash out and waylay him and - buy }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid920634\charrsid15017164 these}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  muffins which we then toast against the - the kitch
en fire or the open fire, whichever room we were using. That was rather - a sort of delicacy really. Sometimes we had winkles. That again was another delicacy. Or a treat. But - apart from that I don't think there's anything really special for meals. Exce
p
t at Christmastime of course, there was always - a bird. You see, in those days of course most of the public houses ran what they call - called a Christmas club, which you paid in sort of weekly whatever you wanted, and then according to the amount you pa
i
d in during the year at the Christmastime you either - at your choice, had a turkey or a goose and - usually a bottle of port, a bottle of whisky and - a bottle of gin. Well of course they were fairly cheap in those days. And a quart bottle of port used t
o
 cost you half a crown. A bottle of whisky would cost three and sixpence and a bottle of gin was - I don't think it was quite two bob. So that - really you hadn't - the - the bird was the most - expensive thing. As regards buying a - meat - well, during t
h
e week we used to use the - sort of butcher up the road. But on Saturdays it usually used to be a case of going down into the town, round about - seven or eight o'clock at night where you'd find all the big butchers would then be - sort of selling off the
 meat at auction. Or at least a sort of auction thing. And consequently you could very often get quite a big - a big joint at a very cheap rate. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 
Which reminds me also of those butchers at Christmastime, always used to have on the premises in the shop pinned up either prize or porker or a prize bull and it'd be there for about a week. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Sort of - and that would be killed say - two or three days before Christmas Eve and cut up and sold, that was a sort of - bit of an advert. And - as youngsters of course - yes -
 prize rosettes - as youngsters of course it always used to be the thing to go round and see the animals in the butchers shops. Another thing we used to have sometimes - for meals would be - things I don't think you hear much of now down - down South, tha
t
 is faggots and pease pudding. Faggots were - a mixture minced up meat and herbs, sometimes they were very highly flavoured, pease pudding of course was made from - pease and flour and - used to do down with the basin to the - one of the butchers shops. T
h
e one we used to go to mostly for those was a German butcher, we knew the man. In 1914 he - he got his - shop nearly wrecked because he was a German, although he hadn't seen Germany, I think since he was about - six months old. But - we used to go down th
e
re with a basin and a cloth and get these - about three pennorth or sixpennorth of - of - pease pudding, which would about fill the basin, - and - three or four faggots, and that would make quite a good - saveloys also we used to buy. Or saveloys, we usua
l
ly bought those on Saturday night if we were out with mother shopping - perhaps father would buy us a saveloy, hot saveloy, they used to sell them - sort of standing outside the shop with a - a heating arrangement to keep them hot. We had hone of those an
d
 you just had it in your hand and walk along the road eating it like a - a hot boiled sausage, but it was really a - really a lovely thing. But - apart from that I don't think there was anything really extra special about meals. Of course there was always
 cake. Mother always used to make a big cake for the week.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Any tinned food?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Very little, mostly tinned fruit. I - there were tinned fruits, of course, in the shops, tinned foods, but they weren't bought by the ordinary people I don't think. You 
might get some people who considered themselves a little bit - aristocratic sort of thing - who would buy them, but - the ordinary people - our - my mother and father - about the only thing they did buy tinned would be corned beef. Which of course was fai
rly cheap - then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 She did buy the tinned fruit as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Oh tinned fruit, yes, we often had tinned fruit. Tinned pears or peaches or pineapple mostly. But there wasn't a great deal done in - in tinned fruit I - well in our house at any rate.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 There wasn't fruit in the garden?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Well, yes, we had fruit from the garden, gooseberries and - blackcurrants and that sort of thing. Apples of course you could buy in the market, we bought - mother would always buy - oh rhubarb was another thing alway
s pulled out of the garden, which - we used to get dosed with much to our - sins. As a matter of fact, it's only quite recently that I've }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid920634\charrsid15017164 begun}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  to appreciate rhubarb again. But - mostly - mostly vegetables and that sort of thing were always fresh, fruit as well.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Your mother did no bottling then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
No, she'd make jam. But bottling, well in those days when I was a youngster of course bottling was a pretty tricky job. You hadn't the - appliances for it and so people didn't bottle so very much. It was 
mostly into jam. Even all my - aunts and that sort of thing in the country - it was always jam, they never - never bottled anything. Jam - you'd get everything turned into jam rarely.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did she bake her own bread?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 No. No, she never baked - never 
baked her own bread, we used to have to go to the bakers for that and of course that was always - usually a cottage loaf. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 
I don't know whether you - you've ever bought cottage loaf, like a - a sort of the bottom and the bit stuck on the top, and it was always sold by weight. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
And - usually you used to get an extra bit cut off another loaf to make up the correct weight. Always the - make weight we used to call it. Usually used to get }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid920634\charrsid15017164 nibbled}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  before we got home with the loaf. But - afterwards of course you use
d to get bread delivered and that makeweight disappeared. When I was - I can remember up to about - I suppose - twelve or thirteen - always going to get the bread, but after then it always got delivered. We had the local Co-operative Society or one of the
 
local bakers. But - it was like it is now I think, we often used to change bakers because - sometimes you get bread was absolutely O.K. and then suddenly it would - something about it we - we wouldn't like and we'd have to go to another - another bakers. 
Of course another thing}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15017164  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 from}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 the bakers that - we used to do as children, which is nothing to do with the housekeeping, was - very often dive in for - a pennorth of stale cakes. That sounds as if we were rather starving, some youngsters I know, it was the o
nly way they ever saw cake. But - we used to do it perhaps if we were going - you know, we were out for a - on holiday, when - during the holidays and we'd gone out on the Common or something of that sort, we'd - call in a - a bakers and ask if they'd got
 
any stale cakes and perhaps have a pennorth just to - it was really - well I suppose - I thought we were giving ourselves a treat. But - whether we were or not I don't know, but any rate, it was something different than what we had at home. Then of course
 
we often used to - a ha'porth of broken biscuits was another thing, used to go to the local grocers for. They were sort of - sometimes we'd do that instead of sweets, when we had a penny or ha'penny or something of that sort. There was one thing I mention
e
d the other - didn't mention the other day - doing little odd jobs. One odd job we often used to do was - and that you can't do now - is we were often chased out with a bucket and - shovel, gathering up horse droppings -- for the garden. For father's gard
e
n you see. Well when we'd supplied him, we'd often, perhaps two or three boys would - go out with a bucket and shovel and we'd get a shovel full of manure and then go round knocking at doors, and sell it for a penny or tuppence. But of course that was one
 
way of making pocket money. I - used to do it quite - well, I say used to do it - I did do it and - it used to - sort of - put a penny or tuppence in my pocket, not very much, perhaps only get a ha'penny for a bucket full and you've walked round half a do
z
en streets, following horses round hoping they would sort of thing. And women used to do it, oh yes. If you saw it outside your house you see, you'd dive out and - grab it quick, sometimes there'd be an awful rush from both sides of the road, before - for
 
the garden you see. Oh it did. But of course it was - it was one way of manuring the garden because there wasn't the - the artificial manures you've got now you see. Well then of course horses have gone, you can't chase a car round - for what it leaves be
hind, it wouldn't do the garden much good.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You did mention before about keeping hens and rabbits?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 There weren't any other animals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 No. No. We - we - oh we had a cat of course, the usual - household - oh no, no, not fore e
ating, there were just the chickens and - and the rabbits, that was all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did your mother make pickles?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Oh yes. Oh yes, we'd always have to have - a large bowl - pots of - pickled onions. Oh yes, they were always made. Father used to - peel the o
nions, sometimes, and mother would do as well. But - we - I used to have to go and get the vinegar. But - apart from that I didn't have any - sort of part in - in making those. But she always made - she always made pickled onions - well pickled onions and
 
pickled shallots. Father always grew shallots in the garden for - for that one particular purpose. And they were always used of course for - well - meals when we had - perhaps a - a bread and cheese meal. Perhaps for supper. And we'd - we - well at least 
they would have them, the grown ups would have them and we as children didn't. We might have them in a - perhaps on a - well Friday, or sometimes on Saturdays we'd have bread and cheese and - and pickles. Which made a - quite a jolly good meal really.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did she make any drinks?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Yes. In her later years, after - after we'd gown up - she used to make quite a great deal of - wine. We had a grapevine in the garden which spread round part of the house, which always gave a very good crop of grapes but you 
could never eat the things because they were so tiny and they very seldom ripened. But mother always used to gather those and - make wine with those. She'd also make rhubarb wine. And - damson wine she used to make, she'd buy the damsons. And there was al
w
ays, underneath the stairs was a sort of cubby hole cupboard, which was really intended to keep coal in, with the gas meters and things were in, and - packed in there were usually two or three casks of - of - some homemade wine, which - much to father's j
o
y because he was always popping in - well at least I say always, it sounds as if he was a drunkard, but - he - very often used to pop in just to see if it had - it had - matured. Consequently the wine usually - usually used to get drunk before it was real
ly }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid920634\charrsid15017164 matured}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
. But - oh yes, we had - used to have great games with that I remember on one occasion mother had bottled some and - made the mistake of corking it down. And we were all sitting in the kitchen one - one evening, and this cupboard was next to the k
itchen, it was only a party wall separating it, and suddenly there was an awful explosion, all these bottle burst. There were corks popping all over the place. But - oh yes, we always - always made wine and - and pickles. Oh yes, they were always done.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did she make any medicines?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
No, my mother didn't. But my great-grandmother did. Yes. Yes. I used to have to pick the herbs and used to get dosed - get dosed. Oh yes, we did make one medicine, I beg your pardon. We always used to, every spring, the
re was a big bowl of - a basinful of - sulphur made, up, treacle and sulphur, which we always used to get dosed with. This was flowers - powdered flowers of sulphur and - I think it was treacle used to get mixed in together and we used to get a large }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 dessertspoonful}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  of this thrust down our - you know, our mouths every Friday night during the spring. The rest of the year - we very - we'd get dosed with a horrible concoction called licorice powder. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 It was powered licorice - if it was really used as an aperi
ents, and we always had to have a dose of this on Friday nights or Saturday nights, and it was most horrible stuff because you mixed it up in water and - and when you drank it the stuff all stuck around your mouth and it took hours to get it out of your m
outh. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
The rows we - the - rows we kids used to kick up, my two sisters and myself, we used - used to end up in a crying match or something or the other over this but we always had to have it because if we didn't father used to threaten to pinch our noses an
d pour it in. That was worse than having to drink it. But - that was about all we used to do in the way of - of - the medical line really. Of course for other minor ailments we might get a - a poultice, mustard plaster or - or - or if we had earache we'd 
get possibly the - the centre portion of an onion, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 pickled}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 onion popped in our ear hot. As a cure. Toothache - well, we'd perhaps get the gum rubbed with oil of cloves. Which used to burn like blazes and I don't know whether it was one counter - counter pai
n against another counter pain which sort of balanced things, but - I know I used to }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 suffer}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 very badly with - toothache. And - oh the amount of - oil of cloves I've had rubbed round my gum or had to rub round my gums was terrible. But - apart from that the
re was not much - we were fairly healthy as far as that goes, we never had - much in the way of doctoring. Of course the doctors then, you had to - you had to pay naturally. Luckily none of us were in hospital, except my mother was once and - I know then 
i
t was a case of - having to go round to - somebody we'd learnt of - lady who was a J.P. and had been on the council who - actually was the governor of the local hospital and - sort of - well scrounged a ticket - ticket from her. It was the only way in whi
ch really you could get - sort of - free - attention in hospital.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Was there a free dispensary or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 No, there wasn't - not in Woolwich, not that I'm aware of, I don't know of one there. No, it was usually a case of going round to
 a - to a doctor and of course - most of the doctors round about were sort of - doctors which - well they brought you into the world and they saw you out nearly, most of them. Although they've all gone now but - they all knew - well two of them I know kne
w my family, right through from beginning to - to end practically.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Do you remember ever noticing your mother eating less at those times, like Fridays?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Yes. I would say yes. Oh yes she did. That was I think - really. General - a general thing, I 
think you could say that mostly - even - not only on a Friday, she sometimes perhaps do it on a Thursday. But - I mean, she'd have - some - perhaps bread and butter while we were having - something else. It was, I think, a general thing with most - workin
g - working class wives - mothers really. It was always the children were - always came first. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did all of you eat together, including your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh yes. Oh yes. He came home for meals. The only meal we didn't have perhaps with him was b
reakfast. Yes, breakfast he'd be gone to work - but dinner, the lunch, midday, he always came home for because - of course working at the Arsenal we were only a few - few steps from it really. Tea, we always waited for tea 'til father came in. And - even 
- on Sundays, though Sundays, of course, breakfast we all sat down together because we were all home, father was home as well. But - and dinner we all sat down. Together, and tea.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did you have set places?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh yes. Oh yes. The table was - sort of u
p against the wall, there was a dresser here, well the table stood out just in front so there was a sort of - a gap behind. Well my two sisters had to tuck in there. And - or sometimes I would. And father sat at the head of the table - mother at the foot,
 
with the tea tray and everything, and my two sisters possibly on the - on the side, and - or one sister and myself. Oh yes, we always had set - set places and - we usually used to lay the table. I would or my sisters would when they - they - got up, got o
n you see. But - oh yes, that was always one of the jobs we - we did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did they have to quite a lot of helping in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Well my sisters perhaps - did - perhaps do a little more in the house than I did, because of course it was their - what sh
all I say - their training really. And - of course - when I was say - twelve or thirteen, I was out sort of doing a little - little job or something of that sort, any rate I was getting out of those jobs. I'm afraid I was a - I was always get - trying to 
get out of something or other, I was always in trouble for that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Were you allowed to talk at meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Oh yes. Oh yes, we weren't - we were not sat on in that way at all. Of course, we - we'd perhaps get choked off for - interrupting perhaps if fath
er was saying something or - if we started to argue between ourselves across the table - that - say May, my oldest sister had got a bit bigger piece of cake than I had, we'd perhaps have a little argument, or I wanted that and - that sort of thing. But we
'
d get jumped on then, but generally we were able to - talk to each other and - to mother and to father. There was never any - sort of children should be seen and not heard, in - on that occasion, of course there were others - when you used to get chased o
ut of the room or something of that sort. Or - shush, the children are about. Which often used to happen, well we - I won't say often used to happen but used to happen when - perhaps - my aunt from up the road came in or something of that sort.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 What was their general attitude when grown ups were talking, were you allowed to join in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Oh well, we were usually all ears. But - we usually used to keep quiet, and - oh I suppose you used to get bored really and - cleared off out. But you had to listen y
ou couldn't but in then if it was - a sort of outsiders - were - were in, you had to do as you were told really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did you have to eat a bit of everything that was cooked?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh yes. Oh yes, and that used to cause - that used to cause lovely argument
s, I remember - not so much with myself but I remember my sister, one of my sisters didn't like cabbage. And there used to be awful arguments. In fact - at one time if we didn't eat it - say for - dinner - it'd be kept until the next dinnertime and we'd h
a
ve - we'd get presented with it then. And - well that might go on for two or three days, until - we won usually. Oh yes, that - that often happened, we often used to object to something or other. And - and as I say, get presented with it quite a number of
 times.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Were there any special rules, table manners?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Oh yes. Oh yes, we had to - we had to hold our knife and fork properly and no elbows on the table and - sort of ask for anything you wanted passed to you. And - we usually used to get chased fo
r - perhaps eating a bit too quick. And - that sort of thing, yes, oh yes, we were - my mother was fairly - fairly strict and - as far - as far as that goes. You see, she'd - I suppose I learnt it in her young days in service - and in house - in house ser
vice and that sort of thing, and of course she considered that - well it was the thing. And - we were always - we were always made to behave ourselves at table. We could get down from table until we asked permission. You couldn't leave the table you see.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 But you could leave before the others had finished?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Oh yes. Oh yes. We often used to say, well can I get down, I want to go out and play or I want to go - something or other. We were always - usually allowed to. Sometimes we'd be made to sit, if t
here was anybody - with us having a meal well we'd have to sit - which - wasn't very - comfortable or enjoyable, just sitting there doing nothing sort of thing, nothing to eat. Just listening to other people - watching other people eat sort of thing.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Could you bring a book to the table or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
I used to - but usually used to get - a clout. I was always a - a terrible one for reading, I was always - mother was always yelling at me for having my head stuck in a book as she'd say. An
d if I did come to the table with a book well I usually used to get told to put the book away, and I used to say, oh yes, I will in a minute, and - I want to finish this page and - perhaps father would - very - very bluntly and emphatically tell me to put
 it away. But there was never any great trouble over it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Your mother served the meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did she serve them in a set order?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Father first. And then - well I don't know there was any particular set order really but father was 
always served first. And - then I suppose it was - well I don't know whether I got served or my two sisters did, we - any rate we all got served. Oh sometimes we - oh yes, we always had the - dishes on the table. Yes. Except sometimes if mother was a bit 
-
 pushed for time like - something was cooking and - father'd come in - and of course he hadn't got a great deal of time, she might, if she was frying something, serve straight from the frying pan, or serve straight from the - soup pot. But usually everyth
ing was always put into proper dishes and - served that way you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 If you were hungry between meals could you have something?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Well, hungry between meals, yes, we used to - have a - a piece of bread and butter or a - a piece of bread putting. A
nd that - reminds me of a story about the piece of bread pudding, which connects up with the - with the old boy that used to sell the shrimps. I'd come in one day from school and my mother was - mother was out. I went to the cupboard to cut a piece of bre
a
d pudding and for some reason or other the knife slipped, and it gashed me right round there, or at least on this hand, right round - no, it was - that hand, yes, right round practically - nearly severed the tendon between the thumb and finger. Of course 
i
t bled like blazes and I was only, I suppose about ten or eleven at the time. Nobody in the house, didn't know what to do, rushed out into the street, was standing at the front - gate, my hand smothered in blood when this old - fisherman came by. He saw -
 
saw my hand, grabbed me, wanted to know what I'd been doing, so - I said I cut it. Well he said, have you - where's the coal cellar? So I wondered what the man wanted. He grabbed - he held; my hand - wrist in a very tight grip, dragged me through the hous
e
 and I showed him where the coal cellar was, he opened the door and grabbed an awful big cobweb and slapped it on. And he said, where is your handkerchief? So I gave him my handkerchief, and he tied that on and he said, now don't take that off for - 'til 
tomorrow. Well I did, I left it on there and - do you know, the next day that had healed up. And there's no make on the hand at all. I - I really think he sort of saved my life but - with a filthy cobweb, smothered in }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 coal dust}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 , but there was something abou
t the cobweb that - had a - a sort of - a stringent property and got the thing together. I always remember that, the cobweb and I've - I've never attempted to do it since; although I suggested to people they should do it. But - oh yes, we were always allo
w
ed to - well - allowed to have something between meals if we - if we wanted it, but not too much. We usually used to get told, oh you'll have your dinner in a few minutes, or something of that sort. But - we usually used to get our way, and have a cake an
d - or a piece of cake or a piece of bread pudding or a piece of bread and butter, whichever was - whichever was going.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You said you weren't chastised?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 By that you mean - a sort of beating?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 But they would give you what you called a clout?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh yes, you got a smack at the side of the head.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Was that quite often really?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Well - yes, if - if you'd - were - sort of argumentative or wouldn't do - what you were told right away. It was merely a hit on the side of th
e head. Oh no, there was never - any - beltings sort of - some youngsters used to get I know. We used to have a cane at home. Oh we were always threatened with it. But - I can't say that - we ever got it. The only places - the only place I ever got the ca
ne was in school of course. But - that wasn't very often either, as far as that goes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 What sort of things did your parents get angry about and punish you for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Well if we - sort of - didn't do something - when we were told to sort of thing. Perhap
s it'd be a case of - you know, we'd - table we'd - perhaps bet a bit obstreperous, argumentative or something of that sort and - you'd be told - keep quiet or stop it or something of that sort and you didn't, well I'd usually end up with a - perhaps a - 
a smack you see. There was no - real - sort of - crime that you could say you got it for really. Just really being - not doing what you ought to do. In other words not behaving yourself, put it that way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 How would you say that they expected you to behave towards them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Oh well, yes, respectfully and - obediently. That's the - the best way of summing it up really. You had to sort of - do things, I mean, if you were told to go to bed, which - of course in the summer one usually used to job against be
cause about eight o'clock at night when it was still daylight - well you sort of dawdled over it, you'd most probably get - a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 clout}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  and sent up, sort of thing, but - that's - that's about all really.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 What about behaving to your sisters?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh well
 we used to have our little squabbles, between - between us. Especially when I was - say - let's see, they - they were of course most - younger than me, there's - what - bout four or five years difference between the - myself and my oldest sister, and my 
o
ldest sister had - was a bit independent. My youngest sister - was - was mother's favourite and they used to - have a terrible habit of - pinching my things. The sort of ties - and that sort of thing, and - we'd perhaps have little squabbles over that. Bu
t - we were - quite a - a friendly, cheerful family, with not a great of -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 They didn't interfere between you and your sisters?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Well, yes, we'd probably get told to stop it and that sort of thing, and perhaps that was where we - get more clouts th
an anything else, but not very often really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 What did they say if another child hurt you, should you hit back or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh yes. Oh yes. Father always said, go and hit - go and hit him back. But - usually used to keep out of those things, not - tha
t didn't happen very often. I can't remember having any real good fights. As some youngsters do have.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Can you remember birthdays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Yes, well we never made much - much of birthdays really. I mean, there were never any birthday presents, or - birth
day parties. And nothing really special was done about birthdays. They were usually - presents and that sort of thing were usually confined to Christmastime. There was really no - no fuss or bother made about it, it passed over in the ordinary course of e
vents.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Can you describe Christmas?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Oh yes, well Christmas - well before Christmas of course it was always a case of - as youngsters we always used to go round the shops because then of course they - always decorated shop windows up in special way
s. For instance I can remember one shop even now - when they had all their windows, each window was - decorated as a suite of - as a room. Set out as it would be in a - sort of - very well to do house. You'd have - the - the kitchen with all the - eatable
s
 and things all spread round. Of course it was advertising goods sold by the shop of course. Then you had the next room - perhaps a bedroom with all sorts of - beautiful things spread around. Then you had a dining room, you had all the - the dummies - dum
m
y figures dressed as if it was a party and you had the streamers all round and everything else. Then of course there were the toyshops. There weren't so many of the mechanical things that you have now. But of course we always used to go round surveying al
l
 the toy shops, choosing what we - what we would like and possibly never get. And comparing prices and all this sort of thing. And then of course we always used to ed up about a week before Christmas with buying a - packet of - chain paper, that was strip
s
 of coloured paper, we - and we used to take them home of course and persuade mother to make us some flour paste, and then we used to spend hours in the evenings - making the - taking these strips of paper, bending them round into a circle, sticking them 
t
wo ends together, and then putting the next one through and so making a chain. So that we could decorate the house. That was really the - sort of only way you could get decorations at that time, later - of course they did start selling - the rather - fanc
y
 - paper chains which were cut out of paper and they spread out. But we always made our - as - as youngsters we always made our chains, and then - Christmas Eve, well I usually used - used to have to go out with - with mother shopping, because as I mentio
ned she was deaf and she couldn't hear in the noise. But on Christmas Eve night usually about nine o'clock, we'd go down - I'd go down with my father perhaps to the market - to - get the - oranges and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 nuts}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  and that sort of thing. The market of course used to be all lit then with }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 naphtha}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 flare lamps and it used to be a wonderful exciting sight to youngsters. They used to put their stalls out about - two days before Christmas Eve, and set them all out and then they'd - they'd sleep beside them all - all the ni
ght, to keep them going, and of course it was always a bustle and - there was all sorts of things - on sale. All sorts of novelties and things of a penny and - that sort of thing, but - was really a - a wonderful world of delight really Christmastime then
.
 Christmas Day of course well, Christmas Eve we'd - when we went to bed we usually hang up - a stocking and - Christmas morning of course we'd - first thing we'd do was dive for the stocking as soon as we woke. What we'd usually find, an orange and some n
u
ts and - some sweets and - perhaps a little penny toy or something of that sort in it, and we used to be highly delighted with that. Sometimes we'd - get something else. Like a book or - I'd get a book or something of that sort, but not very much. It was 
n
ot until very much later, towards - well after I started to go to work really that we began to give presents in the house at all. It was usually small things like that, but they were just as - just as important to us and - as even the sort of tricycle or 
something you give the youngster now costing pounds. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 
Then Christmas Day of course the great thing was dinner, breakfast of course we'd have and then off we'd go out like a Sunday, we'd - perhaps go out with father who'd go out to - meet one or two of his wo
rkmates and - they'd go to have a drink and - of course - as after 1910 we'd have to stop outside because it was 1910 or}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15017164  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 
19ll, we'd have to stop outside. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Because of the silly law they brought in that youngsters weren't allowed to go into pubs. Well any rate we'd usually be given a - a glass of ginger }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 beer}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 and a - a - a large arrowroot biscuit, usually - a big biscuit about - four inches diameter, which used to cost about a penny I think, and they used to be a sort of sweet dry floury thing. But they were }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 really}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 lovely and we used to sort of wait for father and took them in we'd all go home. And - dinner would be ready. Well this of course was - bird of some sort, turkey or - or - or whatsname, and always - plum pudding, and of course I've forgotten to say th
at in the weeks before Christmas there'd always be the - mixing of the plum pudding, and - dropping in the silver threepenny bits and the little china dolls, which were about - oh about an inch long. We'd all have to have a stir of the pudding, which usua
lly used to be mixed with - some old ale, which father used to have to go and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid920634\charrsid15017164 get}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 but - used to - have an extra one for himself on the way. And then of course we'd have dinner, as I say, the - bird of some sort or other and all the - the vegetables, sometim
es we'd have beef as well, or a piece pork, it was more often pork than beef at Christmastime. Then the - Christmas pudding afterwards, sometimes that would be set alight and sometimes it wouldn't. And then after that of course there was - usually - in th
e
 afternoon we would have a sort of - comatose state - but - we usually used to gorge ourselves with oranges and nuts and - perhaps some sweets, there usually used to be some sweets about somewhere. And then in the evening, we'd - well - sort of - make our
 
own fun. We used to join in when we were sharing the house with the other people, we used to all join in together, and - the man of the other family, he was an ex-sailor as a matter of fact, an ex-Naval - Royal Navy, and he used to have a - always remembe
r
 this because it happened every year and we never got tired of it, he always used to go out and take myself and his own son, we were both about the same age, and he'd do us up in sheets like choirboys and do up like a - a vicar, and we'd always march in, 
i
n procession, and then he'd start - what he called a - a recitation. And I can remember the thing now. It always started off - it was a dark and stormy night, and the wind howled dismally, and the chief of the brigands said unto Antonia, Antonio, tell us 
a
 story. And Antonio's story was - it was a dark and stormy night and the wind howled dismally, and the chief of the brigand said unto Antonio, Antonio tell us a story. And so it went on, until we used to throw things at him to make him stop. But - that wa
s
 always done on Christmas night. And the rest of that, well we used to just - play games perhaps sing, we had no music in the house. There was no musical instruments in the house but we used to - do something or other. And then usually about midnight on C
h
ristmas night we always decided, the whole lot of us, would always go out for a walk, children and all. And - oh we'd perhaps walk round the streets and across - a nearby common which used to be quite exciting for - for us youngsters. Not only of course t
he lateness of the hour but very often of course - it was a frosty night and you'd have the frost on the grass and it used to look really lovely. Then }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 Boxing Day}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 , well that was a day for visiting, it was just like an ordinary day - glorified sort of thing. But, that was about all there was about Christmas really.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 What games did you play?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Oh - postman's knock or something of that sort. Hunt the thimble. Perhaps guessing games. Things like that, very simple little - but nothing - really exciting.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Were there any sing-songs at other times?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
No, I can't remember any - except at Christmastime, was about the only time that I can remember. Of course in other peoples' houses they might have had them, especially if they had - a piano or something of that sort, we never had you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You did take a newspaper didn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You didn't tell me which it was?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Well quite frankly I was only trying to think the other day what it was. And - I really can't, I can remember the Sunda
y paper - was the People. Oh wait a minute, the Daily - was there a - no, there was - there was a paper called the Leader. The Morning Leader. That was the one, yes, that just suddenly come to my mind. The Morning Leader and later on - of course - after 1
9
14 it was I think the Express we had. But the Leader and the People on Sunday, yes. Of course they were - father used to - read those, but I used to - used to read them, I was never prevented from reading the newspaper. Mother used to read them but of cou
r
se, as I say, neither of them were - had a great deal of schooling. Mother could only read a newspaper if she followed it though with her finger and read it out loud. And it was not very often she read much of the newspaper really, she might sit down - la
te in the evening, say round about nine o'clock and just look at it and that's about all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Were there any magazines?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 No. No. I - we never had any magazines. As I mentioned I think I used to - I was never allowed to read the Magnet and the Gem and 
those sort of things. They were about the only magazines that came into the house. They came in the wrong way, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 What about books?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Well books, there weren't many books in the house. Except our school prizes. They were mostly Henty and Ballantyne and - }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 Fennymore}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 Cooper and - that sort of thing. Which - I used to - I had for a long - as a matter of fact it's only quite recent - well - a matter of about - oh after I came back from Africa that I got rid of them all, I'm sorry now I did. But - I al
ways had books. Because of course I used to have them from the - local - public library. And - I'm afraid sometimes if I had a penny or tuppence in my pocket I used to go round the - the - tuppenny box or penny box on the bookstalls, if I could find any o
n
 the market. I - used to find all sorts of funny things there, in fact I did have - a volume of - about a first edition really of Johnson's Dictionary - which I picked up. Yes. And my mother went and threw it away while I was away. Yes. But - I think some
times I - I used to collect - used to get those if I had the money you see, it was not very often we had money really. But -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did you have any pocket money from your parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Never given me. No. If - I - sort of - earnt it. Sometimes we'd have pe
rhaps a ha'penny, we often used to ask mother for a ha'penny going to school. Well of course a ha'penny used to be a lot of money in those days, there was a lot you could do with a ha'penny. We'd - perhaps go into the local sweet shop and spend a farthing
 
and it'd take you about ten minutes to make up your mind what you're going to spend a farthing on. You'd either get - a farthingsworth of tiger nuts, or - a licorice ribbon, - which was a long string - length of licorice about so long, marked out into lac
e
s and you used to peel off a thin thread. Well that'd last you quite a long while. Then again - we'd perhaps be extravagant and have a ha'porth of toffee. Stick jaw, which would last you all day. Then there were - aniseed balls we used to get. Yes, gob st
oppers. Aniseed balls. And another thing we used to like as youngsters - although why I don't know - that was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 chloradine}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 tablets. Yes, it is, they were usually sold in shops as - for colds. They were supposed to be good for colds. But - they used to have a very strong - sort of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 peppery}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  taste, and - they used to be rather nice and we often used to buy those. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 
Then again of course there was always a licorice stick, that was a stick of - licorice, about so long, which you could suck for hours, it had a very aperient affect that you never really realized. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 And then of course there were locusts. We often used to buy locusts, locust beans, and chew those. Oh there were all sorts of funny little things we used to - buy, but - as I say, a ha'penny used to be - quite a 
- quite a bit of wealth really, especially when you were spending as farthings you see. If anybody - perhaps if - I was out with my father and - he called on somebody he knew they might give me a - a penny, of course - a bright new penny was always the th
ing to give to - kiddies.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Your father would actually take you out to visit his friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Oh yes, he'd take me round - take me out with him as well for a walk you see on Sunday mornings. And he would call on somebody he knew, one of his }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 workmates}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  and they usually }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 adjourned}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 to the local. And that's when I usually used to get the penny or sometimes I did - they used - stay outside - or - you know, to - I'd usually get the - perhaps the glass of ginger beer or - the arrowroot biscuit. Oh yes -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You can remember going inside though can you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh yes. Oh yes, because that bill didn't come in 'til - what - about 1911 I think it was, when I think it was - Lloyd George wasn't it.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You were saying you remember the buskers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh yes. 'h yes, yo
u often used to get - a big - people coming round and they just push open the door of the bar and they just stand so they had it open a gap like this and they'd - sing away and really - usually a raucous voice, perhaps have a little - folding harmonium wi
t
h them, which one of them would play you see. Oh yes, you often used to - or perhaps they'd have a - a cornet, and would blare out the Killarney or something of that. Everybody talking in the bar, it used to be an absolute - jumble of sound which - was mo
st amazing. Oh yes, I've - I've often been in with my father and mother and - perhaps my aunt and uncle if we were out on a Saturday night. They'd call in. And - of course I used to have to keep quiet and all this sort of thing. But - I used to - go -

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did your mother go out by herself at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Not very far, there was usually either myself or my father with her, because of course of her deafness you see. She - she couldn't - if she got into a noise - where there was a lot of bustle around her she re
ally couldn't hear properly. And - so she always used to like one or the other of us to - go with her. If - she was shopping. And of course we had to carry the bags. Carry the shopping. There was a method in the madness as far as that goes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 So she didn't have any interests outside the home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 No. No. Mother's interest was - fore her home and - that was all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 But you say your father would normally go out to the pub on a weekday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh yes, he'd always go out in the evening to have his - his d
rink. And - on Sunday - Sunday lunchtime he'd always go out and have one you see. And - as I say, perhaps he'd go round and see somebody that he knew - and they'd go and have one. In later years of course he - he used to go to one of the working }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 men\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  club
s. He - belonged - well that was in later years. Although - he belonged to a club as far as that goes when I was - when I was at school. Yes, he belonged to the - strange to say, the local - Conservative association. And - we often used to go down there b
e
cause of course - after this - idiotic bill that we were talking about, they - he used to have the special room that children were allowed to go in you see, there used to be the big dance hall as a matter of fact, and mother - ladies weren't allowed in th
e bar so that we - mother and the rest of us would go in there and of course }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 there\rquote d}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 be other kids there and we - mother would have her drink there and - we'd play about. We were often in - often there. Usually - say Saturdays or - Sundays. And - sometimes 
they'd have a - a sort of concert or something of that sort, which we used to go to.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You said he was keen on cricket, was that after he came back though?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh he was keen on cricket when he was in the Army. Yes. He used to go onto the local common
 and watch cricket matches in the summer. But he usually }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 used}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  to do that in - by himself.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Any other interest in sport?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 No. Except - I think he went to see the Cup Final once, that was when it was played at Crystal Palace. But apart from that he
 - he wasn't greatly interested in sport.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Derby Day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Well, he'd - perhaps have a bob on, but - that's all. He was not a - he was not a betting man or a sporting man by any means.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You mentioned the sick club didn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 No other savings clubs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Well, only the - Christmas club for - that sort of thing you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Was that one in the pub?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 That was a pub, yes, local pub that he used to visit you see. Nearly every pub ran one of those in those days. And - and 
- you usually - sort of - well went to whichever pub - sort of provided the - the best - return sort of thing you see. As long as you were a - a - known in the pub you were always allowed into it and - and you just - did it as you - as you wanted. Sick cl
u
b, yes, he belonged to the Oddfellowes, which - of course helped there. There were other clubs of course, there were clothing clubs - or at least - -that's - they used to be called - actually they were mostly tallymen as they used to call them, they used 
t
o come round you know - sell you all sorts of stuff, pay a penny a - pay a bit a week. But we never used those. I don't know of any other clubs that - he didn't belong to any sporting clubs. There was the political club but - I don't think he was particul
arly - politically minded as far as that goes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Do you know what his views were at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Oh yes, they were Conservative in the - in my schooldays. Afterwards - after the '14/'18 war in the twenties - he - became rather Labour, and then he - well I don't know - became Conservative again. So that I don't think he was really - deep seated - }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 political}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  views at all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Can you remember why he held those Conservative views?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 I think it was merely - the countryman's outlook - really. You see, most c
ountry men were very Conservative, not only in politics but in other things. And I think it was the same thing there, he was perhaps - a bit up to about 1914 he was quite interested in them, we always used to - election times we always had - the local can
d
idates bill up in the window and that sort of thing. And he used to go to - meetings, in fact he'd take me to them, I've - I've been to meetings and I heard - Lord Charles Berriford, F.E. Smith, H.A.L. Fisher, people of that caliber. Even in the days of t
he }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 suffragettes}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 . But of course - I suppose - I didn't understand so }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid920634\charrsid15017164 much}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 of it but - I used to go to them and used to thoroughly enjoy them. All I can remember another - election period, we had a big poster up in the window, that was the famous - election - of - well Joseph }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 Chamberlain}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 against the - importation of Chinese labour into South Africa. - So that was before 1910. I can remember an awful big poster we had in the window there of - gang of Chinamen, all yellow - all painted and coloured yellow, all d
one up in chains, like a chain gang.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 That would have been a Liberal poster.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Would it? Well - I don't know how we had - came to it, but I know he wasn't Liberal. But - of course - again we often used - every - Sunday of course in the local marke
t place there were always political meetings. And - in the - autumn, if there was nowhere else to go, mother didn't want to go out and that sort of thing, father - used to - go down and perhaps stand in the crowd and listen, and sometimes he'd take me wit
h
 him. The main one of those of course was the Labour party, they used to have always a wagon drawn up, strange to say, SI can still see the spot where they drew it up because it was - was the end of the public convenience. They always used to have a big -
 silk trade union banner behind. And - there was always }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 a meeting}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 there, I remember hearing Will Crooks, who of course - was our local M.P. at one time, hear him many times speaking from there. And then you'd have all sorts of other }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid920634\charrsid15017164 meetings}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  all round it was a sort of - a speakers corner from Hyde Park, only it wasn't on grass it was on cobble stones.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Quite a few speakers all at once?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh yes, all round - religious - religious - Salvation Army and everybody else. They'd all be going hammer and tong
s. On Sunday evenings. Sometimes you'd get it in the - in the week. You can perhaps get a midweek meeting. The I.L.P. or the - Socialist party and - oh all sorts of people used to - in fact - that carried on until - late in the thirties - forties.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 And you went along yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
And afterwards - yes, as a boy. Although I was - perhaps not with my father - I used to go down and stand round listening to them. Oh yes, often - often used to do that. It was one of the things to do on a Sunday evening, if
 there was nothing else on you see, because - I mean, in those days there weren't any pictures and that sort of thing, you couldn't go to the cinema. There was only church or - or church or politics.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did your father actually belong to any party?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
I couldn't say definitely, I know he belonged to the Conservative club. And I think a condition of that was that you belonged to the party. So that he might have belonged to it that way, but I never really - really knew
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did he ever canvas?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 No. No. He never took any active part. Oh no, there was - he never did - never did anything like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Do you know what your mother's views were?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Well - of course - before }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 women\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 suffrage}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  I - and even afterwards I suppose she was just the same as 
father, she followed father. I think everybody did then, wives usually used to - vote according to their husband and - children used to follow suit really. I mean, elections we used to - sort of join in as youngsters, we usually - the local candidate'd ha
v
e a - a wagon going round all bedecked with his posters and - we kids used to get rides in it and sing - you know, vote, vote for - somebody or other. We used to think that quite high - high delight. And I must say that elections were much more - exciting
 things then than they are now. And of course they lasted much longer.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did you go to listen to the poll being declared then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 No, because it usually used to be very late. Usually used to be in the early hours of the morning, I can't - I don't know
 that father ever did. Oh - once they did. I wasn't - I wasn't present, because I was in the Army, but I know - it was during - it was after the war I think was over, the election then, they did all go down to the local - local Conservative club - and - t
h
ey had sort of party in the early hours of the morning and - they defeated the local Labour candidate, and I know all the Labour party people, so they told me, all advanced on the Conservative club and were going to raid it. And - this Conservative club h
a
d a very big - the bar had a flat roof, so that you could get on it you see and it faced the street. And I know all the men and they barricaded the ladies in the dance hall and got onto this roof, with all the missiles they could, including - including a 
c
ouple of fire hoses. But as I say I wasn't here, so I don't know, but it was - it was - I think about the first election after 1914 - after the 1918 war was over. When things were getting a little bit - but of course we had been Labour, we had been a Labo
u
r Borough before then. Because - one of the very first because Will Crooks was - was our member for some years. And I think before then it had been Liberal. Really. And of course as you say - mentioned, that poster, was a Liberal poster, it's quite possib
l
e that father might have been Liberal then, and - possibly was because - of course a lot of the Liberals did become - did come over to the Conservative party. It might have been then that - change over came. But - as I say, I wasn't particularly intereste
d in politics then as a schoolboy except - for the excitement really.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 There were people at that time who sometimes felt that pressure from their employers to vote one way or another.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 No, it didn't apply in father's way because of course he was in government employee you see, in Royal }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 Arsenal}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
, and of course it didn't - it didn't affect. I agree with you, in - in the - in the country it would. I think - most of my uncles for instance were farm workers, would naturally vote - Conservative - because 
of course - they had to keep their jobs, and I think that gave rise to an argument father always used to come out with that - the ballot was never secret. Oh he always used to say that. But of course, the thing is, I think it came from - the countryside o
f him, where of course - I mean - people naturally voted according to their - according to their job. And so it gave rise to that. Oh yes, he often used to say that one.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You mentioned about different clothes and food on Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did your parents think it was wrong to play on Sundays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Oh no. No, no. We used to get - we used to play, but - we were usually chased off in - the afternoons to - Sunday school. Oh yes, that was very strict. I did of course - my young sisters didn't when the
y were sort of babies, but afterwards they used to go to the same Sunday school, it was - a very low Evangelical affair I know. Most of the - teachers, and the people that ran it - were - oh Baptist or something or other, they used to hold - outdoor meeti
n
gs, I know, religious meetings I know, they were nearly all, strange to say, foremen in the Royal Arsenal. But - they used to look after us quite well and we always used to have a very good - Sunday school treat. Far better one that - the church Sunday sc
h
ool did. Although we never went out of the - out of the Borough. The two leading lights of the - school who we very seldom saw were - an very old couple, an old Colonel and his wife who lived - in a very gig house on the top of Shooters Hill, it had a lot
 
of ground, meadows and that sort of thing. And consequently our Sunday school treat always used to be there. But it - the Sunday school was held in the school, in the same street as I lived in, and the school I used to attend in the week. And - we always 
u
sed to assemble there in the morning of the school treat you see, all with our - tickets on, and usually with a - with a brown mug, and - then we'd all form into procession and usually with a band, they usually used to get a band from somewhere, and the t
o
ddlers were always in somebody's - coal cart cleaned up for the day, and off we'd process all through the Borough, it - was all uphill all the way, to this field. Then we'd have - sports and a jolly good tuck in and all this sort of thing. But in the even
i
ng, I always remember it, because - the main - the road to go part of the way was merely a cart track then but is now a - a well made road, and we always used to come - be dished out in the evening and - forming up in procession with long canes with a Chi
n
ese paper lantern on with a candle in it, and the candles were always lit and we all used to go - time this so that it was just dusk. And then the whole of us, somewhere about three hundred or four hundred youngsters and grown ups - would all process back
 
to the school, through three streets with all these lanterns, it used to be a wonderful sight. And all singing at the same time. It was usually - a great day. And as I say, it was far better than the - church school, I remember we once - changed over to t
h
e church Sunday school, because we thought they were having a better - better - treat and their treat was to a place called Riddlesdown, which is out near Croydon. Well - we went on this treat. Went by train as a matter of fact, which was a great thing of
 
course. Well when we got there it was just a - an open expanse of country and - oh - were herded into a barn for tea and it wasn't much of a tea like we used to get in the other place, sitting on the grass, and I - if I remember rightly it rained. So we w
e
ren't impressed with the church Sunday school and we never - never went there again. But - oh we went to that Sunday school for years. In fact I think I've still got upstairs somewhere a Bible which was presented me as a first prize from there - for somet
h
ing or other. But - oh yes, we went there fore - for years to - to that school. In fact I think I went there until - well I left school really. 'Til I was about fourteen. And my sisters carried on after me and I knew quite a number of the - the people tha
t ran it, of course as I say, they were mostly foremen and of course - there here was a social structure in Woolwich which was rather - peculiar. At least, I won't say peculiar, it was perhaps natural. Woolwich of course depended on - the Army, it was a }
{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 garrison}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 town, on the Royal Arsenal and the Royal Dockyard, Woolwich Dockyard which was merely store more than anything else of the Navy. Well - the town really had been built around the barracks and the Arsenal. The Arsenal stretched a long way along the riv
er. And of course the old town had - gone along with it. Well that older part of the town was merely really occupied by the - the ordinary workmen, the working class as you might as well say. And it extended up - to - the - up by the barracks, I mean wher
e
 my house was we were all ordinary working class. Quite a lot of the people were ex-service - ex-soldiers who'd come out and settled - come out of the Army and settled there you see. And - as you went up Shooters Hill, which was - in the middle of the bor
ough, you got newer houses, and they were mostly occupied by the - the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 artisan}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
, the - mechanic and the foremen. Until - after - well say about 1905/6, they began to build on the other side of Shooters Hill, which was still in the borough, in a place called 
Eltham, they began to build that up and the - people that were in better jobs moved out to there, you see. And consequently Woolwich itself, round about the Arsenal, and the dockyard, became - slummy. There's no doubt about that. But as you gradually came
 
up the hill so you got away from that. And got into - a perhaps - houses that were running down. And then you gradually went up. Here and there you'd get an isolated patch - of houses - which were - had - when they were first built were sort of away from 
the - on the suburbs of the town as it were, which were occupied by whole families who were - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 trades people}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 in fact. But they gradually moved out. And of course - again, you had Woolwich Common stretching - from the barracks right up to Shooters Hill, and that was lined with old }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 Georgian}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 houses which unfortunately they're pulling down now, they were all occupied by - officers. Well of course officers in those days were - moneyed people, and of course that was the scene of - what shall I say, the society life
 of - of Woolwich. Then you had. The Royal Academy which again was the student officers, again moneyed people. And - so on, and the barracks themselves were - well sort of isolated area and of course occupied by all - infantry - well all branches of the -
 the Army.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 As a child how far do you think you would have been aware of all these differences?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Will, you were aware of the fact that up the hill people were perhaps better off than you were. You see. You were certainly aware of that, I was always aware of that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You were half way up the hill?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 We were partly up the hill, we were on the edge - of the older part of the town. But as you went }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid920634\charrsid15017164 further}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  away - and I was mentioning about - delivering newspapers. Well most of those deliveries wer
e up the hill you see. In this - what shall I say, people who were perhaps - perhaps better off, perhaps they weren't. But you would - you could always see it because - they had - bigger newspaper bills, for instance, they had magazines and - all this sor
t of thing you see. Then again - another job I had was in the local grocers shop and off }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 license}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
, delivery boy, well you - you recognised it there, because you have - people - who would - order - instead of going out to the pub they order it. Consumed at ho
me sort of thing. You see, it was a little bit too - not quite the thing to go to a pub. There again, you have people - which - you always recognised were the snobs as we used to call them, who'd order - quart bottles of burgundy, Australian burgundy at t
h
at by the way. There was man - and - you - you'd notice them too from a question of dress. In a street just near me which had - which was bigger - much bigger houses - there was one man who often - I worked under him afterwards - well you always used to s
e
e him going to work about nine o'clock in the morning always in a morning coat. You see, he was - a manager of a department in a furniture store. I don't think - I don't think he got such an extraordinary screw, but he always - went in a morning coat. Exc
e
pt in the summer when he'd wear an alpaca coat, and a straw hat. But he always carried a walking stick, and he always had a gold watch chain. And another thing you always noticed too - that if those people ever did go into pubs - they'd never go in a publ
i
c bar, it was always in the saloon bar, you see, you wouldn't - you - you'd always tell there was a - a difference. I remember this man particularly because - it was - it was to his house I used to have to - always take round - what was it - a dozen Whitb
read stout and a quart bottle of burgundy. Man named }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13920496\charrsid15017164 Nelson}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
. As I say, I came to work under him afterwards. - But you got that, and then of course in the town itself - a lot of the big - big draper - big drapers shop principally, their staff lived in. Lived
 on the premises. As single people. And they were always dressed in black. Oh yes, the women had to be dressed in black while behind the counter. Oh you couldn't wear colours there. It was not until - oh I don't know - oh a long while after the war that -
 people were allowed to dress out of black. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did you have any contact with those living in the shops?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Yes. We did get in - get to know somebody there once. And - but they were never very happy there as far as that goes, they always had to
 be in by nine o'clock at night, even when they - even though they may be - fifty. They had to be in nine o'clock at night.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Were you brought up to treat these different sorts of people in different ways?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Well you were always - brought - brought 
up to sort of - pay respect to - other people. I mean, you weren't - you weren't expected to cow tow to them. But - well anybody older than yourself - you were always sort of - expected to - address them as sir if you ever did - in fact I do now as a matt
er of fact. Just with sheer habit. But, you weren't - it was never sort of rammed into you that there was any - difference in status. But you could sense it, you could see it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 It's not like you said in the village?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh no, in the village was diffe
rent, but of course of course there you were - you were more of a - a tied - a tied community. You see you were tied to your farm cottage. And - and that sort of thing. But in town, no - there was not - not that but - you always did know there was a - a d
i
fference, and you sort of always - did - yes - you did - sort of treat them with a certain amount of respect you know. I remember one young - young - youngster when I was at school, he asked me to go round to his house. Well his father was a foreman in th
e
 Arsenal and I went round, and oh dear, I was the most - I - I recognise it now, I had most uncomfortable and he had a most elaborate train set which I never in my wildest dreams possessed. And - mother fussed around. Mother was beautifully - nicely dress
e
d in the afternoon and all this sort of thing. But - I only went there about twice because I was so uncomfortable, you see. You got - people who were that way did try to ape something else, really. You did, you felt it, oh yes. Oh yes. And I do now. I mea
n, all - all the - the pretentiousness - it actually annoys me. I love to - take them down a peg if I can.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Would there be anyone who would call your father sir?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh I don't think so. No. There was only us as youngsters used to -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Would another boy call your father sir?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Oh yes, I think other boys would - the same as among ourselves. If you would - is - somebody older - or if you didn't call him sir you'd call him mister, you see. You' always give him the title or mister at any rate. I doesn't matter who it was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did you think that the big gulf was really between the foremen and the rest or between craftsmen and labourers?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Well I should say there was a - a gulf between fore - foremen and - and the craftsmen. And then of course a -
 between the craftsmen and the labourers, because of course the foreman was the boss as far as that goes, you see, in the - in the Arsenal. And - I suppose would have been in any other firm really. So there was a - a certain - gap between them, in - in st
ructure, in social structure.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 How would you define the lower group?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 The - coster}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14378793\charrsid15017164 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  and the - oh the slummy part, well you just - you just regarded them as - sort of - ne'er-do-wells, not worth - thinking about really. I mean, there you did - aroun
d - one very old street in - in Woolwich, which was right against the Arsenal, called the Warren, which had been the original site of - of the Arsenal, which was a terrible slum, and along the waterside, of course - you got a lot of people employed on the
 river - bargemen and that sort of thing. And of course the river was greatly used then and much more than it is now. Well there they were considered the roughest of the rough, really. And - very often they were, they were real - rough 'uns. }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14378793\charrsid15017164 And that's - th
at's still - I think to a certain extent - applies even now, because we always used to - you always used to consider - I mean people talking would always sort of consider that - we were a little bit better than people that lived in North Woolwich which wa
s now on the other side of the river - they were mostly dockers and that sort of thing and they were considered absolutely rough and we were much better than them, sort of thing. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
You see, there was always that - sort of little difference. I don't say it was - very pronounced but - you always - in conversation and that sort of thing, oh those rough people.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Were there families whose children you weren't allowed to play with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 No. No I don't think so. I can't recall anybody.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You were talking about these poorer people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh yes, we always - they always used to regard them as - rough and - very much - out of - the running, sort of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Can you think of a family that you knew at all that you felt were rough?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 No, I don't think we had 
much to do with them. I didn't know anybody in that part of the world. Or in that part of - Woolwich or London. You used to get some people that were - sort of regarded as - rather - low, I remember people next door to me. But they were quite nice people,
 
they were very big family, and the mother was rather a feckless sort of woman. The father was a man who was - well immersed in Radical politics - and after became a Labour man, and - he - was also - had in his younger days organised excursion - train excu
r
sions to Yarmouth and one thing and another. Well they were a family that were always sort of - in debt. They were always popping in wanting to borrow something and something of that sort. And they were - I know mother used to regard them as being rather 
-
 not quite - the thing. You see, you used to get that but as regards the - the waterside people - there were - I didn't - we didn't know any of them but we used - to see them of course. And you used to get the youngsters running about in ragged trousers a
nd perhaps - no shoes and socks, as far as that goes. I mean, that did happen and - but only in that sort of - milieu really. Actually.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Who would you feel were the most important people in the area where you lived?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Well the most important people in the borough of course were the - the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14378793\charrsid15017164 
trades people}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
, I - I should say, the shopkeepers and the - and the moneyed people who lived in the bigger houses, and then again I suppose you - form - from sort of - building up society you'd call the - the Army of
ficers again were - considered sort of up there. Although they were - a collection on their own actually. Rather separate and - than mixing in with the civilian you see. But as regards the civilian population I suppose - the most important people were the
 - the big }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14378793\charrsid15017164 trades people}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  who had money. Were able to have their - carriage and pair and - live in a fairly big house.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did you feel at that time that it was possible to move up from one class to another, or to move down?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Very I - I suppose it was 
always dinned into one that by becoming a white collar worker you'd moved up. You see, and it was always - not exactly dinned into me but - I know it was always mother's ambition that I should have been a - a white collar worker and - somehow or other it 
w
as always my own ambition. I wanted to - I don't know whether I was - I can't say that I was extra brainy but I always thought I wanted to use my - my brain more than - my brawn sort of thing. I had no aptitude for - for hand work at all, at school I used
 
to hate metal work and woodwork were the two - things that used to drive me to drink. I always - I can never see the sense of having to go to school and - and - go - spend an afternoon - filing away at a - iron bar to make it into a square one. It always 
u
sed to be - seem to me to be a waste of time, but - it was the other side of - of school that I was more interested in, and then - not so much the mathematical side but the art side, the arts have always - the arts side, have always interested me more tha
n
 anything else, because at school I often used to - get - when we had assembly I'd suddenly find the headmaster reading out one of my essays or something of that sort to the whole assembled school. Much to my annoyance or - otherwise. And - for the last s
i
x months I was at school I spent - every day sitting by myself in the hall, not undergoing tuition at all but - drawing - maps for the school. Illustrating - various campaigns like Prince Charlie's march through England and - Marlborough's marches through
 
- Europe and Napoleon and that - those - those maps were hung in the school for - oh years after I left. That was my - my side of it. Mechanical side I never was and I - I'm no good now at mechanicals. Really if I try to saw a piece of wood I can never sa
w it straight.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Was there anyone at that time who was said to be a real lady or a real gentleman?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
No, I can't recall - anybody really that was - that didn't have to work. That had a sort of private income was always regarded as a lady or a gentle
man. And there were some round about us. But we knew - by name but not personally, because they were always considered - right out of the - out of this world sort of thing as far as we were concerned. But they were always helpful when it came, as I say, i
f you went to the hospital to - get a governor's ticket or something of that sort you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Did you notice the difference between the people - was it mainly the foremen who went to the chapel - do you feel there was a difference in church and chapel?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Well - no, I won't say that, it was only the case that - this particularly Sunday school were mostly all chapel people. I can't say that - there was any - any - church - division of church and chapel among the foremen really, I think they were all mixe
d up, actually.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 On the whole the church congregation didn't strike you as being different?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Oh no. Oh no. No. Except that the - chapel people were a little more severe in their outlook towards life and - would - very often - bring religion to con
versations when - it wasn't necessary and that sort of thing. But - I don't think there was any great deal of difference between them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 What about the Catholics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh well, the Catholics were - there were plenty of them in Woolwich, just below us a
t the bottom of the hill there was a Catholic church, and - well - it was never regarded with much favour. They were always considered the poor. We had Catholic neighbours next to us. And - next door. And - there was not much - sort of social intercourse 
b
etween us and them. Although - their children grew up - with us. But - they were Irish as a matter of fact. And - all the - all the Catholics were considered a little bit - well - you know - really. I think it was more a case there of - of religious preju
dice than anything else, actually. Because I remember - in the Woolwich dockyard, when I was a youngster, they had a church there, a Church of England church, which was high church, and they started - using }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14378793\charrsid15017164 incense}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  and having processions round the outside o
f the church and everything else and there was nearly a riot. You see, it was more a - it was more a religious prejudice than it was - a social prejudice really, actually.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Was there much sort of criminal activity in your parts?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 No, I don't think
 so. You'd get plenty of drunks and disorderlies - on Saturday nights, when - they used to - a thing you never see nowadays - when they used to - if there was somebody was so drunk and incapable they couldn't walk they'd send for the bier and tug him on t
h
e bier, strap - wrap him up and cart him off to the police station that way. They had a bier which was by the way was like a stretcher on wheels, and it had a hood over one end you see, which came right over. It was usually used - for taking bodies found 
in the river to the mortuary. But on Saturday nights it was nothing to see a couple of policemen wheeling this thing through the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14378793\charrsid15017164 town}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  and you knew they'd got somebody drunk and incapable in it. You'd get that, and you'd get perhaps a - a little bit of thieving. But - nothing like there is at the present moment. Nothing like it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You say you used to run away from the policemen, did you see them around much at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh yes. 'h yes, you always saw policemen about - always on patrol. And you did regard
 them more as - a sort of friend than you - they do now. Oh yes, there was always the policeman about, even at night. You always see him at night with his - little lantern on his belt and his - cape - with a cape rolled up and slung on the other side of h
is belt. Oh yes, you always saw them and - in daytime and night and - they were always patrolling.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 And they used to discipline the children much more?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Well - I won't say they actually disciplined them but - if they found you getting up to mischie
f - and caught you they - they might give you a jolly good talking to or they might give you a clump. But - they didn't actually put themselves out to do it. You see. It was only just incidental if they came across it. But I mean - we used to get up to mi
s
chief and all sorts of things. I mean, go scrumping and one favourite game at school was - of course most houses being a terrace the doors came together with just a short fence or wall between them and one of our great delights was in one particular stree
t
 was to - go and tie the knockers of two houses together, or tie the letterboxes together, and then knock at each house and then run and hide behind somewhere and watch and see the two dear ladies both come to the door to open the door and of course - one
 
would open her door a little bit and - pull the other one shut, and she'd give it a tug and the finish there'd be an awful game. Things like that, or we used to - scrumping or - pinching somebody's - pinching apples off somebody's tree over the garden fen
ce or something of that sort you see. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Can you remember any other practical jokes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Oh yes, spreading cotton across the - across the street. And - also - dropping - say dropping a handkerchief - bit of cotton - tie the cotton and then somebod
y goes to pull it up you jerk it away. Or - calling out to a carman going by - whip behind, because - of course that was one our great jokes, used to jump on a - on a cart that was going by, have a free ride, sort of hanging on the tailboard, and - of cou
r
se it usually used to be the cry, whip behind, and of course he'd swish his whip round you see, and perhaps it might catch you, it might not. And - well we used to go along - used to see shops, newsagents specially, that had their boards out with all the 
- flyleaf - placards of each paper on. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid920634\charrsid15017164 It}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 was nothing for us to run along and nick those so that they all came down with a clatter as we ran - as we ran by. Oh things like that, but I don't think we had any - really dangerous ones. We used to - climb the la
mp post and swing off the - of course lamp posts weren't so \{ILLEGIBLE\}}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid920634\charrsid15017164 ,}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 the gas lamps, and we always used to have bars standing out and we used to climb up - those and hang on that and swing. We used to use the lamp post as a wicket for cricket. Of course
 sometimes the ball would perhaps go through somebody's window and then you'd run like mad. Or we'd play football in the street, we usually used to perhaps get chased by a policeman for that. But most of our games, well they were seasonal games, there was
 
- hoops in the winter. And we used to run up and down the road with a - boys with an iron hoop, the girls with a wooden hoop and a - a hook which we used to skid them along. Then there was - marbles which we used to play up - the - either up the gutter on
 the way to school, or - on the pavement with a ring of marbles and flicking them in. Then there was - ciggies, or cigarette cards, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14378793\charrsid15017164 ciggies}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  - cigarette cards, which we used to flick up and try and knock down as many as you could and that sort of thing and w
in the other fellow's sets. There was Jacky fivestones, which was fivestones, we used to have all sorts of weird and wonderful rhymes. Playing with those, catching them on the back of your hand. Cherry stones. Another one.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did you play with your sisters?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 No. No, no. No, no. If I did play out in the street it was usually with a crowd of boys. Oh and then there was cops and robbers. }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14378793\charrsid15017164 Or as it became after the cinema came in it became - Cowboys and Indians. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 It usually }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14378793\charrsid15017164 used}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  to be called cops and robb
ers when I was a boy, mostly. And - things like that we used to get up to, and of course we'd go up onto - onto the common and perhaps play cricket. Or at least try to. Although I was never much for any of those - sports as far at that goes. I remember, b
e
ing out with one crowd ones - number of us in the street - during holidays, we went up onto the common and - on the common there was one place, it was a lake surrounded by bushes and fence, which was used for - as a swimming pool actually. But in the dayt
i
me you could go in there and I - we were in there and I remember I got pushed in this day, clothes and all. Any rate I went down for the third time 'til somebody pulled me out. Any rate, after that we - came from there to be a school playground which was 
kept open - during school holidays because they had - a swings and a - a great pole with a lot of ropes hanging down that you put your arm through a loop and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14378793\charrsid15017164 swing}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  round and swing yourself off the ground, a maypole sort of thing. We all got over there and I
 remember somebody threw a cricket stump and point hit me in the temple, gashed me. That was the same afternoon. And - well I don't think - I think I went home after that one. But ; I mean, we used to do things like that but - oh we used to get up onto th
e
 common - on Thursday after - evenings, the band - used to have a band play in a bandstand on this common and just near it was a - near the bandstand was a hollow with a lot of gorse bushes in and we used to very often get there and play - cops and robber
s and hide and seek and all sorts of things like that. But - that's about all I can remember.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did your mother mind if you get your clothes dirty?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Well, she'd grouse at us. But - as long as they were going in the wash and that was - I don't drink she really objected too much.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You didn't belong to any youth clubs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
No. There weren't any then. Oh there was, I beg your pardon. There was a - a sort of Band of Hope if you can call that a youth club. I did go to that - once or twice. It used t
o be held in a - in a building which was a Carmel chapel. It's a very low sort of Baptist chapel, it's now - it's now the parish hall of local }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14378793\charrsid15017164 Roman}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  Catholic church. Shows how things alter. I know that - used to be Saturday mornings I - if I remember right
ly - or Saturday afternoons, and it used to hold an enormous number of people, I remember being there and we - they had a - a sort of - cheer leader who got up and - sort of got us all singing songs. All sorts of were things, there's one of them I always 
remember was called From Wimbledon to }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14378793\charrsid15017164 Wimbledon}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 is Umpteen miles. Where on earth that is I don't know. But - things like that, but I didn't go to that very much. There were of course the Boy Scouts but - I never joined those, father wouldn't let me because 
it meant - paying out for uniform and all the rest of it. There was one -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Nothing at the church or chapel?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 No, there was no youth - whatsnames there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Choir?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 No. No I never - no, it's years afterwards I belonged to the choir. There was
 one other - thing I was taken to, I think that was just after I left school though. About 1913 was a sort of literary society run by a chapel, somebody who knew me got me to go along one night to a musical evening, and it was the first time I ever heard 
- any Gilbert and Sullivan. It was done on gramophone records with a - you know, gramophone, which was a box with clockwork in it to work the turntable and the sound came out of a great big horn. The - records were of Pirates of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14378793\charrsid15017164 Penzance}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  and the Mikado, and
 - well I'd never - that's always stuck in my mind. But I only went there once and that was more of a guest. There was - very little of that sort of thing in - there was evening school of course. I did join evening school after I started to work but - I n
ever got very far in that. But apart from that there was really nothing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 What about theatres?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Well theatres we - occasionally went with my father to the local Hippodrome. When we'd go down - and that used to be of course the second house. When we
'd go down to the local Hippodrome and stand on the queue, and as soon as the door opened there be most awful rush. I'd rush up umpteen flights of stairs to the very top of the building while father got the tickets and followed me. And then we'd dive down
 the seats, which were just cement steps and a wooden platform on. So as we'd get in the front, and then we'd see the show. I remember quite a number of them and it was there that I saw - Chaplin before he ever - went to - films, in the famous - Ca}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14378793\charrsid15017164 r}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 no's }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14378793\charrsid15017164 H}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 um
mingbirds. And - quite a number of those shows - Lou Lakes - shows and they were real slapstick comedy and quite a number of the famous - music shall stars of those days. Of course you used to get a really good - I think it used to cost us fourpence in th
e
 gallery - used to get a real good fourpennyworth. And used to get about a dozen - turns, and - one of them would be one of these - either Fred Carno's or Dou Lake's - shows which was really about half the - half the show. And - sometimes - you'd get a bi
t
 of the bioscope, which would be early films. Usually a - a newsreel. In the Hippodrome. In the show you see, it was done in the interval. They'd lower the screen and - just show this - but the first time I saw cinema as - oh I suppose I was about five or
 
six. That was - one of these traveling cinemas worked by hand, it was just stuck in - in the middle of the audience. No fire precautions or anything else, it was in the basement. I was only a kiddy at the time I know. Most of the programme was of - lanter
n
 slides, the old lantern slides you used to turn a little handle and then the rats ran round and went down a man's mouth, I don't know whether you've ever seen them. In colour. Oh they were wonderful old things. And then there was a film of - I think it w
a
s the Lord Mayor's Show, and - I - know I screamed like mad and they had to take me out. Well, there was some horses coming in this thing and they came straight - they looked as if they were coming right out of these - the screen. We were only sitting on 
ordinary - the school - backless forms, and I was in the front and it looked as if they were coming on top of me and I know I screamed like mad, they had to take me out. But - oh yes, we used to - and of course, sometimes - we'd perhaps get to the }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14378793\charrsid15017164 pantomime}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
. And of course that was a high day or a - a high day and holiday sort of thing. But apart from that there was nothing much in the way of theatres.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 When did you get to the cinema more regularly?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh - after I left - left school and started to wo
rk. But then, of course, there weren't - weren't any cinemas really. I can remember the first one opening in Woolwich, was after I started to work, and was about early 1914 I think. When - of course you went in the vestibule and - it was all done up with 
p
otted palms. And you went in the afternoons, you paid sixpence to go in, and in the programme that sixpence entitled you to a free cup of tea and biscuits. And I always - the long - the first - sort of long reeled film, five reels I think it was - the fil
m
 was called Tilly's Punctured Romance. It was a real slapstick comedy. But of course in those days you got one reel, then you had to have a stop while the - whatsname changed the reel you see. And - and so on. That cinema's now destroyed, it was destroyed
 during the war, it was hit by a bomb. But - it was - there weren't many about you see. They were only just sort of coming in really as cinemas. You got the bioscope which was - which was really a - a fairground and traveling showman sort of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 And concerts?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Concerts, no, unless we went to hear - the band concert on the common on the Thursday evening, or we listened to the - Royal Artillery band on Sunday mornings after church parade, they used to usually give a selection of music outside the
 officers' mess. And public were always allowed to go up and see the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14378793\charrsid15017164 padre}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
, as a matter of fact it was one of the things to do in Woolwich - on Sunday mornings, and we used to stand - stand and - listen to that, but as regards other concerts - no, I can't 
remember going to a concerts to all. Well, the parade - they - they used - all - all the various regiments - and units in the town, in the garrison, used to parade in full dress for church service at the garrison - church - and it was the thing to do was 
t
o go up on the parade and you stand along the parade and watch them marching into church. Then you just parade up and down the sort of monkey parade we used to call it, when the boys used to get off with the girls and that sort of thing, and then after ch
u
rch service was over they'd all come out form up, and then they'd ceremoniously march off - taking - the - one of the Colonel's or the G.O.C. taking the salute you see. Then - after they'd cleared off, the officers were all drift into the mess which opene
d
 onto the parade ground - for their gin and tonics etcetera and - the band would play a selection of music, usually a - they used to do one or two sort of standing in a circle, then they'd do a sort of ceremonial - one of these marching affairs when they 
m
arch in between each other and all the rest of it. Then after they'd gone over the thing was you went to the end of the parade ground - and waited for the one o'clock gun to fire. They always fired a - a - a time gun at Woolwich until - about 1918 - no, 1
9
14 I think it was - at one o'clock, which was the signal for all - during the week, they used to fire it during the week as well, which was the signal for all the - shops to close and the - factories to - knock off for lunch and all the rest of it you see
.
 But we always used to go along there and of course it was always a case of the girls squealed and everything else when the bang went. It was an old gun of the Crimean war days, they used to have a whole battery of them. And - other times we used to go up
 
there if there was any big parade of the - of the garrison, like a review. I have been up there when - King Edward was there, to and Queen Alexandra reviewing the troops, which was always of course a great - affair because - the troops, even on Sundays, w
ere all in their coloured uniforms and not the - nondescript khaki we had to wear afterwards. And - sometimes I've been up there and after the parade's all over I've gone into the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14378793\charrsid15017164 barracks}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  and - well I knew various people, most of our friends were military 
people, either ex or in it, and perhaps I've gone up the barrack room and stopped there for dinner. I've ate many a meal in the - in the - of course, you could walk round the barracks then without let or hindrance. And - it used to be the thing if you had
 visitors you always took them up to the parade. To the gun. And then you always took them through the barracks, because the barracks were - especially in the mounted regiments, the artillery and etc., the stables were on the ground floor and then the }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14378793\charrsid15017164 men\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
' barrack rooms were on - above them you see, and they'd have their meals there, you'd see the - the men going down to the cook house to the long - and coming out with a long tray with all the - meals - the meals of all the men in that particular barrack 
room.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Could they fetch extra?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Well, no, they used to - somebody didn't turn up you see and somebody'd gone off out perhaps and - so they had one meal over and I used to - pass it over you see. Oh yes, used to often do that. Now -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Just you, not your parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh no. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Were they just friends though?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Well people that I - we - I knew through the family you see. But not you can't even get in those barracks. As a matter of fact they don't - don't exist now, they've been pulle
d down. Oh yes, you often used to do that. Watch the horses being fed and groomed and that sort of thing. Even in the daytime as schoolboys - in holidays I often used to go up there and watch them. And as a matter of fact it was in the - it was through th
a
t that I - I had my first taste of the Army, that was the Christmas of - 1914. I did go with my father them because we - we went to the sergeants mess, in a tent, with a battery that had been called up and - we had various - refreshment, and they wanted u
s
, both father and myself to stay to dinner bit of course - that would have been terrible. So any rate the only way he got out of it, I got left behind to stay - as guest in the sergeants mess, guest of the battery sergeant major. Well the only refreshment
 
they had for me was port. And they kept me there until quite late in the evening when we got home. And - well I don't mind telling you I was pretty squiffy. Much to mother's disgust. Any way I sort of went to bed - I fell asleep on the couch as a matter o
f
 fact, and they left me there. I woke up in the morning feeling like nothing on earth and - of course boylike I'd sort of got in the back of my mind somebody had said once if you got in that state a hair of the dog that bit you - I saw a decanter of port,
 
so I had a swig, when they came down to breakfast they found me lying on the hearthrug clasping - clasping the decanter of port, the port had run all over the hearthrug. I was dead. That was my first introduction to the Army life. But anyway that's my - t
hat's not - oh no, it's - Army way - really the whole of Woolwich was - bound up with the Army really. Everything that the Army - anything that happened in the Army affected Woolwich you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did any other churches have parades, not military, but people parading outside, walking up and down?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Oh yes. Most churches - after you came out of church you'd always find - a number of people sort of standing on the pavement or in the church grounds having a chat. That was considered the thing, sort of thing
, you were - to be seen, especially the ladies, to be seen and - admired sort of thing or - you showed off your new dress or your new hat. Oh yes, that always happened - and - of course most of the chapels I suppose you can say their doors opened on to th
e pavement so consequently there was always gang gathering round the pavement you see. Oh yes, that was always, a considered thing. But of course it was nothing like the military parade which was a - a real military occasion.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did your parents go to church or chapel?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 No. No. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14378793\charrsid15017164 
Not until later, when my mother - well, my mother would - often go - we did, I beg your pardon, occasionally go - to the garrison church, because it was a much more - lively church, our own parish church was a very ,very - low
 church, low church of England and it was most miserable place. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 I could tell you stories about that but I won't. And the garrison church was usually - much - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14378793\charrsid15017164 brighter}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 , because they often used to use the string orchestra of the Royal Artillery band to accom
pany - for the musical part of the service. And we often used to go there, we were allowed to go in for evening service, in the gallery or down in the church, and we often used to go up because it was not far from our house you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 As a boy you mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 As a boy. I remember - one famous -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 We were talking about Sundays and religion?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh yes, that's right. We've been talking about Sunday school haven't we? That's right, the - garrison church.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You went to the evening services?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh 
yes, we always used to go to - evening service. And of course on - on occasions they were - a - sort of big services. For instance, one I greatly remember is the - the service at the time of the sinking of the Titanic in 1912. The whole church was packed,
 
it was a big church with a big gallery. The whole thing was packed and the - in the chancel they had the string portion of the Royal Artillery band, which was quite a well known orchestra really, they were accompanying the singing, and I remember when the
 
whole lot, including organ and drums, played the - Dead March in Saul, there wasn't a dry eye in the house - in the place. It was occasions like that that were more - I - more often than not used to go with my mother because - she didn't go very often bec
a
use of course she was so deaf, she couldn't hear it. But - on an occasion like that we always had to - take her up. Harvest Festivals another one. It sound rather strange for an Army, the Army to be having a Harvest Festival, but they used to - they used 
to have a most elaborate affair. The place used to be decorated up with the most - looking like a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14378793\charrsid15017164 fruiterer's}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 shop gone mad. Apart from that - of course morning service there was not - was really not open to the public, it was mostly all troops. As regards 
the ordinary parish church which wasn't far form my house, well I can't say that we ever went in it. Except to be - perhaps marriages, births a - baptisms and - well there weren't any funerals in the family so it didn't matter. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14378793\charrsid15017164 It was a very,}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15017164  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14378793\charrsid15017164 very - It was a very very - low church if you know what I mean. Frightfully}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  low, very miserable place, it was a very dark place surrounded by a tall high trees so that the sunlight never got at it, it really was a cold - even on a summers day it was a cold miserable pl
ace. And consequently we used to avoid it like the plague. I think the last time I was in there was when I was married. And even then I didn't enjoy it, but that's another story. Because that's much more recent. As for - as regards the rest of Sundays, we
l
l - Sunday evenings of course we usually went out with father and mother, the whole family, my two sisters and myself and father and mother. We'd - perhaps walk over what is called Plumstead Common - we'd - youngsters would play about on the way of course
,
 but usually we had to decorously - walk in front. Sometimes we'd go across the river to North Woolwich. We'd go over on the free ferry, that was quite an exciting time for us youngsters. And - listen to the band in a park over there. Another one we used 
t
o do was another sort of walk across the common and up; into a wood, which is called Boston Woods on the - sort of slopes of Shooters Hill coming down to the river, where there'd be another band in a bandstand. Those usually used to be the - well the summ
e
r - Sunday evenings. The winter - Sunday evenings one was usually at home unless it happened to be a fine evening and then perhaps I might go out with my father and as I said we'd usually go down to the market place and - listen to the various brands of p
olitical wisdom, shouted at one another from - various groups. Apart from that there was really Sunday was a very - a sort of tame day.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 How often would you go to this evening service?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Well - I suppose - taking my mother would be - five or six ti
mes a year. Myself, it was not a regular - thing, we were not - regular church people or anything - and as youngsters of course having had an after - solid afternoon of - Sunday school we felt we'd had enough. So that - it was not a - a regular thing but 
o
f course amongst - quite a lot of people it was regular thing to go to - church or chapel. Very often I think in lots of ways possibly - to be seen, because you came out of church there was always usually groups on the pavement outside having a little cha
t and - whether they were discussing - somebody's hat or something of that as is usually said I don't know, but - I know there used to be but - it was not very often we went - did go - go to church really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You didn't have family prayers in the home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh no, no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 What about grace at meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Quite frankly I can't remember it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Your parents really hadn't much to do with the church?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 They hadn't, no. No. I don't think father'd - after he left the Army - ever went to church except
 on the sort of state occasions. Whether he had enough of it in the Army or not I don't know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 It would just be your mother who went to this evening service?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Yes. Mother and - father would never go. No. Never.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 What time did your father get home from work in the evenings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
In the weekdays usually about - about six. About six or half past. He usually, yes, he'd always come - six or half past, always, well unless he - I think they worked until - six at one time, and we were not far from the
 - from the Arsenal. Then I believe they altered afterwards to about half past five. I know I often used to go down to meet him and come home with him. And - he used to sometimes go down at - lunchtime and meet him and walk up with him, especially in scho
ol holidays. And one of the things I always remember then were the - while - whilst waiting for him outside the Arsenal gates - the boys - who were working in the Arsenal would come out to a neighbouring pub to get the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14378793\charrsid15017164 workmen\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  beer, and they'd always have
 a long stick, a piece of timber about an inch square with a number of hooks all along it, and hanging on the hooks were tin cans, which was each mans beer can. And you'd see them - sometimes there were two of these cans carrying somewhere about - oh, abo
ut forty cans, twenty on each. It's a thing I've never seen - since the - well, since - fourteen - 1914, I think - I don't think they ever did it afterwards, because I - they had canteens in the - in the works then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 They didn't have any food in the works then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh no. No, no, there was no food in the works then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did you boys go in to take food in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
No, you could go down to the gate and - you could go down to the gate with say father's - dinner or - something of that sort. And he'd come ou
t of the gate and bet it you see, and they usually used to go perhaps into a neighbouring pub and sit there and eat it. The boys who came out for the beer often used to take things back, like pies and - things like that. But that was the only way of getti
ng food unless you took it in yourself. There was no canteens or anything of that sort in those days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You mentioned these places you would walk to but would you go off for walks by yourself? When you were a schoolboy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh yes. Oh yes, one of my - 
well I suppose the longest walks I ever did was - during school holidays I'd often go off when I was about - well say - twelve, thirteen, and I'd walk from Woolwich - right up to London, right along the Old Kent Road and so on, Soho and Westminster Bridge
, \{ILLEGIBLE\}
 And then perhaps all the way up South Kensington. To one of the museums. I'd have a - some packet of - sandwiches or something or other in my pocket. And - I used to thoroughly enjoy the walk - and walk all the way home. At that time it was th
e only way I could do it because I had no money sort of thing. But - afterwards we used to sometimes - go up to London - on an outing - on what was called the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14378793\charrsid15017164 workman\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  train, when you could then get up to London for fourpence return. I - that was a specia
l - thing by act of Parliament laid down when they first opened railways I believe. But - I know that fare now is somewhere about - three or four shillings. But even then we used to go up - I used to go up then, sometimes with my father if - he was on hol
i
day, but not very often, it was more often than not I used to wander up - there looking at all the funny little shops and - curious little shops and - that sort of thing on the way up and dawdle along and thoroughly enjoy myself. Oh it used to take long -
 long walks on my own. And into the countryside, yes, around about. Just - depending on - sort of how the spirit moved me sort of thing. Really. Yes, about twelve miles to Westminster Bridge. Oh I often used to do that
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You didn't have a bicycle?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
No, I never could ride a bicycle. I had many opportunities - my uncle who lived in the same road used to - do quite a little bit of - of business in his spare time in buying up old bicycles and renovating them and selling them. Well I had then plenty of o
pportunities of getting a bicycle, but I could never stop on the thing. I was all right as long as somebody held it. But as soon as they let go I feel off. I had no sense of balance at all. And I never have been able to ride, I couldn't even ride a bicycl
e
 now. I wish I could sometimes. I never have been - it's one of the regrets - I do regret not being able to do it. But - again it was not - I never used to worry about it very much, really. I - I was - I was more - more interested in walking because - I c
ould sort of stop and have a look at something, where as with a bike you had to find somewhere to put the bike before you could look sort of thing you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You didn't go fishing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 No. No, I've never been - not actually fishing myself, I've been ou
t with fishing parties, when I was a - a boy. Only about twice I think. When my - when I was staying perhaps with my grandfather, he used to be great on going out cray fishing. That had to be done at night. So it was not very often I was - included in the
 
party but - I remember once going out - and - oh we went off in the evening for some miles to a river - camped down by the side of the river and was much unloading of - of eatables and - gallon jars of beer. And - they spent the night - cray fishing with 
nets. Cray fish were a sort of small lobster, freshwater lobster. I don't remember much of the fishing because I - I'm afraid I spent most of the night }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid920634\charrsid15017164 asleep}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  under a - under a bush or something or other. But - I remember - there was always these cray fishi
ng efforts when father was down on holiday, and - well - mother and the rest of the - my aunts used to say it was only an excuse to - have a night out sort of thing. That was in Hampshire, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Where would they find these cray fish there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 I don
't know - quite frankly you've got me guessing. I mean it was - mostly traveled in the dark and I haven't the foggiest notion. But - in a way I suspect there was a certain amount of poaching is }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid920634\charrsid15017164 included}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  in it really. But - I never could say definitely. But
 that's the only fishing I ever went on. I never - as a matter of fact I was never much interested in sports at all, either - I mean football -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did you collect anything then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh I was always collecting pictures, prints. My bedroom wall used to b
e one mass of them, until mother would have a - a blitz and destroy the lot and then I'd start all over again. I was more interested in reading - sort of collecting that sort of thing and - writing. I used to cover reams of - foolscap with all sorts of th
i
ngs. I one time - I do remember once starting on a play, and it turned out a I had a cast of thousands by the time I'd done - by the time I got half way through it. I don't know whatever happened to the manuscript but I know there were piles of - man - fo
olscap paper I covered with all sorts of - things like that. No I was never much interested in outdoor things really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 What were the prints you collected?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Well, just a - as I say prints, they were - copies of - of famous pictures, prints of famous
 buildings. Anything that was old to tell you the truth. I'm afraid I haven't got any of the - any of them - oh I think I have got one book upstairs which I - scrounged off my great-grandmother. A History of Charles XI of Sweden I think it is. That's the 
o
nly thing. And that's got my childish signature inside, that's why I keep it's. Books I used to - sort of collect if I could. As I say I often used to - especially when I got a bit older say round about fourteen - I'd often go delving into the - sort of t
u
ppence box outside the booksellers and it's surprising what you could find. I did - I know - as I say, had a - a - an early edition of - Johnson's dictionary, which - my mother very kindly put in the dustbin while I was abroad, which greatly annoyed me. B
ut it was things like that, anything that was connected with books or with the mind really more than - more than energetic things.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You did no gardening, you didn't like gardening?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 No, I didn't do much gardening, about the only gardening I ever di
d was - was gathering up the - the manure for it. But - not gardening. I - I never have been - I always call it an over-rated pastime. Much to a lot of peoples disgust. But - no, those things never seemed to interest me, and then of course, as I say, I wa
s
 only - what - fifteen and a half when I - went into the Army, sort of - a pseudo-man, I was supposed to be - eighteen and a half, so really I had no - none of that - in between - sort of - youth as you might say. So that - I - I mean I was pitchforked fr
o
m a - from a schoolboy to a man right away. And of course in the Army there was no chance of - gathering things, although - I did - when I was in - in Greece I had - oh - quite a number of things all made out of the - pieces of the first zeppelin that was
 
brought down in Greece. Unfortunately somebody stole them. I also had a quite a - a library of - military books, which I'd scrounged from here, there and everywhere. But apart from that I - of course you couldn't - sort of collect - really in the Army bec
ause of course you couldn't - cart them about, although I was in a mechanical transport unit, you were - circumscribed you see. So that collecting really wasn't a great - great thing.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You've mentioned the aunt and uncle in the same road, but were there any other relatives living at all near?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
No. No. All of - they were the only two relatives - well, I say the only two relatives, there was one living the other side of London, who was a great-aunt of my mother's. When I knew the old lady she was - e
ighty. And - I remember going to see her once, this was when - oh I was - before 1914, going to see her once in Kentish Town. And when I got there - only to find the dear old lady was out doing a nursing job, and she was eighty then. So I had to go and pa
r
k myself on some - on some very distant cousins, who were mostly - well the - the husband was a - a piano maker in a factory in Kentish Town, the wife was - oh I don't know, she was in some factory there. And there were three daughters who were in - a fac
tory that made - very expensive Christmas crackers. But they were a real - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14378793\charrsid15017164 cockney}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 working family. And I always remember this was a Sunday, so that they - I called on them, they asked me to stay to dinner. So I did. Well we got dinner somewhere about three 
o'clock in the afternoon. And - much to my horror - the dinner was a meat pudding with - with mussels in it instead of oysters. Served on the table - of which the tablecloth was - was a newspaper that week. It was a real - a real - quite - a very much - v
ery different to my }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid920634\charrsid15017164 own}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 home where of course - such a thing would have been - mother would have had - forty fits. And created like mad if we had suggested it. But - they were the only - they - we saw very little of, except the old lady. She would sometimes 
come and visit us. But apart from that - they were the only relatives we had, the aunt and uncle really in the same street. All the rest of the family were all in Hampshire in the one village.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You saw the aunt and uncle a great deal did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh 
yes, we were always sort of - except when - mother and the aunt fell out or something of that sort, you see - the uncle and aunt - it was rather }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14378793\charrsid15017164 peculiar}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  you see. The uncle was my mother's brother. My aunt was my father's sister. It was a cross - a cross m
arriage, and - and consequently there was always little - little tiffs between them. I always remember the aunt and uncle getting married because I was - pageboy at the said wedding. I remember - being dressed, I can tell you exactly what I was dressed in
, a pair of little - velvet - shorts with two - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14378793\charrsid15017164 marquisate}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 buttons on each side of the leg. A white silk blouse, and shantung silk blouse, frilled all round the front and round the collar, and a little jacket.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Not your father's workmates?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Very s
eldom that anybody called. You see. They'd know each other - no, they didn't - they'd know each other at work but - out of work - it was a different life, it was their own life. Sometimes - they'd meet perhaps in a pub, or - my father - I - I have been ou
t
 with him when he's suddenly called on somebody - who he knew, but merely to ask him to come out and have a drink - you see, that was all there was, there was no - no social call like mother and father and all of us going round and going to tea or somethi
ng of that sort. That was very seldom. That would - might be - might happen at Christmastime or something of that sort but that's about all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Would your mother have any friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 No, I can't say that she did. Not - what you'd call intimate friends.
 I mean she was - she was on speaking terms with all the neighbours, yes. Because she'd - spent all her married life in that particular - just within a few - a few hundred yards of the one house.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 But she didn't have a special friend she would call on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh no, no. No, no. No, no. Oh no. There was nothing of that at all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 She knew your father's friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh yes, she knew of them or she had met them, she perhaps - with him, perhaps meet them - casually in a - in a pub or something of that so
rt. But there was no visiting as regards - as we do now, come in and have a coffee and that sort of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Would your father's friends take their wives too do you think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Well they - I suppose go out together and go into - a pub together, but you
 see - in those days very often it was the - it was rather the German - system of kinder kitchen - kitchen and church. You see, the - the husband's used to go off - very much on their own, the menfolk. And the women were left on their own - the women's pl
a
ce was at home or if she went out it was going out shopping. You see. There was no - there was very little - in some - in some circles - I suppose there was a great deal of that in some - areas - poorer families would - sort of always be mixing in togethe
r
 like that. But there was always that desire - to - although - you weren't over blessed with this world's goods you always tried to make out you were. In other words to try and keep a - yourself to yourself so that you were - you relied on yourself and yo
u were absolutely self reliant, really. Consider - people that were considered sort of - sort of running in and out of one }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14378793\charrsid15017164 another\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 ' houses, they were considered rather feckless. As far as I can - as I can remember it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 But the Catholic family?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Yes, little Lord }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14378793\charrsid15017164 Fauntleroy}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
. And my aunt - I can always remember her bridal dress. It was made of - thick heavy - cream serge, the skirt came out into a train at the back which I had of course had to hold up, and trimmed all down the front, right from the 
neck to the bottom hem were little black bows, I can always remember that dress. It was the most weirdest wedding dress I have ever seen, but - it was her design - her - her desires. And - they lived - they didn't live near us at the time - when - just af
t
er they were married, but - they came down into the same street and - their children are still living in the same house. That's - the house where the children were born in actually. You see, we were all living in that road, I mean, my mother lived in ther
e for - what - over fifty years in the one house. My uncle I suppose now - well they've been somewhere about seventy odd years in that house.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did he work in the Arsenal too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 No - he did for a little while but - most of the time - he was employed 
as a painter and decorator by one of the - local - big firm in painting and decorating. Then after a time he gave that up, and - started - his own business. Which he carried on until his death with the aid of his two sons. The two sons have carried it on 
b
ut one of those has died now so I don't know quite what's happened to the - because I haven't - strange to say I haven't seen them or - heard of them now for a long while. But we were always - we were brought up together really, although, strange to say w
e
 didn't have much - I mean we were never sort of playmates. Because for some reason or other myself and my sisters we couldn't - couldn't stand - my girl cousin and her two brothers. We were always sort of having a - a row if we got near one another. But 
- as I say there was a - a family - sort of - cohesion really, we flow to one another if there was anything - anything wrong. Anyone was ill, well, the other one looked after them sort of - that sort of thing you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 So you didn't need any help from neighbours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh no, no, we got very - we - never used to call on neighbours at all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 It sounds as if you didn't like the neighbours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Well, no, but mother was - mother was rather - what shall I say - she was rather - strict - she was very capa
ble and very independent, and - she always considered that - of course - if you asked a neighbour in they only wanted to come in to see what you'd got. And that was of course a general feeling with quite a lot of people. There wasn't the same - well I thi
nk it is now really - neighbours don't sort of - keep running into one another, if they did it's rather a rare - phenomena really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 So they wouldn't call casually?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh no. No, no.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh yes, well of course, there - yes, there was the Catholic f
amily next door to us, and there was another Catholic family - next door but one to us and next door to them. Well they were interchanged strange to say - because they had been - this is where perhaps one of the differences came in. They had been wives of
 
soldiers. In married quarters at - in - in their early days you see, early married life. And of course in the Army well you were thrown more on top of one another. And so they carried that into civilian life. But - then again of course there was the - I s
u
ppose the - the attraction of being of the same - outlook as regards church. Whereas - the other people being Protestants didn't quite like them and these other people were Irish too at the same time, there's - there always has been that - sort of - sligh
t }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14378793\charrsid15017164 animosity}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 as regards Irish - In England I think, really all the way, all the way through, I can remember - I can remember then that - you know, the - as I say, the Catholic church was only a few yards from us and - it was often said, you know, those - com
mon Irish or something of that sort. You see. Whether it was a sort - I don't think it was any - understood - religious animosity, although no doubt there was. Really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 When you say there were sometimes occasions when you had your tea in the parlour with people, that would be with relatives would it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
That would be with relatives, yes. Yes. Relatives - relatives, if relatives came from - up from the country to see us or if - a sort of state occasion as I say - my aunt and uncle up the road came dow
n to have tea with us. Or we went up to tea with them. That's the only occasions in fact that - that sort of thing would happen. Or if somebody very unexpectedly called - that - we had - they - mother and father had known perhaps - shared house with. Cons
equently you were more intimate with - they were more sort of - like the family more than anything else.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 They kept up with them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh yes, we kept up with - people for instance in one house we had another family with us, I - I've mentioned it befor
e, they had a son about the same age as myself. Well they moved away - to quite the far extreme end of the - district. And we have a - we did occasionally go and see them, but not very often. And then mostly in the evenings after a mealtime. You didn't so
r
t of - call - you know, in the afternoon - so that they had to ask you to stop to tea. You see, you called in the evening, and then while the two wives had a chat, father and the other chappie would adjourn to the - to the local for their chat. And we wou
ld be left to - either sit around or just - play about together you see. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14378793\charrsid15017164 No, social - social life then was very, very much different to - to what it is now.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Do you really feel it's friendlier now?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh I think so. Oh yes. I think so. Very much.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 A lot of people give the opposite impression don't they?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Yes, I think it is much - whether - I think it has - slackened off a great deal - to what it was. I mean, even if you - if you were - as kiddies, you wanted to go out and play well you had t
o go and knock at the door and please, Mrs So and So, can so - somebody come out and play. Well now you sort of don't worry, you just bowl in the house and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You said something about the landlord of your house also owned a sweetshop, so you saw quite a bit of him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Oh yes, we did - we - we always used to go in there on - Saturdays, when mother - out shopping with mother and we'd usually call in for - four ounces of sweets, which would - sort of last - last us the week really because mother would d
ole them out, one at a time, when we were good sort of business. But he was usually serving in the shop and he always called of course - on Mondays for the rent. And so we saw quite a - quite a good bit of him, and he lived not far from us really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did you think he was a good landlord?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Oh he was a very good landlord. He was a very - very good man altogether. He was very helpful, if one wanted anything done in the house one only had to mention it and it was done. Or you - or he'd say, well you do i
t and I'll pay you, so that he was a really - from that standpoint he was a very good - and the rent was always - very - very low, he never sort of shoved up rents, I think when - oh when we left the house it was only about twelve and six a week and that 
w
as after the - after this last war. Of course we - mother was a sitting tenant as far as that goes under the rent restriction acts and all that sort of thing, but I believe when we first went in it - let's see, I - this was about - 19 - 1909 I suppose - t
he rent was only about - six and six a week. It was a six roomed house, but of course it had no bathroom. As most houses hadn't then, but everything else was - there and of course it had a big garden. Very big garden.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did he own quite a few houses?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
He owned quite a - quite a number in that street and in other streets, he was quite a big property owner really. And of course he owned two shops. So that - he had quite - he was quite fairly - fairly }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid14378793\charrsid15017164 wealthy}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  man really for those days. Oh yes, he was quite a local figure, oh yes. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
When there was someone in the district whom the people disapproved of very strongly was there any special way in which they showed it, for example do you remember any one being made to leave by rough music?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 No
, I can't say that I - I do that. I don't think rough music was practiced much in towns. In villages, yes. But not in towns. I think there if any - if there was any - sort of - didn't like a person well possibly be a row and a jolly good - there might hav
e been a fight. But - quite apart from that I don't think there was anything - of that nature. Rough music - I can't - I can't say that I've ever known a case of it except - in }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8342617\charrsid15017164 1939,}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  when we were on honeymoon, we were threatened with it. We were on honeymoo
n in a small village in Kent. We - I'd - rented the - a small cottage which belonged really with the school house, belonged to the - or at least was occupied by the - the teacher of the village school. She didn't use it, she lived at a - a farm - with a b
r
other on a farm nearby. And - she was away when we took - went to this cottage and she'd left the key with a - a young man, a young married couple further - down in the village who we called on for the key. Well, we had the - cottage for a week and were v
e
ry careful not to - be - sort of betray the fact that the were on honeymoon, we were very friendly with this young fellow and his wife - we called on them and - to get the key and they asked us one night to supper. But - any rate, after we had left we wen
t
 back and we were passing through the village some - oh months later, yes, on a ramble. And - just called on them you see and this young fellow says, ah, he says, you were on your honeymoon weren't you? I said, yes. He says, it's a pity we - we - we didn'
t
 know it, he said, we'd have given you some rough music if we had have done. So I said, thank goodness you did, but, I said, how did you find out? He said, well we were cleaning up the - the cottage we found one piece of - one - one piece of confetti on t
h
e staircase. So that's the only - it was evidently still in use then. In this little village. But - that's the only instance I've - known of it. I've heard my father speak about it, in - in the village. You know, they get the marrow bones and all this sor
t
 of thing and old tin cans and - anything they could make a row on and kick up a dickens of a row during the night. I've heard him speak of it but - I can't - as I say, I've never - never come across it and I don't think it ever happened in a town. It mig
ht have done in some places.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Do you remember if there was a case of the neighbours wanting to get rid of somebody?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Yes. Yes I can. There was - one lady in the street who - gained a reputation of being - well, not nice to know, put it politely, a
nd - she was - I think the only way they showed the - disapproval was they just ostracized her, just wouldn't speak and all that sort of thing, that was the only - that's the only thing I can remember. That happened I know, as - once. Of course, in all - 
m
ilitary - garrison towns you always get the - local obliging lady, and she was one of those, and I think - well the - there was no proof of it but it was always suspected. And of course - although - it wasn't discussed in front of us children - we got to 
s
ort of know something was wrong. And - as far as I remember the only thing they did was they just sort of ignored the person you see. And made it rather uncomfortable for her that way but - of course with people of that sort it didn't - worry much. No, th
ere was no other - ways of doing it really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You mentioned fights?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Oh yes, you'd often get - you'd often get - fights. Two dear ladies or - two ladies, you'd often get them having a go and pulling their hair out or - or - oh yes, you'd often get t
hat on a Saturday night. Down in - some of the rough as I say, around the river area. You'd often get two }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8342617\charrsid15017164 women}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 who'd had a - a gin or two too many - would - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8342617\charrsid15017164 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 n argument would suddenly }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid8342617\charrsid15017164 f}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 lare up and they'd go for one another. Or it might be that the two hus
bands would have - be having a fight, the wives would join in, and of course it was always a dangerous thing if a husband and wife were having a fight - never to join in. Because the pair of them then would stop - their fight and turn - turn round on you.
 
I always remember my father always giving me that advice. If you see a man and woman fighting never - never join in. Apparently he did once, and got a good clout from both of them, so he always - always said that. But - oh yes, you often get - fights on a
 
Saturday night and you sometimes get it during the week. Perhaps a - two ladies would have an argument over the - over the garden fence sort of thing and it would - they were only low fences and it would - sort of simmer and simmer and it's sure to burst 
out at some time or other. And - you - you might have fights - yes, I've seen - seen many of them really. And the ladies used to pull their hair out too, pull it out by handfuls. Oh yes. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14378793\charrsid15017164 
Real}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  viragoes some of them were.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Because there were these much poorer people around you didn't feel your own parents were having so much of a struggle to make ends meet?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Well no we didn't. We felt we were sort of - comfortable. But of course as I - sort of got on, round the twelve, thirteen, fourteen, I began to 
realize, that things were a bit - awkward, but mother was an excellent manager and she was a very saving person. And - so that we were never really - up against it. I mean at the end of the week, perhaps Friday it might be a - a bit of a - a scratched mea
ls and that sort of thing, but there was always a meal, you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 If she'd had a much larger family it would have been different?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh, if we'd had a much larger family, yes, there was only three of us, if we'd had a larger family it might have been
 - it might have been much tighter. It might have been much worse. Clothes for instance, we always had - decent clothes. Although - mother made - made a lot of them. And we always had to look after them. You see. And shoes, well father always mended them.
 
So that - we were never - like - quite a lot of families who possibly were in the same position financially, where the youngsters were running about with no shoes and stockings. The - shirt tails hanging out of their britches and that sort of thing. Which
 
- did occur. But then of course - in lots of - lots of areas of the town they were - it was a pretty poor area, and - it was very funny within the very poor area there were more pubs than there was - in the other areas. And consequently that may have cont
r
ibuted to the - to the poorness. In fact it did, there's no doubt about it. You see. It was all a case I think of peoples' - own - upbringing you see, my father and my mother - my father's mother died when he was about - sixteen. His father cleared off an
d
 left the family and my father - and his eldest sister practically brought the rest of the family up and there was - let me see - oh somewhere about eight of them. They both had to work - you see. And - my mother, well she was in service when she was four
teen, she went - off - to live with another aunt and uncle whom I'd never seen - in fact I can't even remember their names now, who lived at Whitstable, he was a fisherman.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 She was in service with a member of the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 No. No, she lived with t
hem for a little while and then she went into service after a few months, yes, then she went into Margate you see. And she'd always been in service all her life, so the pair of them - had had to sort of make their own way and which had made them very - co
nscious of the fact that - self help is a very useful thing. Sort of thing. You couldn't rely on other people.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 And they were very keen on education?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Mother was, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did they try and teach you anything before you went to school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Well I
 suppose yes, we did the sort of usual counting and A.B.C. and sort of thing. Oh yes, they used to - we used to have bricks - sort of cubes of - of wood with - pasted on them on one face'd be - capital A, on the other face would be a small a, and then per
h
aps on another there'd be a - a picture of an apple, or something of that sort, we used to play with as little kiddies, as babies. And - so we - we got the - A.B.C. into our heads. And then in counting I always remember we had - a - a board frame, well it
 
was really - a modernized abacus, with - you know wires across with beads on, coloured beads, and we used to - mostly - slide them across then slide them back but - mother would now and again get hold of us and - with a finger you know, that's three, that
's two and so on. And so we began to - all of us - most - both my sisters and myself - to - count and that sort of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did you find that there was toys like that in other homes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Yes, I think so, they were fairly common - they were fairly commo
n in the shops. So that they must have been in other homes. And then of course we'd - there were also - sort of kiddies books which were on the same style, a for apple, b for - butter or something of that sort you see, which we had as reading books as kid
dies. Mother would perhaps - sit with us and read - those to us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Was that after you started school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Well - yes, and before we started school because - of course we didn't start school until we were five, you see, so that up to - I mean, three to 
four we - there - after we were say from three to five we had some sort of - receptive - capacity. But after then of course - we went to school. Well as we got on in school of course there was - homework and that sort of thing and mother was always very -
 strict on seeing we did that. I know I used to very often try and dodge it, I often used to leave it 'til next morning and perhaps do it while I was trying to have breakfast, and hear the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14378793\charrsid15017164 
school bell}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  ringing at the same time. \{ILLEGIBLE\} \endash  she was always very strict \{ILLEGIBLE\}
 and so was father as far as that goes, he'd - very often threaten to give us a good cuff if we didn't - get down to it. I got through - school, I did sit for the - Oxford and Cambridge Junior Certificate which was at that time the so
rt of metric - but - missed it by about - oh - about - less than ten points I think}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15017164  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
But the last six months I was at school I did nothing else as I said before, just - drawing - maps for the school. My two sisters - well my youngest sister was the only one
, she did get a scholarship, a trade scholarship and she went to - the Borough Polytechnic in London and passed out as a court dressmaker and she went to - she was a dressmaker in Hanover Square for - some years. My other sister - she didn't - she - well 
she was a secretary when she - finished working. But - we - we had a fairly good education but I think - I can safely say really my education proper started when I joined the Army - after I'd left school actually.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Were you at the same school the whole time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Practically, yes. Only for a very short time when I first went to school - I went to - one school - it's still in the same road as which I - we then lived, but after - wards when we finished - moved to this last house I went to the school - in
 the same road again, and ended in that school, I passed right through the whole - the whole thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Were they both board schools?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 They were both school board - board schools, yes, you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Were they mixed - boys and girls?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 In the - ye
s, part of it was and then afterwards the - sort of - from about twelve onwards they were separated. Girls in one - on one floor, boys on the other. It was a tell four - four storey building.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Were you mixed in the classes up to about twelve?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Up to about twelve, yes. And then - then we went into separate classes. In that particular school, some other schools were mixed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 What did you think about the teachers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh they were - they were jolly good, I - I used to get on quite well with them.
 I had no trouble with them. They were quite characters, I remember one, a man named Lucas, he was usually named - he was usually called by us Pongo. I shall never forget that man one day, he - we had a young Indian in the class. Was a boy who - been }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5244319\charrsid15017164 born}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  
in India, he was - coloured of course, he came from and Indian family but they'd shifted over into England you see. And this boy was always up to some mischief or other and I remember Lucas would be - writing up some - sort of - temporary exam - or }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5244319\charrsid15017164 t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 est exam }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5244319\charrsid15017164 questions}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 on the blackboard and he had the blackboard away from us and he was behind it so he couldn't see the class. And I remember this boy suddenly - standing up in the classroom and holding up a stuffed monkey, and yelling out - boys, here's old Pon
go. And Pongo came round behind the board and said, and who is Pongo? Consequently of course there was a sixer. Another - teacher we had, it was the mathematics master if I remember rightly, he was a little short and very tubby man, his name was Mellor an
d of course he was always called Mouldy. Mouldy }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14378793\charrsid15017164 Mellor}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 more than anything else. But - they were all quite - quite good teachers really. They were strict. And - but they were always - they were dedicated teachers and they - were - they would always - sort of
 acknowledge good work. I know one of my - I suppose my best subject was English, and I often used to find that in morning assembly before school started, the headmaster standing up and reading one of my - assays, to the whole school, much to my disgust b
e
cause I was always - leg pulled over it. But - and then of course we had - we had - other teachers, they mostly all had their own one subject. And - we had our sports teachers. But sports sessions were things I used to hate. I could never see the sense of
 
going up into a - cold winters afternoon on a muddy field chasing a - muddy ball up and down, or - cricket I never used to like either, although I love watching it. Swimming I used to hate - hate like poison, because - well I had been down for the third t
i
me once and I know the first swimming lesson somebody - pushed me in. And in going in - it was in the shallow end and I hit me head on the bottom. So I was dragged out then and after that I hated swimming lessons. And two other - lessons I used to detest 
w
ere - woodwork, because we used to have to go - we'd have a special classroom for woodwork - I don't think I ever succeeded in making anything except a very - very simple pipe rack I once took home to father, which he never used. And I don't blame him bec
a
use I thin the thing would have fallen to bits if he'd have put a pipe in it. I was never any good at that. And the other one was metal work. Metal work. Yes. We used to have to go to a school about a mile away for metal work. And - when you got there all
 
you had to do was sort of file a piece of - round bar iron into a square - which I always used to think was an awful waste of time because I could never see the sense of it. But - those things - at - at school itself, the arts side of it - history, geogra
phy, English, except parsing, I used to hate parsing and paraphrasing - which we used to have to do a lot of in those days.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 What kind of history did they teach you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Well - usual you know, the - from - the Anglo-Saxons upwards, dates and Kings an
d Queens and all that sort of thing which - of course is really a waste of time, I can never remember any of the dates now, except - 1066, and 1815. But - history was my - I suppose one of my best subjects, I always remember once having a lovely argument 
w
ith the master. He had made some statement in history and I knew he was wrong. But I had nothing to prove it so then - I know I went and dug out ell the history books I could find at home and borrowed two or three from the public library. The next history
 
lesson I carted them all to school. And - put them underneath my desk and of course he was recapping the previous lesson and he - made this same mistake and I put up me hand. He wanted to know what I wanted and I - corrected it. And he stuck to his argume
nt and so I gradually brought out each one of these books one after the other and quoted them, until I until I nearly got six for being - cheeky. But - that was - that was I suppose one of the things that I - I really did - really did enjoy history.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 And they caned you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Oh yes, you got - you got a sixer on the hands. Sometimes you even got a rap over the knuckles with the edge of a ruler. A wooden ruler. If - you were writing and sort of didn't do it - weren't holding your pen properly or somethin
g of that sort. For real - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14378793\charrsid15017164 misdemeanors}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 you - usually got six - or four or three on the hands and - sometimes it was a case of - being marched out and - having to bend over and get six on the - the backside. I mean they were beastly painful at the time but
 I don't think they did us any harm. And I think it's one of the - the things they ought to - never should have done away with in the school at the present time. I think it would have - it would be - what shall I say - instill a little more discipline int
o - into things really. I mean it did not - it didn't do us any harm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Were the teachers particular about manners?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Yes. Oh yes, you had to - speak properly and - you know, please sir, yes sir and that sort of thing. Oh yes, they were very - very k
een about that. And about dress as far as that goes. Oh yes, you had to be neat - and tidy. And clean as far as that goes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Punctual?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh yes. Oh yes, you always got a black - let's see, a - a red mark if you were - a - to time, black mark if you were - late.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You had sort of marks?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Oh yes, you had to have a register you see. Each - each master when he got his class into his room had to call the register and you had to answer your name. So that there was no - sort of dodging it, playing t
ruant, you were soon found out. I mean one day - if you were missing one day well you were expected to bring a note with you - the next day you turned up to explain why. Or if - you sort of - there was some reason why you couldn't come back after the lunc
h
 break - well you were supposed to bring a note in the morning from either mother or father to explain why. That was always strictly - stuck to, there was not much chance of - you could play hookey of course, but you were soon found out. And of course if 
y
ou did it too often you soon had the - school inspector or as - it's still called now - well at least it's what they call the attendance officer now, but we used to call, and I thin people do still use the term, the school - the school board man, would co
me round knocking at the door wanting to know why little Willie wasn't at - hadn't been to school you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You knew children who played truant?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh yes. There were some of them that used to. Oh yes. And then of course if it - if it became a littl
e bit too - too much of a good thing well father would be up at the local police court for - not a - his child not attending school. Oh yes, that - that happened quite - quite often. And I've known - I've known youngsters do it - used to play hookey as fa
r as that goes. But - I can't - I - I don't know that I ever did, I can't remember ever doing it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You went home for lunch - dinner?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh yes. Well I was only - only five minutes down the road you see. But we all went home for lunch. We all stopped 
school at twelve. And - went back at two, so that there was plenty of time even if you lived some distance away, of getting home for - lunch you see, but I was only just down the road, it was only - five minutes, or less than that if I ran. And - we - fin
ished school gain about half; past - half past four.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did your mother ever come up to the school and meet the teachers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 No. No. Parents very seldom came up to the school unless - you have some irate mother coming up - having a row about little Wil
lie having had a sixer across the bottom or something of that sort. And then it was merely - sort of - you used to get people who were a bit pugnacious, but - as regards - like they do now, parents and teachers - sort of working together, there was never 
a
nything of that. The only time I suppose parents would come to school - come to the school in the ordinary way would be prize giving. And even then sometimes they wouldn't come. It just depended. I can't remember - mother ever going - coming up to the sch
ool except - perhaps after we'd been away ill she might come up to explain to - the teacher why and - all that, you know, he's got to be - you've got to be }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14378793\charrsid15017164 careful}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  for a day or two and that sort of thing. But there was no - no educational connection between
 - between parents and teachers. Teachers were really sort of - really regarded as a class apart. Oh yes, they were always regarded as being sort of in the - the upper class to a certain extent.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 They didn't live round you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 No. They usually lived
 further out - in more modern built houses and in - perhaps what we used to consider was the - was the more well -to-do part of the place you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 How large an area did the children come from, did the school draw any children from the rather poorer part?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Yes, it was a mixed - mixed area it drew from. We had a mixed collection of - of children. They came from - foremen's children, shopkeepers' children, labourers' children and casual workers' children, they - we were all mixed up as regards social class.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did you separate out in the playground?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
No, I don't think there was much - except - perhaps you'd get - one or two of them were a bit - dirty or something of that sort, you used to avoid them. But generally there was not much social dis
tinction in school. About the only social distinction was sometimes - if the - a school - we did have a sort of school health visitor at the time - a sort of affair - which was mostly to see that ones hair was clean, and - of course if somebody was sent h
ome - for having - nits in the hair - then you'd avoid them like the plague because you didn't want them yourself. That was the only thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Were there gangs in the school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh yes. You - you'd have gangs in the playground.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 But that was a different sort of basis?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Well yes, it was more - perhaps you'd get some fellows - boys that - were a bit rough in their play and that sort of thing - they'd gang up together and - have a game of - oh what the dickens did we used to call it, one man - boy
 used to stand against the wall and then you get about four - bent down, one - the first one with his head in the other boy's tummy and they'd all be - the other's be head down with their head against the other back - boy's behind and then the rest of the
m would come along and leapfrog onto the back and see how many you could get up there without the - the boys collapsing. You see. That was one game they - we played during }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14378793\charrsid15017164 the}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  whatsname. Sometimes you get a - a sort of scratch - football - game going. Other
s would just; sit about perhaps. Just talking or reading. Yes, you used to play all perhaps - you know, corner playing - Jackie Fivestones or something of that sort. You used to gather together according to your - inclinations more than - more than anythi
ng else.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Were there any links between those groups playing in the playground and those who would play outside later?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Well it just depended whether - where the - the playground group lived in general. If they lived in the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10750940\charrsid15017164 same}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  street or two or thr
ee streets near at hand, they might - make a - a - play gang again. But if they were scattered all over the place well they wouldn't until they were back in the playground again you see. There was no gangs - as - you think of gangs at the present moment, 
g
oing round - getting up to mischief and - that sort of thing, I mean - you used to - perhaps a dozen of you be playing bout and you - might run down the road and as you passed the newsagents shop you'd - knock all his - billboards flat. But - that's about
 all the - or you might go along and in some - streets, the houses opened onto the pavement and the doors were sort of together. Well you very often - we'd often - of some of you would - tie the knockers together.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Were there any groups of boys standing at the corner?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Not at our age, you'd get them - the older age. Over the - over the fourteen, the boys - that had left school and had got - sort of - well jobs of some sort or other. You might find them - one or two of them but not very often, not a
s you get nowadays. You - in some areas you'd get them perhaps standing round talking. But not hanging around like we do now, and even then they never got into the - sort of vandalism and - mischief that they do nowadays. There was a - a - I think a }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10750940\charrsid15017164 great}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  deal more discipline - and of course there was more respect for the police. Because the police were about more. }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10750940\charrsid15017164 You}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 see, you always had a policeman patrolling - somewhere in your street. He'd always walk through your street two or three times a day but you
'd never know - what time of the day, you couldn't - sort of say, oh he'll be along at two o'clock and he'll be along at four. It was always - irregular times but there was always police about. And of course you had much more - respect for a policeman, or
 
- more respect for the law if you like. You regarded him not as a sort of public enemy number one as they do now. But more as a - as a friend really. Of course you used to get youngsters up to all sorts of games, I mean, youngsters would - pinch stuff off
 the stalls in the - in the market. Run along and grab an apple or something of that sort. But - it was done more for devilment really than it was done for - theft, with any - criminal instinct. Really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Do you remember street dancing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 No, I can't
 say that I do. Because of course - oh you - you get it - yes, I can. On a Bank Holiday you - in some of the areas - you'd get - perhaps dancing outside the pubs - on a Bank Holiday. It was when everybody had - sort of been having a - quite a number and t
h
ey would have got a bit - hilarious and they'd start - especially if the - if there was anybody about with the old barrel organ. Then you'd get - you'd get grown ups perhaps dancing. Of course, in the ordinary times you'd get - the barrel organ round, you
 
might get kiddies about trying to dance round. You got - often got that. But of course - the - the old barrel organ of course, you always got that around and sometimes the - the German band as the saying is, as they used to be called, which used to be qui
t
e - quite amusing. The - you'd get all these - about a dozen ladies - they really were mostly Germans as a matter of fact before 1914, they'd stand at the street come and play a few tunes. Very much umpah. But - they used to play music, and then of course
 
you would have the barrel organ which would - usually Italians brought those round, sometimes they'd have a monkey with them dressed up. The barrel organs usually played - the latest hit tunes from - the music hall or one of the - musical comedies, and - 
y
ou'd hear all the - messenger boys and that sort of thing going about their business, delivery boys on their bikes and all that sort of thing, would be whistling them. Everybody knew them. I mean, even the - the latest hit from say Flora Dora or - or the 
G
aiety Girl or something of that sort would always be - whistled by the delivery boys, it was quite the thing. And - and then of course you'd get the hurdy-gurdy man sometimes, again Italians. They - used to have a - a sort of box on a pole, which was - th
e
y used to wind a handle but it played by means of - a metal disc - which was rather like a pianola play - roll, but on a flat round disc. And it used to go over a cone, rather like a - some of the musical boxes you can see. And - they used to - used to pl
ay. Of course collecting money, ha'pennies and pennies usually thrown at them and that sort of thing. And consequently the streets used to be quite - quite gay as regards music really.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Much more than now?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh yes. 'h yes. I mean all you get now i
s - the sort of - well you used to get in the 1930's the - the - out of work Welsh miners - yell - singing - as they walked along, I always remember they used to in 1910, 1911 when there was a big crisis, there was a great deal of them out of work. They u
s
ed to come along then and - perhaps a procession of a - of a dozen of them - all out of work and of course there was no - out of work - benefit then. And - they used to come along singing - a very mournful lugubrious song - Oh what will - will - Oh what w
i
ll become of England, if things go on this day - something thousand working men are starving day by day. I always remember that bit of it. And it - it was the most mournful - song. But - then of course you'd always have the - the buskers as I mentioned be
f
ore. At the pubs. And at the - music hall and theatre queues. And some of them used to be - really - really good. It's marvellous how they used to stand up - especially the singers - stand up to - the sort of climatic conditions really and get the voice o
ver. Especially if you go - try to sing Bonny Mary of Argyll or something of that sort on the - and get it over the - the clatter and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10750940\charrsid15017164 hubbub}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  of a - of a crowded pub bar, it }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10750940\charrsid15017164 wants}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 some doing, but they used to. Or they'd have a cornet. You can - you'd perhaps
 hear the cornet streets away sometimes. It was usually - it was usually a cornet or a - or a folding harmonium. Sometimes it was a concertina. Hut - the two most popular were the folding - the folding - harmonium and the - and the cornet. The folding har
monium was about as big as one of these little electric organs they sell in }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10750940\charrsid15017164 Woolworths}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
. I don't know whether you've seen them? I don't know how many octaves, they're only about that long, I don't know how many octaves there are but - they used to manage to 
get the tune out of them. Pedalling away like mad. Oh yes, you often got - especially Saturday nights would of course be - Saturdays and Sundays were the great days for them, but of course you used to get them out practically ever - in fact there were a l
o
t of people - I have had them pointed out to me when I was - when I was a boy in Woolwich - who's sole occupation it was. They used - that was their living. And they used to make quite a good living about of it. Doing nothing else but that, going round al
l the - all the pubs for a whole - a whole area, all the way round, in fact they were quite well known. Really. Not the sort of living I should have liked, rather precarious I think.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You left school when you were twelve and a half?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 No, I left school }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5244319\charrsid15017164 when}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  I was fourteen. In 1914.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 So you really only had a few months in this job as an office boy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 I - I - I got the office boys job - I left on the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5244319\charrsid15017164 13th}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  of July, and I started work the following week. And I remained there until - the followin
g - January, 1915. No I didn't. Wait a minute, I'd left school at fourteen. I was fifteen and a half, no, I was there over a year. 1915 when I left. No, when did I join the Army? 1916, that's right, of course. Wait a minute. I always get muddled up in thi
s. No, wait a minute, I left - I left school in 1913, of course I did. I was fourteen in 1913. And it was 1915 I joined the Army. So I was there in that job all the time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Can you describe the office, what it was like?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh yes, it was the - an offi
ce partitioned off the end of a showroom and it was equipped with desks, with that - were - rather like the desks you see in the pictures portraying dickens - you know, high things with two slopes and a - ledger rack in between, and then high - high stool
s
 up about so high, used to be a - bit of a job sometimes for me to get up on them. And there were - spaces for four clerks, there were only two of us. The cashier - and - he was an old bachelor, and a most meticulous man. I remember him keepings there one
 
night - quite late - because in balancing up his day book - he - was a ha'penny out. And he wouldn't give up until he found that ha'penny. We all offered to put it in but he wouldn't have it. But he was always like that. Another occasion - he had a till y
o
u see - as a matter of fact in this firm it was a furniture dealers, and they did a lot of hire purchase work and of course in the office it was a case of people coming in - Saturday - Friday nights, Saturdays, all day Saturday paying their weekly install
m
ents, so there was always quite a bit of - money taken you see. And - he used to take them through a window and his till was one of the old fashioned - ball tills. And of course if you pushed the drawer in too far - hard, sometimes the money would shoot o
u
t one of the - one of the boards. And on one occasion there was an awful stink. He was a sovereign out and of course this was the days when - before notes, when actually gold was used. He was a sovereign out. And there was a most awful stink, I know every
body had to check everything through, and of course it was my job - as he entered up these - books, the peoples paying in }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10750940\charrsid15017164 books sort}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  of thing and he'd enter it into his day book and then I had to transfer from his day book into the ledgers, the ledger accou
nts of each person. And then we had to check every one of these entries through - against one another. And we checked everything we could possibly thing of. And then somebody - oh I think it was the managing director was waiting to - waiting to lock up an
d go home. He came, he said, hell}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5244319\charrsid15017164 ,}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 he said, I'll give you the pound - oh - the old cashier wouldn't have it. And - he said, well, he said, have you pulled the drawer cut? So - oh - so the cashier said, no. He said, I will. And he pulled the drawer out and t
here was the sovereign lying in the bottom of the - tray. It had shot out as he pushed the in you see. But he was a most meticulous man, always used to say he - he hadn't blood in his veins, he'd only got red ink. He was that type of - dry as dust individ
u
al. Figures - and his cash book were absolutely his - whatsname. Another job I used to have to do was to make out the copies of the hire purchase agreements. The agreement would be made out and signed and sealed and all the rest of it, or signed over a si
x
penny stamp. And then I used to have to - make a copy - all on printed forms, I used to make the copy - so that it would be handed over to the - hiree. And then of course another job of mine was to always take all the - ledgers down to the safe which was 
down in the basement. And it was a bit of a job, put them in the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10750940\charrsid15017164 strong room}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 - the safe and - pile of these blessed ledgers, they were thick, the - the covers were about a quarter of an inch thick and they were not of flimsy paper I can assure you. They wer
e thick and - were untearable paper actually. And they were very heavy and I used to - I used to grouse like made about it, in fact one night we did have a - I }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5244319\charrsid15017164 didn\rquote t}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  have an awful row about it. But - it was not a - a very - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10750940\charrsid15017164 onerous}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 - you know, I was never
 overworked sort of thing. The hours were long. It was nine in the morning until - six o'clock on most nights, Friday nights was - until - eight. And - I think on Saturday nights it was nearly - nearly ten before we finished, you see, the ordinary shop ho
u
rs. And of course we had Thursday afternoons off. And when I first started, I went to - went for this job, I got it entirely on my own, I saw the advertisement in the paper and I went to see them and I was taken on and I - my initial salary was seven and 
sixpence per week. I was there six months and when I got a rise of half a crown and I thought I was a millionaire. But - let me see, I don't think I was getting much more than that when I - when I really left.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 There was the cashier, how many others were there there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Oh well there was another clerk in the - in the office. But then there were various - salesmen used to use desks in the office. Specially if they were writing up any - any account or doing what they called their own spiv account. You 
see, in the trade at that time there was certain - lines of furniture, articles of furniture which were perhaps hanging fire, you put - you know, didn't sell very well. Well - if that was so the - the - the boss used to sort of put a spiv on and all - spi
v is a slang }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10750940\charrsid15017164 name}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 for a commission, so that if the salesman sold them he got an extra commission for those particular bits. And - of course there was always much reckoning up of spivs at the end of the week, so as to get - some of them used to get quite a g
ood bit of money. Of course there was not much - I mean, furniture was not expensive in those days by any means. Well it wasn't for a long while afterwards as far as that goes. But - of course there was a certain of amount of retail trade as well. Carpets
 and - lino. And that sort of thing. And then we opened a - they opened a - music department, well there always was a music department for pianos. And - they went in for }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10750940\charrsid15017164 gramophones}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 , and that's how we got our first musical instrument in the house. My own home. Was a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10750940\charrsid15017164 gramophone}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  I bought there. A }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10750940\charrsid15017164 gramophone}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  with a large tin horn. And - of course I used to borrow - }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10750940\charrsid15017164 gramophone}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 records over the weekend. Or at least we used to have them on like appro actually. Yes, from the shop. And - play them at home during the weekend and - perhaps if we liked one we might bay one, they used to cost half a crown then. And - then take them }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10750940\charrsid15017164 back on}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 Monday morning you see. Of course the boss didn't know that - I was - the - the music salesman allowed me to - to do this. Well one o
f the managers, he - one of the head salesmen - he lived near us and he was the man I mentioned a while ago used to see going to work in a morning coat - frock coat. They were of course considered a little bit - up sort of thing. But - it was quite a - qu
i
te a good job. As a matter of fact - I - as I say, I quite enjoyed it and I learnt quite a lot there. As regards - ledger work and that sort of thing, but it was a - it was a dead end job, I don't say I would have stopped there long, it was a dead end job
 really.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 What was this other clerk like?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Oh he was a - he was a - a young - he was married. He was a young fellow I suppose about thirty. He was married and - a bit of a bohemian. I remember he did - ask me to go to a party at his house one nigh
t. And - he lived near us, in a rather big house, and it was a - well, what I thought was at that time was quite bohemian. There was much - liquid floating about, and - much cuddling and canoodling round the place. I felt most horribly out of place and I 
d
on't mind telling you I didn't stop there very long. It was - rather reminds me - reminded me I suppose of quite a good description of it would be - one of the parties of - George Erosmith's - Mr Nobody, you know, I don't know whether you've ever read it 
-
 which is a very good picture of the period. It was sort of a - well - it was not quite a bachelor party because quite a number of the couples were married but - they didn't seem to be - particularly - what shall I say - I don't quite know how to put it -
 
it was rather a peculiar affair and I didn't stop for very long. But - well, I don't say they were quite that but they were flirting all over the place. After the war - I don't know, but I think he had - some German connections, because - after war broke 
o
ut in August '14 - he suddenly started - using German in the office, speaking - you know, using German places and phrases and that sort of thing. And it was through that that - I - sort - I sort of joined the Army because as I say, he got my goat one day 
a
nd I flung a ledger at him. I didn't hit him unfortunately, but - he annoyed me so much that I - I did, I lost my temper and threw this at him. And - what happened to him afterwards I don't know. I've never - never heard of the man, I daresay he was calle
d
 up and - he might have been killed for all I know. There you see, I didn't go back - to Woolwich after I - after I joined the Army, except for just - a few days. Until - I was a few days in 1918, then I left again and I didn't go back for 19 - after - 19
1
9 was the next time I went back, and then I wasn't back in England - well, I wasn't in Woolwich much because I was in Aldershot, I was there for bout six months and then I was out. And I didn't come back again until 1928. So that really that part of - of 
l
ife is - a sort of - I often say, a sort of lost generation really. Because all - when I came back all the people that I knew - and - sort of scattered all over the place, those people I used to go to school with - were married and were fathers and that s
ort of thing and I knew nobody. In fact it wasn't until the second world war in the Home Guard one day - I - was signals officer for the local battalion for a while, a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10750940\charrsid15017164 lieutenant}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  of the Home Guard came up to me and - made some remark to me which sounded rather - suspicious, I wondered what he was getting at. And - I asked him }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5244319\charrsid15017164 after }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
another remark which - rang a bell somewhere and I suddenly discovered that this - this man was - a boy I knew at school and I'd never seen him since I left school.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did you have any contact with the employer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Oh yes. He was always about the - about the - shop. He was name - well it was a company that the shop belonged to. He was the managing director, a man named Cannock. Oh yes, I - we - he was always about the place, 
of course one was always rather circumspect when he was about. But - he was quite fair and - would speak to one and that sort of thing, but - of course was rather - he had his private office upstairs, rather big room. And - was rather - sort of - up there
 sort of thing and one didn't one scuttled round when he was about and when he - when he'd gone you - resumed your normal pace sort of thing. He used to act as salesman as well at times.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Were there quire a lot of slang words used in the shop?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Well - no, I don't think so, it's about the only one I can remember connected with the trade. Of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10750940\charrsid15017164 course slang}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 was used amongst the - amongst the - the staff or - describing customers wand that sort of thing but then it was the ordinary common slang of the str
eets really. I can't remember any - particular - trade - term alone, except that one, the spivs - the spivs. That's the only one I can remember of them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 They didn't use back slang?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh no, you only got back slang amongst the - amongst the - coste
rs - the costermongers, the stall holders and the - in the square, in the market, and - people of that nature. They were always called - regarded as being very common, and used to get a lot of back slang amongst them. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10750940\charrsid15017164 You'd get it in some of the shops in that area too. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
For instance, you'd get of course the apples and pears and all the rest of it which is quite well known, or - after - 1914 of course if you wanted to be - derogatory of somebody you might - might say he was an ablag}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10750940\charrsid15017164  (?)}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 . Yes. That being German. But you can put it round the wrong way so that it wouldn't too }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10750940\charrsid15017164 
obvious}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  and you wouldn't get a punch on the nose sort of thing. But - back slang - quite frankly you know you would hear a lot about back slang but - I can't say that - apart from the - apar
t from the stallholders in the market - and - people saying something for a joke - I can't - I can't - sort of recall that it was a general way of speaking. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10750940\charrsid15017164 
The costermongers would use it if they were calling out their wares, they'd - call out all sorts of things. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
And in fact sometimes it - it wasn't back slang, it was - real language but - they used to be noted for that, in fact there was one dear lady, and I think she's still living in Woolwich, or at least she was a little while ago, who always sold bana
nas and she was well known for - she used to say some of the most - outrageous things you could possibly - think of. I mean, it puts Hair and Oh Calcutta into a - into the shades now. She used to come out with when she was selling her bananas. And of cour
s
e you get some of the other - stallholders, the china people and that sort of thing, 'cos a lot of them would travel, they'd travel round to all these markets - and you'd get the man who'd - and I've seen it done quite often - who'd get a - a whole - fort
y
 piece tea set on - laid out on his arm and chuck it up in the air and catch the whole lot without braking anything. And - or a - a big dinner service, he'd do the same thing. Well I daresay you've seen it haven't you? I have many a time. Get it all laid 
o
ut on a - on the big meat dish, see the whole lot piled up and - throw the whole lot up in the air and catch it. No breakage whatever. Of course it was done as an attraction to attract people round and then they'd - then you see the - the - style of selli
n
g was they'd - auction it downwards. And - of course the thing was to - wait and see 'til he got it down as low as you could possibly - you could possibly get it before you shouted. Then of course he sold one at that price, then he'd start selling the oth
ers at the same price you see. You always did that, and the - fruit and that sort of thing, well there were always - apples and pears and that sort of thing that they've very often bring in a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10750940\charrsid15017164 bit}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  of backslang to - wake the - sort of - attraction. But it was
 not - I don't think you can call it - at least not in our time - can you call it a - a method of - a way of - of conversation or of even speaking really. Although - it was used of course. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10750940\charrsid15017164 
You might get the - music hall people and that sort of thing perhaps use it but - to even them it was - it was really I think a - a - a - survival of something very, very much earlier. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
When - say - early - early 19th }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10750940\charrsid15017164 century}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 I think really, when there were - a greater - sort of - criminal class sort of thing. When it was 
necessary for them to be able to speak - or convey something to somebody without the rest of the world knowing what you were talking about. I think it dates - I think it's a survival more of - of the Dickens period than anything else. Or perhaps earlier t
han that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did you come across the National Union of Clerks?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 No. Never un - not until - not until 19 - 'til - oh in the 1950's. There were not many - white collar trade unions.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did you have to be articled, there was no form of apprenticeship or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Oh no. No. No, no. No, no. It was - really the - there were of course articles - if - I mean in the - in some - clerical jobs like accountants and that sort of thing, very - more professionals. But the ordinary clerk there was no - appr
enticeship. No, you just - got a job and that was all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Did you feel that having a job changed your situation at home, your relationship with your parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Yes, I suppose it did really. I mean I was a little bit more perhaps independent. And I wa
s able - sort of - I was able to assist - with the housekeeping and have a - shilling or two in my pocket, not that I had very much, but I remember I }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10750940\charrsid15017164 did}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  feel quite the - the lad, especially as I - I haven't been in the job very long because of the - I got
 my first - real suit, long trousers and all the rest of it and I've got a photograph of that somewhere - in the house, I always remember the said suit because it was a lovely - cigar brown, and I had a brown felt hat - kid gloves, silver top cane, brown 
s
hoes. And I felt the absolute - real - sort of - Burlington Bertie sort of thing. I always remember that suit because - I wore it first on a Bank Holiday, and I went out on my own, complete with kid gloves and cane and all the rest of it, and I walked to 
a fair at }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10750940\charrsid15017164 Bostall}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 Heath. And whilst in the middle of a fair I had - dropped my gloves, I bent down to pick it up - and as I did so every button on my trousers came off. So I had to walk home with my cane tucked under my arm, my hands in my trousers pockets,
 to keep the trousers up. And the funny part about it was, all the way home - of course I kept meeting people who knew me, and as it was a case then the rigour of raising one's hat, it became very awkward. I always remember that one. And I've got a photog
r
aph somewhere about the house of me in that suit - that I had taken - at the sort of local photographers, which was - of course quite a thing. But it did give me a certain amount of - more freedom, sort of thing, I could go out - on my own without - sort 
of - explaining where I was going or - getting permission and that sort of thing, and I could go to - the cinema. Without - sort of - explaining. I wasn't - still wasn't allowed to stop out late.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 When did you have to be in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh I used to have to 
be in about - I suppose half past nine, ten, you see. As a matter of fact of course after work one didn't go out much in the week. Perhaps Thursdays - at Thursday afternoons one might take myself off to the pictures, because of course then you could get i
nto the - the cinema for - sixpence. And one had a - cup of tea and biscuit thrown in. Besides seeing the - seeing the programme.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 On Sundays you say you gave up going to Sunday school at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 So what might you do on Sundays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Well, Sunday mornings I'd - sort of get up and have breakfast, get - dressed and I'd go out for a walk, perhaps - most - on most occasions go up onto the - there was the usual - most people in Woolwich go up onto the - garrison common, garrison parade 
ground and watch the parade going to - into church parade. Stop there until - they came out of church and marched off, then listen to the - the - Artillery }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10750940\charrsid15017164 b}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 and who used to - play a few - marches and that sort of thing outside the officer's mess, an then g
o over at one o'clock to the - saluting battery and hear them fire the one o'clock gun, the time signal. Of course in between, while they were in church it was a case of - one strolled up and down amongst the crowd, a - a sort of - well the common express
i
on is a sort of monkey parade. You just strolled up - you might see somebody you knew, a neighbour or something of that sort and - sometimes my sisters'd be with me. I was never very pleased when they were as far as that goes. Well they were younger than 
me - but - it - that was the usual procedure, then come back to dinner.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You were in your suit for this were you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh yes, I was always dressed up for that. Then in the afternoon - well - I don't suppose we did go out really. After tea - might go 
out in the evening, perhaps take - a stroll round or - stop at home and - just - sort of as one would - no sort of set - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10750940\charrsid15017164 programmes}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 . I very often perhaps would - walk down to the local - the market place and as I say listen to the - speakers down there, wander from one to the other. More amused than anything else at their words of wisdom.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Were you taking more interest in politics after you started work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh - oh no. No, no. No, no. It was - no, I suppose I - I don't think - really I altered much i
n ways, except of course I did - I had more freedom and - used to go out a bit more by myself you know really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Why did they call it the monkey parade?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Well I don't know, it's a - it's a general term that has - because - it was - sort of wanderin
g backwards and forwards, you just paraded up and down -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 By yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
I was by myself, but of course it was usually a case you wandered up and down by yourself until you saw somebody you - and you got off. Or picked up sort of thing. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10750940\charrsid15017164 I think the
 thing still - still exists, it's - it's a term that has been used - used in Woolwich I know in - whether it's a - a - an army term or not, or whether that was where it rose from I don't know, but I've always heard it in Woolwich as the monkey parade. }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 I suppose it does really in all places where you got - crowds of - young people sort of just promenading.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 There were usually groups of boys or groups of girls?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Yes. Oh yes. Yes. Yes, sometimes you'd get half a dozen girls all together and - half a d
ozen boys and - of course - they usually tried to - connect in some way or other. Drop a handkerchief or - something of that sort or - trip over. No, you don't have a wolf whistle in those days. Of course you got very - very - adventurous, perhaps you'd p
ull a girls hair or something of that sort, and then }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10750940\charrsid15017164 she\rquote d}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
 turn round and - well it all depended who she was. She might give you a mouthful, she might be quite polite. But - it was a case of - you - you used some subterfuge to - you saw anybody you particul
arly liked. But - I don't know that I did really, I was not much a one for - it was not until after I was the Army that I got - interested in girls, and then I wasn't particularly.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Usually at what sort of age did boys become interested in girls at that time?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Oh - oh I suppose about fifteen, sixteen, seventeen. I don't know they didn't rally, I suppose you really only got - interested in girls because of course - it was a case of - marriage, I think there was no sort of - of taking a - a girl out
 - like you do now, sort of take her to the pictures and that - perhaps not -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You didn't take them to the cinema then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh you did, but - only when you were - as the saying now is, going steady. You see, and - I mean you didn't start going steady
 until you got - very much older in most cases. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10750940\charrsid15017164 
Because of course - well - one had to think about going steady, I mean people didn't - sort of get married until they were well in their twenties, late twenties, in their thirties actually, because of course 
you hadn't go the - the money and it was a case of having to save up - to - provide - find the where with all to - to get married on, you couldn't - well not in most cases could you - sort of get married as you can nowadays on the - never, never or hire p
urchases you see. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 I mean, hire purchase in those days was considered rather - rather - well not a nice thing, you didn't tell the neighbours you'd got it on hire purchase sort of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You would expect to have a kind of home to offer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 That's rig
ht, you sort of - you - you really - it was most - I think most peoples; idea that - you should have - at least something - a home of some sort or other to - to offer - before you could - at least, the where with all to get it before you could sort of sta
rt thinking about - going steady with anybody.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Were there any other sort of obvious places apart from this }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10750940\charrsid15017164 monkey}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  parade where boys and girls could sort of meet who didn't know each other normally?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Well only - churches and chapels and that sort o
f thing you see. There were no - there were - the - for meeting of - and of course the - a street, I mean - the girl next door and the neighbours girls and girls living a few - doors from you and that sort of thing, you'd naturally know those. And - there
 wouldn't - weren't - an extraordinary lot of - social opportunities, for really meeting girls, except as I say at church or - church functions or chapel functions or - something of that sort.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You had rather dropped those?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh yes, I'd dropped out of all those really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Had you taken up any new clubs or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
No. No. I - I hadn't actually, I used - used to keep myself then very much - rather to myself actually, a sort of a lone wolf sort of thing. I used to find much more - amusement in - watching the world go by really than - sort of going - going in with it.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 More than when you were a schoolboy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh yes, more than when I was a schoolboy, yes. I used to spend a great deal of time reading at the library and that sort of thing 
as I - had - time and that sort of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You went to evening classes as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 I did go to evening classes for a while.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 What did you do there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 But - that didn't last long, I don't know why I dropped it really. I went for - shorthand -
 shorthand and book keeping. Well - I don't know quite why, I never got very far in shorthand. I can just about remember the alphabet of Pitmans, or most of it. But that's as far as I ever did get I think really. I don't know why I dropped - dropped night
 school 'cos I mean - really. I did, I gradually - I know I paid all fees and all that sort of thing but - not that they were a very great amount but - some - I don't know, I just - just dropped it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Would you make friends at a place like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Well, yes, you could there you see. I mean, there you'd get somebody of the same sort of - you'd have something to - something in common.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 There was this friend who took you to a sort of literary evening?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh yes, I - I - I don't know who it was now
, I couldn't - I can't recall who on earth that was. I think it was somebody - it was before I left school actually I think. It might have been afterwards. But I haven't a foggiest notion who it was that - took me there, and I only went the once.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 So there wasn't a sort of special chum or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
No, I had - no, no, not after I left school. When I was at school there was a boy on the opposite side of the road I used to spend a lot of time - time with in his house. He - him father had died and hi
s mother was - out a lot. And we used to spend - oh hours together in the - in the house. But - after I left school I think that dropped really. I suppose he'd got a job somewhere, I think he did, I think he left school about the same time as me. And - we
ll sort of just faded out really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You went over to his house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Well I was more in his house than -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 What sort of things did you do?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh just - read or - played - played about, all sorts of thing and - usually - I was he used to make a - 
a very good welsh rarebit. And we used to tuck into that, very often make ourselves very bilious, but - I remember doing that quite often in the winter in his kitchen. Oh we used to get up to all sorts of - silly little things. No, that period - is really
 
a - a - between the time I left school and the time I joined the Army is really very - a dud period really, there was nothing much that I did at all - I used to again - go up to London, but then of course I'd - I could go up - not on my own two feet, I co
u
ld go on the train or - or the tram. And - I used to - sort of wander around. I was always a great one for - sort of wandering round the historical places of London, I used to know nearly all the back alleys for miles around really, of course they're most
l
y all gone now but - even now if I want to go from here to there in London I can usually - go quicker by doubling up the back alleys than I can by taking transport. But to tell - anybody how to get there I couldn't. Not - the way I would go you see. Or I'
d
 - another place we sometimes go to Greenwich Park, which was quite a good walk from us. There's usually - a band there on a Sunday evening. And - another monkey parade round the bandstand. Or Thursday evenings of course in the summer on Plumstead Common 
there was a - usually a band there. And - very often used to group there, perhaps sit on the grass or - wander round and round and round the - bandstand again you see. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5244319\charrsid15017164 It }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 was simple little things like that which really - you can't sort of - sort of pinpoint really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
When you went around in this suit and so on how did you feel when you saw some of the schoolboys that you'd been with who had got sort of labouring jobs and so on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh yes, well - as a matter of fact, again I can't remember meeting many 
of - the schoolboys who were in my class who left about the same time as me. We seemed to have got into - sort of separate compartments. I suppose if I ever did meet any of them we just passed the time of day and that sort of thing. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Sometimes we hear about scorn for somebody who's a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10750940\charrsid15017164 pen pusher}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 ?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Ah yes. There was that sort of thing as I - going to say, but - as regards the schoolboys - if I met them - perhaps they were in the class below me when I left, well of course one used to - sort of f
eel very superior to them, they were mere schoolboys sort of thing. If a fellow was - just an ordinary labourer, well - there was again a sort of - feeling of - being superior, because you were white collar worker, he was a - a labourer or a - a mechanic 
or something of that sort. There was that - there was that feeling amongst everybody I think. That - white collar worker was a bit higher up. And - of course in the sort of labouring classes there were various degrees there}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10750940\charrsid15017164 .}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  But - no, as a matter of fact I 
can't remember really meeting many of - of boys who were at school with me, after I - after I left. I many have but - they never registered sort of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 I suppose this was a stage really when you felt most distant from your sisters?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Yes. Yes.
 Yes. Because of course they were only - let's see, my two sisters were only about - my oldest sister was about ten I suppose, when I left school, yes, she was about four years difference. And of course - I was considering myself grown up when they were -
 
you know, beastly little nuisances. I know my youngest sister who was always - very keen on - on needlework - she would - she was always pinching my ties and cutting them up to make dolls clothes with, much to make my annoyance. And that sort of thing. Al
t
hough sometimes I used to - I used to help her to tell you the truth. I - often used to sit down and - sort of sketch out a - a dress and she'd make it for her dolls, and sometimes I used to even - sort of pin it together - pin the bits - make - make it m
yself, well at least get it pinned up together and cut it out and all the rest of it. I'm afraid it was that sort of - things that used to interest me more than - more than the sporting side.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 That sister became the court dressmaker?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Mm, the youngest one.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Was she a court dressmaker all the time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
No, she - well she was all her - practically all her working life until - oh I don't know - oh, until she got married, yes, she was a dressmaker right up until she got married. And then she gave 
up, but she still makes her own - dresses. But - yes, in the war - then of course - when war broke out - she - what the devil did she do during the war? During the last war. Oh yes, she went into - she went into the Civil Service in the last war. How on e
a
rth that - she managed it I don't know, but she was in the Labour Exchange. Right through, yes, right through the war. And then she married - she married after the war or before the war? After the war. No, before the war - before the war, yes, before the 
war. Yes - she was all - practically - well all her normal working life, put it that way, she was a court dressmaker in Hanover Square.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 What does her husband do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh he was - well - it just depends which one you mean, there was two of them. The fi
rst - the first one was - the son of a local - shopkeeper - who was - the business of - tools - tools and ironmongery and that sort of thing. He was - more mechanical than anything else. And then - she married again.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 He worked in the shop did he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
He worked in the shop sometimes and sometimes he worked outside, he was a bit of a ne'er do well actually, and - eventually she divorced him. And then she married again a - after the war - a fellow who - retired from - Colonial service. And they now live
 - he was a - oh a building inspector in charge of - of building some hospitals in Nigeria, and - he - they now live in Lancashire. But - she hasn't worked since - since then actually. Since the war. The eldest sister, well she - she was a secretary right
 
up to - well she married. She married first as a matter of fact, before I did. And - then - well she was at home as an ordinary housewife for a long while, then she - went out to - business as a secretary, and - eventually died. But - she was married - sh
e was the first one of the family to marry actually, and she married before - before I - well I was away in South Africa when she married.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 What did her husband do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 He was - he was a gas - gas fitter, with the - what was then the South Metropolit
an Gas Company which is now of course the Gas Board. He's retired now and I don't know where he is. Down - somewhere in the - South - South West somewhere. But - they - they both did quite well and - we were, I suppose - yes. Yes. Yes, in the same street,
 
yes, and - after - of course we had grown up, I suppose we became much closer together than we had been when we were very much younger. Although I was never particularly - close to them because of course I was away from England - for so long while they we
re growing up. And - I was always a bit of a - a sort of - a loner really. You couldn't help it being - being away so - for so long.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 But that is more a later time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Well, yes, right from - sort of outbreak of 1914 until 1928.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 When you were a boy you really did play a great deal with other people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Yes. Oh yes. Yes. No, well - no, I used to have spasms of it. Yes. Sometimes I used to - couldn't be bothered and another time I'd - enter into it sort of thing. But usually I had a sort of spar
e time job I suppose from about the time I was - about twelve I suppose really. Job of some sort or other.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 The newspaper round?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Yes, the newspaper one and the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10750940\charrsid15017164 grocers}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid792229\charrsid15017164  and the greengrocers. Oh then there was another one I had for a little while, 
in a - in a - a drapers. That wasn't very long. Oh it was just keeping the shop tidy and delivering things. I wasn't very long in that, and I never liked that one because - the - shopkeeper there was - he was a very strict chapel merchant and was very - v
ery awkward - and - the whole atmosphere was not at all - to my liking and I didn't - I only had it for a - month or so.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Can you tell me more about it, what was wrong with it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh I don't know, I suppose - he was a bit fussy. He was fussy and - ve
ry prim and proper. And - well he was - he was only a small shop really - he had been in a big shop and he'd - I suppose saved a bit of money and bought this small shop and he was just about - I should imagine - just about making a living out of it and th
at was all and consequently I never got much from him. And - one of the reasons why I didn't stop there very long, but I didn't like the man somehow. And - consequently I never sort of got down to it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 How did you get these jobs, were they advertised?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Well - yes, or you'd hear of them - through - somebody or other, oh Mr So and So wants a - somebody. And you'd - you know - and - perhaps mother would say, well you'd better go round and see him, or something of that sort. You'd just go round and - p
erhaps get taken on.;
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Do you remember how you found that first job in the office?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 Oh the - the - what when I first - when I - went out properly? Oh from the local newspaper. That was advertised in the local newspaper.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13179849 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 You went round for an interview?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12126379 CV  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid792229\charrsid15017164 
Yes. It was - I found it on the Friday morning, the local newspaper came out on Friday, I saw it that morning, it was about a week after I'd left school. And I promptly - went down to then. I had an interview straight away and I started on
 the next Monday. So really I hadn't very much between leaving school and - starting work, only about a week which - was quite quick really. That's how I - that's how I got it.
\par }}