{\rtf1\adeflang1025\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\adeff0\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang2057\deflangfe2057{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}{\f38\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f39\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f41\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f42\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f43\fbidi \froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}
{\f44\fbidi \froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f45\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f46\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f48\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}
{\f49\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f51\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f52\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f53\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f54\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}
{\f55\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f56\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden 
Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs20 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}}
{\*\latentstyles\lsdstimax156\lsdlockeddef0}{\*\revtbl {Unknown;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid489342\rsid725484\rsid949540\rsid4786472\rsid5178564\rsid6042602\rsid6450268\rsid6557717\rsid8284531\rsid10511160\rsid12086728\rsid13524052\rsid14483652\rsid15352313\rsid16523642}
{\*\generator Microsoft Word 11.0.0000;}{\info{\title Information about interviewee}{\author SEENU}{\operator lhorto}{\creatim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min9}{\revtim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min9}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords30204}
{\nofchars172163}{\nofcharsws201964}{\vern24613}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 http://schemas.microsoft.com/office/word/2003/wordml}}\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1800\margr1800\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0\ltrsect 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\donotembedsysfont0\donotembedlingdata0\grfdocevents0\validatexml1\showplaceholdtext0\ignoremixedcontent0\saveinvalidxml0\showxmlerrors1\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace180
\dgvspace180\dghorigin1800\dgvorigin1440\dghshow1\dgvshow1\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\splytwnine\ftnlytwnine\htmautsp\nolnhtadjtbl\useltbaln\alntblind\lytcalctblwd\lyttblrtgr\lnbrkrule\nojkernpunct\rsidroot725484 \fet0
{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}\ilfomacatclnup0\ltrpar \sectd \ltrsect\linex0\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ltrpar
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid14483652 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\ul\insrsid14483652\charrsid16072257 Information about interviewee}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid14483652 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid14483652\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tx2057\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid14483652 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid14483652\charrsid16072257 Date of birth}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid14483652 
   \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid14483652\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid14483652  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid15352313 1903}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid14483652\charrsid16072257 

\par Gender}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid14483652           \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid14483652\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid14483652  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid15352313 M}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid14483652 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid14483652\charrsid16072257 Marital status}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid14483652 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid14483652\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid14483652  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid15352313 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid14483652\charrsid16544153 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid14483652\charrsid16072257 Occupation}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid14483652 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid14483652\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid14483652  
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid15352313 Farmer}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid14483652\charrsid16072257 
\par Geographic region}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid14483652 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid14483652\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid14483652  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid15352313 
Bridgend, Glamorgan}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid14483652\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\qj \fi-490\li518\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin518\itap0\pararsid14483652 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Could w}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid725484\charrsid6557717 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
 have your name?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 John Emrys Edwards.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 And your present address?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 I live in Nant-y-Neuadd Farm, Kenfig Hill.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Are you married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, I am married and I have four children.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 The year of your marriage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 We were married in - 1935.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 And the year of your birth?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 I was born in 1903, on December the nineteenth.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Where were you born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
I was born in the cottage at Pontrhydyfen, Port Talbot. The - all right, the - the - leave that - the cottage, or better known - or better known to the Pontyrhydyfen people as Tetocan.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 How many years did you live in the house where you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Well I was five - five years when - five years old when we - left the cottage to go and live in Oakwood, Pontrhydyfen which was across the river.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Where did you live then, did you stay in Oakwood some time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
We stayed in Oakwood until 1923. And my father being a colliery manager - he moved down - to - the group of collieries of the Baldwins, Aberboydwin and Pintra collieries at Kenfig Hill.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Do you remember why you moved from the cottage to Oakwood?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Yes, the cottage was - just as the thatched cottage of the time was. They had only - one long bedroom, where the parents and the children - slept, and there was one kitchen and what is called the chamber, the little room that was adjoining. And it cam
e when we - the family was coming, we were then - three children and my parents, and the building trade was going on at the time, and I can remember my mother telling me how she put the deposit of one pound on a house that was built, and - that - is known
 as Penhydd Street, Oakwood, Pontrhydyfen, and - that's where we lived until we moved to Kenfig Hill, in - 1923.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 When you say you remember your mother telling you about putting the deposit, what did she tell you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 The - interesting part about tha
t - was - that it was her brother was one of the contractors that was building - that was building the houses - for the other man was - Daniel Jones, he was the carpenter, and my uncle was the mason, Jenkin Thomas was the mason, so - she wouldn't - think 
of her - brother, but she did ask - Daniel Jones - what were the terms and how much of a deposit was wanted for a house, and he said, well - how much have you got? And it must have }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid725484\charrsid6557717 
been - well, if you've got a po}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 und that is sufficient for the deposit on the house.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 How many brothers and sisters did you have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 I had five sisters and - two brothers besides - two brothers.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Could you give the birth order?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh - I had five sisters - my - the eldest sister Eunice was born in September 1902. And 
then Irene was born in December the twenty-fifth, 1907. Rhoda was March - 1907. Then came the twins, Kitty and Megan, born in September 1911. Those were my sisters. I was the eldest boy born in 1903. Elwyn was born in June 1905. And then Thomas, the young
est of us, he was born on November the tenth, in 1912.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 How old was your father when you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, twenty-seven. Father was twenty-seven when I was born, and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Where did he come from?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 He was born in Pontrhydyfen. He - never rememb
ers his father, his father came - strangely from the Kenfig Hill district, came to Pontrhydyfen when the iron works was going then in Pontrhydyfen - the iron works which - had the water for the big bridge. His father was a blacksmith, and by his photograp
h
 that we have, he was a six footer and a strong able man. The depression came in the - works in - at Pontrhydyfen at the time when Rhonda Blycombe works were opening, and so it seems he went there for a - to have work, and - received a damp bed which - br
o
ught on what we call today pneumonia, but then it was called inflammation. Mm. And he was - he died leaving a widow with two little children. Sister was older than my father. Things being very bad at the time - and it was very bad too - there two little c
h
ildren, but with the help of the family, and she - like many more, took in the washing and went to do washing, and - they - his upbringing was - as you can imagine, was not very good under those circumstances. Still - he had been brought up - Church of En
g
land, Church of England boy, and they were very devout, he knew his creed and he knew everything. And he - was with them until - as he explained, a lad of fifteen, and then he went to the non-conformist, because - as he used to say they had stronger food 
f
or him. They used to have - literary and debating societies which were very - popular at the time and he reveled in that. Always been a good reader, he - was up to date with the latest books. But not only that, he was a keen musician. And - even with his 
-
 lack of funds at the time, but he did go to Neath to take lessons on the violin, and one of his - fellow students, under a gentleman called Moodie, was - the late Doctor David Evans of - Cardiff. And I can remember Doctor David Evans - conducting the - a
 Gamanfu Ganu in Bridgend and coming to my father afterwards and say - where did you go out of my life, I thought sure that you would have come on with me. Well now.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What did your father do, what was his job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Well he was - there wasn't a thing i
n Pontrhydyfen at that time for any young man, except the collieries, and - we can hear many of the tales - of the - the colliery then, the lads were going, starting work - from ten to twelve, in these places on the mountainside, and - eventually - the bi
g
ger collieries came, they sank the - Whithworth pits in - in Ton Mawr, they were not the success, but then they sank the Cannon Pit. There was an old Cannon Level, but then they sank the pit, when the Percy Jacobs and his brother came to the Evan Valley. 
Many of the bigger collieries were started afterwards, such as the Frynrhnfar and the pit in Glyncroch, and Nant-Olaf, but the Oakwood there was - was about coming to an end at that time. But colliers, miners they were.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Your father went to work there did he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Yes. Aye, the - the - into the - into the collieries, there were - various I've named two or three different types but it was in the - Niguday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 When did he start work there, at what age?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Ten, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did he have any other jobs then, he started in the colliery?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Yes. Well now here's one - interesting point again. He was - he didn't have - there were no jobs, no second jobs at that time. But - he was - a keen radical pol - political - politically, and - S.T. Evans, the member f
or Mid-Glamorgan, he was the - a big man and a big friend of my father, and during election time I can remember the committee rooms in our parlour, and the comings and goings when I was a toddler during election time on - that time. When Lloyd George - in
t
roduced his - bill, my father was - very very much for that. And one of - that advocated - the insurance. He also was on the committee of a provident society, which I don't know if it's still going but it was until lately, the Bristol West of England and 
South Wales Provident Society. That did give - something like from eleven shillings to fourteen shillings a week if a person was ill. Another - thing -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What did your father have to do with that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 He was - at one time, he was secretary of it. And -
 but he was - as they had just a - a few, you had a secretary and a treasury - treasurer and just a few members of the committee, but he was always involved in that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 He did that as well as his job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 As his job, yes. Another thing - that started a
t that time - was the Co-operative movement. And he with another - half a dozen, after they had done their work, they were going down - to this new - Co-operative, and they built it up until it was wrong enough to employ a secretary manager for it. So he 
was one of the - founders of the Co-operative.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 He was a miner, did he have any other job then, was he always a miner?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, he never were - was anything excepting the - in the coalmines. But what year are you going - I see what you are a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12086728\charrsid6557717 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 ming at. 
Having been brought up in the collieries, at that time there was - a movement for - the education that could be had, and - he took up - a correspondence lessons in the science and art of mining, and I can remember those - weekly - books - coming to the ho
u
se and he used to study those, and - mining and geology and insulation, and all those - until eventually, he became a fireman, and then - graduated from there to the - second class manager's certificate. And finally - at the age of twenty-one he qualified
 as a mining engineer.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 If he had his mining engineering certificate at twenty-one and he was born in 1876 it meant he qualified in 1897, as a colliery manager?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 That's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 So he was a colliery manager before you were born?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 But actually he didn't continue with it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 He was still a collier, I say, but he was - cutting coal up until - 1911, 'til the 1912 strike. 1912 strike.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 But you told me earlier he went to do a colliery manager's job earlier?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Married.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 So in 1911 he was still in the mines as an ordinary miner?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
After the 1912 strike - that he - saw the advantages of using his certificate and at that time became a fireman, and later he became an over}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12086728\charrsid6557717 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 man, and - later - he took up again - the colliery manager}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12086728\charrsid6557717 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
ship, in Ton-y-Banwen. Ton-y-Banwen colliery up in Ton Mawr. In 1923 - he - we moved down, he became a - the manager of the Baldwin's group of collieries in Kenfig Hill, Aber-Byden and Pintra colliery. Which at that time employed over a thousand men
. And - unfortunately he - he developed - an illness that he - died when he was forty-eight. I don't know what's your next question but if -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Do you remember him ever being out of work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No. They - only in the period of - the period of 1912 strike
. He was all miners were out of that time. And it was a - bitter struggle which - oh he had the young family, growing family at the time, and it was after the 1912 strike that he - decided - to - although - he would be earning less money as an official th
an he could as a miner, because he was - a specialist miner, that is - he was - a heading man. There was a group of our that were - working headings, which had - a big advantage over the colliers that were in - the top holes as we called them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What was the advantage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
The advantage was then that the - the - oh the ordinary collier that was working with his mate or with a boy in the top hole was that they only had - the coal they cut, whereas the heading men, they were paid yardage because they had 
to - clear the - the muck as it was called, the shale, and also they were paid for the double timber that they put. They were also paid for the rails that was going along the heading was the main gallery. So that the heading man - the heading people had t
hose advantages, yardage, timber and the rails.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 I asked you whether he had any part time or casual jobs, he didn't really have any paid work did he?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No, there was - no the - the payment was so much, he used to go to - I remember going with him, 
going to the - like the monthly meetings or the district meetings, and it would be down in Neath. He was paid his expenses, for going to - a - conferences and so forth, but apart from that I don't think that it was any - any big advantage to him - financi
ally.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 How old was your mother when you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 We worked it -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Where did she come from?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 She was - a native of Pontrhydyfen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Had she any jobs before she married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Never anything except a housewife.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did she work after she was married or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No part time jobs? But you did say that when your father died, did she work then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No, she did not. We - this - this note might be of - of - one of the disadvantages of the - a colliery manager - was that he - was 
in - the colliery house. Aberboyden and Pentra collieries, they housed their officials all together in one group known as the Oaks. Well the colliery manager, once he was disposed - or - died, another was coming in for - straight away. So that we exchange
d
 - houses with someone from Kenfig Hill, and - another manager came - to tak his - place. My mother - with - the help of my eldest sister who was - in business - and my brother and myself, we - did the best we could to - maintain the family, and rememberi
n
g that there was five - younger ones, who had started a grammar school career - I can't remember - that there was any difference - in the table, not what we wore on our backs, nor our mode of living. My mother kept us together. The - twins - they decided 
a
fter having their - passing their - higher it was called then, the - what was the examination, junior and senior, after - after having their senior exam they decided that they would take nursing as a career. And they were both accepted - to do their train
ing in the General Hospital in Birmingham. Mm. Father was a manager up in the Oaks.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Can you remember how many rooms were in the house at Oakwood?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, there were three - rooms upstairs. Three bedrooms. And - there were three rooms downstairs, an
d - a - a - scullery, a scullery we called it. We did have - running water, in a tap, and we did have - I remember the time when the sewer was put in. That was - it came - it wasn't there with the - when the houses were built. I have mentioned that the de
p
osit of one pound was placed on the house in Penhydd Street, but when we remember that the total outlay was two hundred and fifty pounds - thinking of terms today well that was going back - I did remember my mother saying that her parents - were able - to
 - go - as mortgages for part of the money, but it took a long - many many years to - wipe off the debt gradually, but eventually - it was - and became - afterwards, a very very good investment for my mother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did anyone else live in the house besides your parents and your brothers and sisters?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No other relatives?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No other rel -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Or lodgers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did your mother pay anyone to help in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Occasionally when - I'm looking back at it, when - as - as the babies 
were coming one after the other, there was a - as it were a seasonal help.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Do you remember Mrs Cullis?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, I do.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 How did you get on with her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Mrs}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12086728\charrsid6557717 .}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
 Cullis was a rough diamond. She - her father - was nicknamed - John Garabaldi, and that is very interesting, because - people called him John Garabaldi but Mrs}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12086728\charrsid6557717 .}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717  Cullis would stand up for him and say that that was - his greatest hour - of glory. It appears that there was a hurricane blowing, over the old - iron works one night, and that - qu
ite a lot of damage had been done, and many of the men had - gone for shelter, but John Cullis had stood his ground, braved the storm and the following morning when it was over and the - manager of the works came, and having known what had happened, he sa
id at the time, even Garibaldi wouldn't have done anything braver, and that was why he was called John Baribaldi.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What exactly did Mrs}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12086728\charrsid6557717 .}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid489342\charrsid6557717  Cullis have to do, she just came on the Tuesday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes. She - she had different days, to - different houses to go, and - as my grandmother, in her time with two - children dependant, so Mrs}
{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12086728\charrsid6557717 .}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717  Cullis - was going from house to house different days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What did you call her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Mrs}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12086728\charrsid6557717 .}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
 Cullis, we - and I can remember another woman that used to come periodically. She 
was - a dressmaker from Manwr Buchan, and - one of the conditions of her coming that I being a strong youngster was going down to carry the Singer machine. And it was a - about a mile, about a mile coming up from there, and I can always remember - that Mi
r
iam - Miriam - Jenkins, by name, she would - maybe be there for - a week or a fortnight, until we had all been rigged out with a new - flannel shirts, and - cutting the clothes down for the oldest ones for the younger ones and make do it was in that time.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did your mother make any of your clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would she mend any of them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh no, always mending.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about your father, would he make or mend any clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No, he wasn't that way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would you have new clothes or secondhand clothes, you did mention that you had them cut down from the oldest to the youngest?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Yes, I would be having - some of the - of the clothes - that were coming, they would come after my uncle's - some such jacket or something, that would be cut down
. The other thing my - my father was a very keen gardener. In the old - Tetocown, there wax - an extensive garden. And - he was known as the first one who experimented with - budding roses on to a dog rose stoc}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid12086728\charrsid6557717 k}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 . And I can remember - the joy that he used t
o show his friends how he had budded a rose called - Dorothy Pdrkins onto this dog rose. Then came the war in 1914. And - the allotment craze started, and he was a very keen man with the allotment association.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did you grow any of your own vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, we used to - even from Tetocown, we used to depend a lot on the garden.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about fruit, would you grow fruit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Only soft fruit. Soft fruit such as - raspberries and gooseberries. And - and gooseberries. And rhubarb, that's all I can remember.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 This lady came in to wash for you, what would she call you and your mother? Mrs Edwards?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes. Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What did she call you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 By name.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about the clothes, when would you have new clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 New clothes were
 due - if possible - to coincide with Whitsun. Whitsun. The turn out of the Sunday school was - but there was another consideration as far as we boys were concerned, it had to coincide with - the quarter ending of the Co-operative. There would be - quite 
a
 lot of saving - to clear the quarter, clear what was due for the quarter, and then after the beginning of the quarter, if anybody had to have new boots, or new - clothes of any kind, my mother used to say, well you'll have to wait - until after Pencwarte
r Co-op, which was the quarter ending.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about shoes, would you have new shoes or would you have hand me downs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 I can't ever - no, I cannot ever remember - wearing shoes - because, being a - a strong robust youngster, it was - well - the worki
ng shoes, mainly boots with tips - turning up in front, and I can remember those very very well, and my mother - showing the - lady next door, it must have been on - 1915, and how surprised she was that my - boots - had gone up from five shillings a pair 
to six and six. But it was strong anily boots. But we did have our better boots for Sunday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 When would you have to have new shoes or boots?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Working - the - the boots usually the stronger boots for school usually lasted the twelve month. And the o
nes that we used to use for chapel - or for - going away, they would have to last many many years more, it was very rare that we used to have those.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Where would your mother buy the clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Clothe - for the girls mostly at the Co-op, but we use
d to go - I can remember walking to Neath which was four and a half miles, and there was a shop - shop of the Lamb - there because there was a golden lamb's fleece - a golden lamb outside which - shop yr oen - shop yr oen we used to call it. And - I can r
ememb}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12086728\charrsid6557717 er - the N}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
orfolk suit, navy serge, that was coming into fashion, and I was a full fledged man in my Norfolk suit, but - that type of clothing used to come from Neath.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 But you used to have a dressmaker come in quite regularly did you? What would she do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Yes, twice or three times a year for a week. For a whole week. Well she'd make a - a - a - five rig outs you see, make five dresses for the - a dress each for the - for the girls. And - often my mother - my - my mother used to have nice things 
given her from her aunt, which this dressmaker used to unpick and make them into nice garments of us. But for best - she used to have this - well a roll I should imagine of material, and the five of us used to be rigged out with this dressmaker. Her dress
maker was Miss Thomas Mrs}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12086728\charrsid6557717 .}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
 Price afterwards, Tom Price's wife, and after she finished we had this Miss Jenkins. And as John my brother said his job was to carry the machine. And - we used to love to see her coming because we had a lovely fire in the middle 
room, and my mother had a lovely - thing that she used to put the toast on, and that's what I can remember about the dressmaker, was the lovely tea we were having you know with this toast and butter all streaming down. And this dressmaker, she used to lov
e to come to our - my mother's house because she used to say, well I've never tasted such nice food as Mrs Edwards cooks. That's - quite true.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did your father help your mother at all with any jobs around the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No, I'm afraid not, it was - a 
comparatively new house when we went there, which - didn't in - as far as I can remember require any - any jobs to be - done to it. And - I'm afraid that - he wasn't very domesticated, and - I have followed suit. He had a good mother, that did everything 
for him. He afterwards had a very good wife that - did everything for him. And I followed, I had a good mother and I had five good sisters, and I never did anything at all - my - wife now tells me that - I was spoilt.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 When you were a little boy did you have any jobs to carry out in the house? Regularly?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Not in the house. He used to work for money - for money outside the house.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about in the house, did you have anything your sisters had to do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No, John my brother never worked. He - he didn't clean the brass or the knives and forks, like Elwyn and I had to do.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Why was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Well he was never in. John my brother was never in, he was always out. But - Elwyn and I, we - we were the ones that helped my mother, cleaning the brass fender and cleaning the candlesticks, cleaning the knives and forks. But as for my elder brother, no.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What did you think about that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Well, we didn't think anything about it. We just took it you know that it was - he was cut out to be out, but 
there was an occasion when he was in the house one night, and my parents had gone to - the Thanksgiving, chu - in the church because my father was a churchman at the beginning, well the three of us were left in the house. So John thought now well he could
 
smell sweets - up in the top cupboard. And he thought it was easy, there was a fireguard - and from the chair onto the fireguard, his foot on the next shelf and up to the top to the sweets, and lo and behold the poor boy fell down, and the kettle of boili
n
g water was on the hob, that fell into the fire and all this stuff came on his leg and burnt him until he nearly - do you know that was a terrible night. And - well he had the doctor, and it wasn't boiling water, it was this - the heat, that was coming ou
t of the fire came on his leg. Just because he was one of those type of boys. \{BLANK\}
 And I couldn't get out of between the guard, I fell in through the guard, caught me then you see. Well now last night I was looking at that, and - there you can see now how that - how much of it was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did your father make the fires?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, everybody - everybody - the - the first down, the first down - lit the fire.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 But he'd do it on Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh yes. But - to say about - fire - I don't remember that as it w
as, as it is today. Because when you think that every miner at that time was having a load of coal every month, that means that he was having twelve loads of coal and the coal of the Eben Valley was noted, and the last thing we did at night was to damp th
e fire down with small coal. That in the morning it was only just rake out the bottom, and you had the fire on, that the fire hardly went out -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would your father do any cooking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would he ever wash up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh yes. He had to - with eight children.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would he do any decorating?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about repairs to the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
It's my mother would do the decorating. No, there - as I've said, there would be - it was a comparatively new house, and a well built house, and - that didn't need.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would your father ever dress you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 If necessary, yes, if - if the occasion a came that - my mother was indisposed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would he undress you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes. And - as - as for John saying - that he was doing jobs in the house, it was my father
's job to bath the children on a Friday or a Saturday night. That was his job, to bath - us. That's right John?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 The rest of the week who would bath you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh well we weren't bathed only once a week, we had a good wash.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 So he bathed you really?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 It's my father was bathing us once a week.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would your father read to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Yes, he would read - I - it was at that time that - he - the - a series of books came, out - the first one was Door of the Heart. Door of the Heart, R.H. Hughes, U
pper Brighton. And he used to - well they were - short little poems, such as the - the Welshman, the Welshwoman in an English - hospital. And - was - that book, used to read those out, mostly I should fancy for my mother's sake, but I used to - I used to 
- and I can remember some of them now. Then that was followed by - Other Doors, and - eventually - all the doors drysau was made into one book, Poems by RH - R.H. Jones, Upper Brighton R.H. Nones, Upper}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid12086728\charrsid6557717  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Brighton, that's the man and I've got that book, and I
 - go at it very very often. One of them I can remember then that - Come Dei amongst the flowers, Dei to see the little flower weeping. I have bruised it there are big tears on its cheeks, oh do you see Dai. That type was new that type of - poetry was new
 at the time.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 And your father would read it out loud would he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
He would read it out loud that I - it was many years afterwards that I came to read it for myself, but they all - they all - they weren't new, they - had been -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would he tell you stories?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Oh he was one of the masterpieces on the stories. And after this bathing time on a Friday night - we looked forward to the stories, and he used to tell us about our cousin Fritz, from Russia. And he used to go and bring us and the cousin F
ritz - was such a character he become one of us. And then when it would come that either this poor bear was coming or the wolf, he used to go - and make that noise till the younger of the family would be jumping out of their skin and my mother would turn 
t
o him and say, what are you frightening these children for? And with that, that was the end of the story, our cousin Fritz, and we'd have to go to bed until the next bathing night. Yes. But here's one instance of him as a reader. The - he was working - ni
g
hts in the Cannon colliery, and it had been a terrible night of storm, and the - men were coming up from Port Talbot the following morning, and everybody was talking about the - blizzard that had - raged, and the Port Talbot people said, oh nobody has sle
p
t in Port Talbot, because there's a boat come up on the Morva beach. And - that boat - they had saved - they had saved the crew. So I'm come home and had his breakfast and - bathed. There was a train that was going down, the - ten o'clock train, so - he m
u
st have asked my mother - have you got train fare for me to go down, I'm going down to see that boat. The Amazon, that was the name of the boat, and I believe it was in 1909 - well anyway my mother must have given my father - a yellow sovereign, that's al
l
 that she had. Well he went down and he saw the Amazon, and coming up in Port Talbot, and looking in the shop - a book shop, Days in Port Talbot, he saw a book that he always - wanted. It was the Em - the Essays of Emerson. And I still have that book, but
 
it is written on the front, bought on the morning of the wreck of the Amazon - 1909 I think is on it, and what I think is - happened - why that he autographed that, my mother must have asked him for the change, and that she was - seven and six short, and 
at that time that must have been a tremendous price for that, but I still have that book. Mm.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would your father ever take you out without your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes. The day war broke out in 1914 - my father had a cousin in Porthcawl - and Porthcawl in th
ose days from Pontrhydyfen was to us - that we were going to London. Well the day war broke out he took John and elwyan and I to Porthcawl to see his cousin. Who kept a pub. Yes, he did take us out without my mother, and that's the very particular day I c
a
n remember, because there were trains going through Porth station - we were going by train see, and there were trains going through the station, it was - well I don't think, we - I was amazed and - we were asking daddy, well what's this all about, and fla
gs outside the trains, and that's what I can remember, we are going - we are going to fight the bloody Germans. \{BLANK\} The garrison that was - the garrison that was down in Pembroke Dock at the time, they were the regular soldiers. They're going.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Do you remember your father taking you out other than that, would he take you out without your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Yes, he had - in Cardiff again near there he had - an uncle in Cardiff, an uncle and an aunt in Cardiff, and - I can remember being taken with him, only a - to take - taken to Cardiff, and - what I can remember about that -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid13524052\charrsid6557717  Cardiff to me was - well, fair}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
yland at the time. But coming back through - Roath Park and my father talking with - the - gardener in Roath Park, and that gardener kindly - giving me -
 a few roses, in a little posy to take back to my mother. And the name of that rose which was the darkest rose o}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13524052\charrsid6557717 f}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
 all, which was my father's }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13524052\charrsid6557717 favorite}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
 and has been mine since it's - gone out of fashion now, but that rose was - Hugh Dixon. And Hugh Dixon was
 the most fragrant of all. But having come back by train to Port Talbot, we had lost the train to the Eben Valley, and - there was a late brake - going from the Walnut Tree Hotel in Aberavon, but it was only going as far as Cwmavon, and I can remember - w
a
lking and being carried late that night, and - up to Pontrhydyfen, and we had to - pass under those bridges, but there was a weir Gorad, and I still can remember the rumbling of that water - and that - impression - very young. Well I was being carried par
t of the way you know. Talking about Ivor Davis now - our neighbour, Mrs Griffiths who had - one child more than we had, she had nine child - nine children, and how they used to go having put the children to bed - one }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid13524052\charrsid6557717 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717  Mrs}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13524052\charrsid6557717 .}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6557717  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Griffiths would tell the - my mother, come on, lets go down to see my sister Annie, says - which is Mr}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13524052\charrsid6557717 .}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid489342\charrsid6557717  Ivor Davis's wife, and there - they would go down there in - by the time they'd have walked down - have an hour down there and have a cup of tea and something to eat and walk back, but
 that was considered - a night out at the time, having to walk - well it would have been three miles and just a chat with somebody - because that was before - there was no - there was no cinemas there was nothing at all. All - entertainment - had to be ma
de.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would your mother go out often like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Not so much - as far afield as Cwmarthen, but it was - yes, she would - once or twice a week go over to my grandmothers. And then my grandmother would come - well - once a fortnight, and that would b
e a memorable time for us children because - she would have this cape - this cape - beav}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13524052\charrsid6557717 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
r - cape, and underneath she would have called on the way - for - a pound of biscuits, and they were always the garibaldi, with the currants, and - she used to - dole those out to the children - every so often.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 I was asking you about little jobs you had to do in the house and your sister said that you didn't do any really?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about the older children, did they help the younger children with things they found difficult to do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh yes, the responsibility came on - it was expected of you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would you have to dress them or help them to eat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 With the five sisters of course, no, they came - very simply they came to - when you are eight chil
dren it's the - the survival - of the fittest it is and there is no - I've no need - if somebody do - just mention that he didn't want something there was planty more that did want it and you wouldn't have the second chance, so they learnt, we all learnt 
very quickly. But it -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would the younger children help the older in any way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh yes, they - yes, they had to do - very much the - run errands, and - do some little jobs that were required.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would your father look after you at all when your mother was out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Yes, he would - it was only just a matter of - that there was somebody in the house. It's not a question of looking after because invariably - he would have his - always have his reading, if it wasn't a book, it was always a Goleuad - a
nd then he would have a - a - Cymro, the Faner, Faner and - the periodicals that were going. So he - that only just that he was around, but it was never as if it - he was - looking after anybody.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Were you expected to go to bed at a certain time in your schooldays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Yes. That was - definite, the - it was the - thing done - that - when it would come for - I don't know about the younger ones, had to go - of course the girls, they were in a different category to the boys, but the boys were expected t
o be in - the house and in bed - by ten. That was the period - but 1914 - that changed - changed everything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about when you were a little boy, when you were in school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh when I was in school the -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What time would you have to go to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
It all depended on the season. If it was the - winter of course well - it was the sun that decided when we went indoors and when we went to bed. Because there was such a variety of - everything to entertain you in the village at that time, you had 
the river, which in summer was - well that was our playground, either to try and catch a fish or - we would be after some tadpoles or frogs, and if it was warm enough we would be - swimming. And that every boy in the Avon Valley could swim very near as so
o
n as he could walk. So - then you had - the collieries had come, the - collieries had come by that time, and there was always colliery horses and stables which - brought us - we used to spend a lot of time down there - helping the ostler, and - if he woul
d
 give us a brush to groom the horses we were in our element. Those kind of - pastimes, that used to keep us - then again it would come - always if you wanted something extra - there was the Winbury time, and there was the blackberry time, and - very often
 you could have a spare copper by picking a jug of - either fruit for somebody who was unable to go.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 There were lovely winberries weren't there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 There was. On the side of the mountains.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did your mother or anyone else put you to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No
. As - far as - looking back, we were pretty independent. Very young - we had to do for ourselves, and being the - eldest boy - of - the family - we were - off our parents hands - so quickly. I can remember - across the river - there was a family there, t
h
e Jenkins's, made famous later by - Richard Burton. Well Richard Burton's eldest brother was my friend, and he had the washing to do, he would do the washing for a family, because the only safe question you could ask his mother like my mother was - how's 
the baby? Couldn't go wrong in - in - with that question. But - but we were - we could always fend for ourselves.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 You don't remember anybody putting you to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did you share the bedroom or bed with anyone?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, we used to -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about the other bedrooms?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Well we slept together, John and Elwyn and I, the little bed for me and John and Elwyn in the big bed. Right? The other bedrooms then - well, there was a double bed in the front you see for the girls. And my mother and 
father had their own bedroom. That of course after we grew up, you want a change round didn't you. I mean I didn't sleep in the same room as my brothers after I - came to the age of twelve.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 But until then you did?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 I did. The same room. And on Su
nday mornings, we - we were much - it was very wrong of us if we realized - that my parents were very tired on Sunday morning, but we were awake early. And John my brother, he used to tie the blanket to the knobs of the bed, and make it as a reins, and we
 
were in the trap going to Margam. Ructions in the bedroom, and then - the - my father couldn't stick it any longer, he'd come in - and a couple of taps, and the clothes over you and go to sleep, and it was only about seven in the morning then. Now it was 
terribly naughty of us wasn't it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What room did you bath in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 In front of the fire always. In the kitchen. The big tub and the water, that was the bath.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 You mentioned you had a bath on a Friday or Saturday? When did you have clean clothes to put on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh - we - we would change our clothes, clean clothes - Saturday night for Sunday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Where did the family have their meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh it was always in the living room. The living room, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Were there any occasions when you ate in another room?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 High days and holidays, such as a visitor from Cardiff or from my uncle from Barry, or - oh yes, yes. \{BLANK\}
 And Mrs - Miss Griffiths from London. Mrs - Malone. Malone. \{BLANK\} Oh yes. Yes. \{BLANK\} Mrs Malone, she used to have the - honour of having - this - supper - in the middle room. \{BLANK\}
 She was a - girl from Pontrhydyfen who had married a French jewe}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13524052\charrsid6557717 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
ler, and - lived in London and in Paris, and Mrs Malone when she would come it was an occasion. And - we would use the middle room at that time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What did you think about that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Oh - and - she used to - she - my mother was an excellent cook, and do you know the - the - the meal she used to prepare for Mrs Malone? Were - the little beetroot that my father used to grow, she used to boil those, and \{BLANK\}
 and she used to cook those in the oven. Fresh herrings. And beetroots. And apple tart. And - on - the best china with the gold, they were beautiful, the - the tea service my mother had, but those were the only people that were hav
ing a meal in the middle room, was my uncle from Cardiff, and the one from Barry, and Mrs Malone.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would you all eat with them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Well no, the little ones were in bed, you see, the youngest were in bed. But I can remember being in - the middle room
 having a - a - by the table. And hardly - well afraid to look sideways because of the distinguished visitor, and also - the best china.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Where did your mother cook, in the kitchen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 In the kitchen, on the kitchen grate.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Was it a range?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Not a range, an oven - built in oven - next door - next door, with the coal yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 When was breakfast eaten?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Well first of all, when my father was going to work or - or the boys, and then - for us to go to school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would your father have breakfast on his own?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Well he'd have to.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would your mother get up with him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would she have breakfast with him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh I don't know. Yes, oh it was always the - well she would - well they both would more or less be down together
, and the - one making the breakfast that - usually it was the cup of tea, there was nothing - cup of tea, and the bread and butter, it was nothing anything very special, and then the - cutting of the - food for the box, and that invariably was bread and 
b
utter again with - cheese. Didn't vary very much because of - it did come - jam was sometime - or the - there would be a slab at the bottom of the box, a slab of loaf cake, yeast cake which was one made every week and that was a stand by for - all eventua
lities.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 You children would have breakfast together would you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
The ones that were going to school but - I - but having started work at - when I was thirteen - of course I was one that was going out in the morning as well.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 You were having your breakfast with your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 With my father. And he - oh, of course you had to - it was a strict time table because the trains were trave}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10511160\charrsid6557717 ll}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 ing from Port Talbot - right the way up through the Avon Valley and you had to catch the train, or else it was losing the shift.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 You mentioned that you had bread and butter usually to eat, what would you have to drink for breakfast?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Tea always, nothing but tea - that was the - beverage.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would you have anything different for breakfast on certain days like Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes. A boiled egg on Sunday morning. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 You'd all have that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
We would, and then it was - Saturday night - Saturday night was a - a night where there would be something different, and - the butcher would have been around, and - my mother would - buy - two sheep}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10511160\charrsid6557717 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 s heads at three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10511160\charrsid6557717  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
pence each. And then - the butcher would have come midday, well that was boiling, the sheep}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10511160\charrsid6557717 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
s heads would be boiling - and - boiling all the afternoon. And then my mother would shared all the meat that
 would come from the two heads - and put it between two soup plates, with a - a flat iron on top, and there for supper, as much as it would be, it was brawn. It was brawn from the two shee}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10511160\charrsid6557717 p
\rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 s heads. And looking back at that it used to be - a feed we used t
o come from - maybe from football or later on from cinema or - wherever we would come but that invariably would be - our supper. Not forgetting of course that the lady from Penclawdd would have called with laver}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10511160\charrsid6557717 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 bread and cockles. That was - again which - a change for the feed.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about the supper in the weeknight, the other nights of the week?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Well four o'clock - they used to come home from the colliery. That's right. Four o'clock they used to come back - home from the colliery. And you were 
asking us about supper. Well we - we used to have a cooked meal - between four and five, a - a - a real cooked meal.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 This is when you were schoolchildren?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 School - schoolchildren as we}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10511160\charrsid6557717 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 l, yes. Our dinnertimes didn't consist of much I - I - if I 
can remember, we were living quite near to the school, but dinnertime didn't mean much it was just - cocoa possibly and - some bread and butter. But we were sure of this - one good meal a day, and that was between four and five. Well now supper didn't mea
n much to us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What would you have for this good meal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Oh well - it - my mother would buy a - a leg of country lamb which is terribly reasonable. Or we'd have soup. Or she'd buy a - piece of bacon and then we'd have pea soup, and then we'd have th
e bacon with parsley sauce. We had very good food. When you think about it you know now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about on Sunday, what sort of meals would you have on Sunday? You wouldn't still have the main meal between four and five?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh no, after - coming - one o'clock we'd have our dinner on Sunday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What did you have on Sunday then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh a cooked dinner again. Beef I suppose.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about teatime?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh very posh tea. Jelly and - and - tinned fruit.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about supper on Sunday?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Well ou
r - Sunday night supper was a treat, because we'd have the remains of the joint, and a fry up. We always had a very good day of eating on Sunday. Although we went - to chapel three times.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What would you have to drink at these meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Tea, we neve
r remember - we were not - there were some people who - when Tomas - the Collins brothers of Neath, Britain Ferry came with - pop, or aerated waters, but - some of the fam - families in the village they had graduated to that beverage, but we never - I don
't remember anything wha}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10511160\charrsid6557717 tso}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 ever except tea as a beverage in our house.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did your mother or father bake their own bread?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh yes. There was baking twice a week, and that was - in the public baking in the cop. And - I can remember my mother - making 
bread, it was ten pounds of white flour, and - it was seven pound of - Allison's, which was - a courser brown, and what I can't remember, there was a bag where she used to put a handful of bran into the mixture, and that would be in big tins, which betwee
n the morning of the school - in the morn - in the afternoon, we had to take over to the bake}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10511160\charrsid6557717 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
house, and - being strong and very - clever with it I could have two tins under my - one under every armpit and hold the third in front. And that was a treat to go and fetch that bread afterwards. And hoping that it would be over}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10511160\charrsid6557717 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 baked that it would overflow the tins, and that we could taste that crust on the way home. That was the - there were two public bake}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10511160\charrsid6557717 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 houses in the village and - but the baking - and I don't
 remember - it was later that the bakers came - from door to door but - definitely we were public bakers. But our neighbours down in the - old - the row - Row Pencar, they had - a - bakery - on the end of the row which were back to back, and that was very
 
interesting because all the - men - used to bring what - timber they could from the colliery and everything else, and burn it in those open - oven, and - but there was only one woman that was competent to say when the temperature was right. And - they wou
ld call Mary Ann James who lived at the o}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10511160\charrsid6557717 w}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 ner}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10511160\charrsid6557717 \rquote s}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 , and she would stride over, and just put her hand into the - oven, and she would say, either yes, or no, if no, there would be a few more sticks put in, but if yes all the - e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16523642\charrsid6557717 m}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 bers would be raked out, and then
 - the - whole - row, well it would hold somewhere about - thirty to thirty-five loaves all packed in, then they would put an iron covering over it and seal it up with clay. And that - and that would be - and the great thing for our - the school was quite
 close, and - invariably, when we were let out from school there was the operation of taking the bread out of the oven was in progress, much to the amusement of we as children.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did your mother make her own jam?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No.. \{BLANK\} Well - you should say yes to blackberry. And - making it and eating it - the next day. \{BLANK\}
 But it was more or less - a kind of a - instead of - boiling the blackberries every day, you would have this - dished up.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about bottled fruit or vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about making pickles?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Wine?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Medicines?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Was any beer brewed for the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Diodfaen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, diodfaen in summer always. The nettle - a spring of yarrow, and the - dandelions. And there wa
s another one or two herbs that would be - but as - lemon - lemon would - at the top of it. And then when we would have the - the yeast in - and that}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16523642\charrsid6557717  was - well everybody made diod}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 faen at the time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 You mentioned earlier that your father grew vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 And some soft fruit, did they buy any?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Yes, we had to buy - there was the farmers and in that locality they still come around. There was an old lady from Hawdre Frm that used to come on a Saturday morning, sitting on a gambo, and -
 potatoes and turnips. She would - white turnips in season, swedes and potatoes. And we used to buy those from the gambo, and when she would have served us and they were out, that lady was so industrious she wouldn't waste, there she would be with her ste
el needles and she'd be knitting stockings or gloves - between calls - and weighing out the potatoes, but - those were the only vegetables that - because we were more or less self maintaining - for green}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16523642\charrsid6557717 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 stuff.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about tinned vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Dried vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Tinned fruit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, on a Sunday. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did you have any dried fruit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh yes. Prunes, I can remember Prunes and apricots, dried fruit like - but I don't - can't remember anything more apart from that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did you keep any livestock for the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Yes, there was - always - chickens. Always chickens. And when the war, 1914 war came out we had permission to keep a pig, down - below the house. And - there we - while the war and for a year or two afterwards, we did keep a pig.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Who looked after the chickens?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
The chickens were only a few yards from the - from the back door really, and there we had a cask and that was very convenient for the neighbours, so they wouldn't think they were wasting - 
if - a stale half a loaf or a crust would go in either to the pig or to the chickens.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would you children have to look after them or would your father or your mother look after them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 All of us, we would just - the command would come - go and give
 - go and give something to the chickens, we would throw - some Indian corn and - we would get something from the cask and - there you are, it was just that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Who would look after the pig?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 When we had a pig we had to go in turns, John and Elwyn. 
Or Elwyn and I. Or John and I. And to think we had to walk down a - a deep slope, and the pig sty was always near the riverside, and we'd go down there with a torch and this bucket of stuff to gove to the pig - about eight o'clock at night.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 But there were two of you always?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Always - oh yes, both of us, and we three were together you see and then the - the other five were sort of colony - of their own.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 And yet there was only two years between?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, I know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Of course the twins were self-sufficient?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, that's right. We three seemed to be - more - you know, bosses as it were.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 How many times a week did you eat meat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Bacon of course we had our own bacon - while the pigs lasted. There was meat of some part every day - 
and at the weekend, that would - weekend would always be - the - and it was - cig we}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16523642\charrsid6557717 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
ther - weather, it wasn't the lamb as we know it today. They used to kill the sheep, either they were bigger and they were older, but for a family such as ours you wanted - leg we}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16523642\charrsid6557717 a}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 ther, and that was - there was cutting on that for a family.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would you ever have tinned meat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did you ever get extra meat such as rabbit from poaching?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, now we're coming on to - yes, very - there was quite a - a lot -
 a few of those coming periodically because - I was - attached to a farm, and - that farm - had land on Margam Moors, and when we used to go to Margam Moors, if we were going mowing, invariably there would be a few of those rabbits who - who were - had th
eir legs chopped off by the mower and those we used to bring back. And - there were a few other - instances of - supplementing the menu - with rabbit, and an occasional hare.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 When you say you were attached to a farm what did you mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Well - that
's how I got attached to the farm. Two of our cousins at Penhydd Fach Farm were in the Territorial Army the - Royal Horse Artillery, and - in July of 1914 - they were on }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16523642\charrsid6557717 manoeuvres}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717  in Salisbury Plain. Their father kept the butchers shop - but those boys - 
did not return from Salisbury Plain, they were pressed on to go and they were about the first batch - that went to France. Both did return from the war, but - not until it was all over in 1918. Well - being interested in riding horses, I having had - a de
light for a farm, and another boy - Will Timpant, he had - farmers blood in him, so we both - kept the farm of Penydd - going. And we - were there cleaning out the sheds, feeding pigs - gathering the lambs.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 How often would you get extra meat from poaching or something like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Well we used to get it as - periodical trips down to - down to the moors. It didn't come very often, but one - other - one other source was open to - to me, and that was - that there were sheep being killed on the line. No
w the - the village was between two railways, the Rhonda and Swansea Bay railway on one side, and the PPR, the Port Tabot railways the other side. Well the sheepsaw - the sheep of the farm I was attached to and other sheep - they would be coming down thes
e
 bridges of which there were five bridges, carrying these railways in the place, and sometime the sheep would be in - between those bridges, when a light engine or a coal wagon would come down and the next thing we know - knew that there was - a sheep, so
metime two and even half a dozen - had been killed - with these - train, the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16523642\charrsid6557717 luggage}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
 we used to call them. Well when the farmer would go - it was reported and when the farmer would go he'd have to - take those away, and sometimes a sheep would have been cut
 in half, and he would say, here you are - take this home with you, and - we would have the hindquarter of the two - of the two - of a sheep between the other boy and myself which used to eke out -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 It was quite a help wasn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 It was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did you remember seeing your mother having less food so that the family could have more?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
It never was perceptible, but - I know - going to - the colliery - when I was a lad - I'd been - at fourteen - I'd been working underground for a twelve month, and 
I can remember one - very very - black week, everything - there was nothing at all to be had, and - to put in my box to go to colliery, except black bread - and boiled potatoes. And I remember my mother putting that box - for me that day, and the tears in
 
here yes, saying well this is all I've got for you, and - going then. But the following morning I thought well I'm going to change this, and I went on an old pushbike that I had down to Neath, I saw - a queue waiting for something and I joined the queue. 
A
nd when it came my turn it was a huge butt, with red herrings, and you were only allowed - one pound. And there was this man with a kind of a spade, and he was hacking at these and until he'd have a block, putting it on the scale somewhere near the pound 
a
nd bringing that home. They were frozen by the way And by the time they were thawed out, if you were lucky you had a few bodies, but if you were unlucky you had mostly heads. But still - it all made for taste, and that was a real delicacy with - the potat
oes that were more or less our staple food. But that was in the black days of the war.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Do you remember your mother having less food than the rest of you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No, I don't think because we wouldn't allow it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Were you allowed to talk during the meals or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Yes. Oh yes, there were - out house - was a house of very little restrictions. Everybody - was allowed his point of view, and - if - the - you were - we were taught - that we were to allow even the younger ones to express themselves and say nothing.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Could you choose what you wanted to eat from what was cooked or did you have to eat a bit of everything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 We always had to eat what was put before us, it was - there was no second choice at all, you either ate it - or you had to go without it.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What was your parents attitude if you left some food uneaten on the plate?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
They would ask the cause because - it wasn't often that - any would be, but - the only reason for something to be left over, was that you had ate something befo
re, which gave us away very often if we had been stealing apples, we wouldn't have place for our food and then - that would be or else we were sickening for something.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would your father have more food than you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh yes. My mother would graduate i
t out - for my father and the workers. My father and myself, the eldest and - and the younger ones would not need so much, that was the philosophy of -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 How would she serve the food out, would she serve it out on the plates or would you have it on the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
We would have the table - we - very very often if we were all together round the table, the potatoes would come straight from the saucepan and it would go right the way round, and then - soup - was very often that would come again from - anoth
er big container, it may be - and it was - doled out with a cup, a cup or a mug and there you are, and it was usually soup plates and you had everything, the meat - and the vegetables, and the soup swimming all and that was it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 In what order would you be served, who would your mother serve first?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Oh it was all - everybody would be served together, nobody would dare start until - somebody - had asked grace. And I can always remember that grace and - it is even now - even now we do on a Sunday, we
 ask the grace. But this was the grace that was - asked at the time. May the Lord bless what his bounty has provided, for Jesus' sake, amen. But these little twins, it would come sometimes their turn to say grace, and they were so anxious to get at their 
food, so - one of them could do - just say, bounty, bounty, up and away then amen, and then dig into her food. That's quite true.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Who said the grace?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 We had to say it in turns. And - we did have Welsh - Welsh grace and English - we were taught th
e English in school of course but that was the - the one - that was the - usual. But we all had to say it in turn, parents included.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did you all sit at the table for the meal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did you always have the same places?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes. We wou
ld all fit into the same place - my father at the end and my mother would just come in after everybody - she was the last to sit down and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Where would she sit at the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Not very far from my father. Father at the head of the table, and - the
re was a big - as you would want for a family of ten, it was a big square table more or less - filled a big part of the room and we - would just sit around that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 You can't remember how you sat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 My father at the table and my mother next - one end
 of the table next to the fire, and then - I would be - and my brother next to me - but the girls in order of - the eldest would be near my mother and we're coming back and - but therefore to help the younger ones where - where help was needed, it - it ju
st fitted into a pattern.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 How did they manage before they could feed themselves, the little ones?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
They had - what we call the - the high chair with the - platform in front of it. And there you are, they were - when the twins we had two of them, and one would be by my mother and the other would be by my eldest sister or - anybody else that would help -

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 So they'd be around the table with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh yes, always around the table.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 If there was something on the table that you wanted, like 
the salt, could you ask someone to pass it to you, or did you have to wait until it was offered to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Oh no, we would - it wasn't very often - I don't remember - very much, we - we weren't allowed to be very fussy. The salt was on the table if boil
ed eggs was on the menu, and naturally everybody would help himself to that. But I don't remember we were encouraged to add - pepper or salt, ever, my mother used to do that and you take it - just took it as it was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Could you ask for a second helping?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Yes. AND - you were welcome to it as long as it lasted. And then - you would hear - or else you'd hear somebody else scraping the bottom of a saucepan or something and - but there was not much left - after any - every meal.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Were you expected to hold your knife and fork in a certain way, or sit in a certain way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No. We were - we were taught that I believe in school, in the infants - school, how you
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about taking a toy or a book to the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No. It was - going to the table was a job of work. That was to - get it over as quick as possible, and to get away out of it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 When could you leave the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 There wasn't much restriction, if you were finished your food and there was something calling, well - you would just say,
 I'm off, and that was it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about the lady who came to do the washing, did she eat with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh yes, she did - and the lady that would come to - to - dressmaker. OH yes, they were -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would they eat with you at the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, same table.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would they have the same food?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Exactly the same food.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 They wouldn't have different food?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Was your mother an easy person to talk to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Very. Very easy. The conversation would flow - from morning 'til night, it neve
r lagged and - the association of ideas, one thing would - suggest another, and - there was always something in the - in the mining - community, somebody always - was worse off than the others. And - as the poet said, about dwelling in the midst of alarms
, well that's what the environment of a mining village was. Somebody would be injured, and very often it would be a fatal accident. There would be somebody who had a new b}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16523642\charrsid6557717 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 by, and there would be a - somebody who had won a scholarship, there was no lack of variety in the conversation, and everybody would be interested in that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did your mother show affection?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
If necessary. Not - not so very - well I - we boys, at least, saying for myself - we resented it. We resented it very early, it was - considered girlish - to be a little }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16523642\charrsid6557717 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 issy to be - we lived very near - we often had - bad - cuts and bruises which we never reported - to our parents and they would only see it when we were bathing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 If you had any worries could you share them with your mother or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
No, it wasn't safe very often, our worries, the - the only worries that we did have was - our school teachers and schoolmasters, and we dare not say - tell them that we'd had a - the caning in school, because we'd have an extra one - for doi
ng it, so - we didn't take our troubles, we - just kept those to ourselves.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about your father, was he an easy person to talk to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, he was very easy and he - you could discuss anything with him, and he had a keen - a very keen sense of h
umour. And would take us boys and the girls summertime he would go up the river. There was one pool in - Avon Valley, higher}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16523642\charrsid6557717  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
up than the village, Robin Pool, which has an historical - background to it, but that pool was always - very deep - and - an ideal 
place, so he - took us there, well - before were six years of age, and literally threw us in and came in with us, and taught us to swim even then - would - carry us on his back and all of us and then he would dive down under you and leave you on the top b
ut - there you are, he saw to it that we - could fend for ourselves - very young.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did he show you affection?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No, I can't remember - any - any incident of affection - between my father and I. There was a resolve - he being a colliery manager - and
 I being a workman, I never wanted to be considered - the manager's son, I wanted to be on the same footing as my mates, and - that may be the reason for my resentment toward - any kind of side or affection or anything else - just call a spade a spade and
 - I want the same treatment for my work as my fellow men did from the work, and my father to me outside the house was just the manager.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Well, looking back at it I had so many - outside - things between - the farm and the hors
es, and every - sport that would come, football came in, I was the captain of the - schools team, in the school, that's when the junior le}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16523642\charrsid6557717 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 gue was formed in Port Talbot - and that was pre-1914. So between everything I only went home to roost as it were and to eat.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 If you had any worries could you share them with your father or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Maybe I could if I - I knew - I knew if you had financial-and we - if you had financial - worries - well it was no good asking because it was not there. And that by th
e way was one of the - things I never forgave my parents, the school had half holiday because the circus had come to Port Talbot. All my friends - who had their sixpences to go, but I was refused the sixpence. By today I know - that it wasn't available. B
ut I was the one that walked down to Port Talbot and was outside the big top without having a sixpence to go in. And I - nursed that grudge against my mother for a long time until I came to know better.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 How did your parents expect you to behave towards them?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
You were expected to be - if they were asked you were to be o - you were to obey, obedience was demanded. And - you were expected as far as it was possible - to fend for yourself. Therefore the - carrying of - messages, and the helping of - w
ith the grocer, and when the - carrier used to deliver coal and coke to the school - to - get a few coppers for helping him, all that was - encouraged. But I don't think it was - it was no use going to ask for any financial favours like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did your parents bring you up to behave towards your brothers and sisters in certain ways?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Oh yes. Bullying - bullying was - it wasn't allowed at all. It wasn't allowed - my father had a way with that if he - started bullying, he would just - nip it in the b
ud and - there you forget it. It would be just one sharp tap and - he would say, now - there you knew it was time to break it off, it was - bullying was not allowed, and - you were to be obedient, and there was a family code that you were expected to live
 up to, and if you didn't well you suffered for it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did they say you should hit back or not if another child hurt you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 My father - I was in many a fight as a boy. And - I think my father - he never discouraged me to defend myself. But he would - 
he would chastise you if - if you - took advantage of somebody smaller - or weaker than yourself.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What kind of people do you think your parents hoped you would grow up to be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Well the - I don't think - they were - over ambitious - our family wer
e not over ambitious, because we could see - in - other members of the families, such as cousins, removed, we could see that this over ambitiousness for their children led to - many - dissentions among the family. So I believe my parents were wise enough 
to let us - well - just go on in your own sweet way, if you've got anything in you it will come out, and if you haven't got it in you it's no good pushing empty barrels.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did your parents bring you up to consider certain things important in life?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Yes. The importance - the greatest importance were - to be whatever work you undertook to be efficient in that work. If it was cutting coal well - be a good collier.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What did they think of swearing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 It wasn't allowed, swearing was taboo. I - if you felt inclined like swearing you had to go - far enough away from our - from the house.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 When grown ups were talking were you allowed to join in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No, we weren't. And - my mother had a way of saying - if - a younger ones would be too ken to li
sten to a conversation between my mother and a neighbour or between something else, she would just say in her way, that little pig's had very big ears, and we understood what that remark meant, and we made ourselves scarce.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 If you did something your parents disapproved of what would happen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Well crime was graded at that time, if it was - something - ne}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16523642\charrsid6557717 
ver were theft at that time, th}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 eft, we were told - we were taught - the - commandment regarding - other peoples property, that never occurred but if it did, if it did you were }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16523642\charrsid6557717 chastised}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 , and forcibly for that kind of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 In what way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 There was always the remainder of the - birch stick on the mantle}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16523642\charrsid6557717 -}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 p}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16523642\charrsid6557717 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 ece. That was the birch rod.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would they use it on you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, they would use it - in certain cases they would.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What would you have to do to have it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Well - being told once to - not to play ball in a certain place, and persist in doing it and break some neighbour's window - well then that would deserve a birch rod.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Who would give it to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Either - either my mother or my father. And they would have that and you'd have to run the gauntlet of that - of that stick while you could gallop up the stairs and get out of the way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 How often would you be punished?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Not very often. Not very often, the - well we had come to - to know that - delinquency and crime did not pay in our house.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Can you remember any particular occasion when you were punished?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, I can remember that - occasion quite well and I deserved all I got then, I had three - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16523642\charrsid6557717 chastisement}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
 for that one deed. Outside the school, in Pontrhydyfen they were building new houses, and at that time they - for the - lime that they were using for ce}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16523642\charrsid6557717 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 lings and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16523642\charrsid6557717 plastering}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717  - they used to excavate - ten 
square yards from a field - a yard deep and there they would have - tons of - lime, in that - hole, and add the water, until all that was a milky surface, right away. And that was a charm for the children of course. And they - we were all looking at this 
-
 and then it was burbling when it was warm. By the following day it would have settled, into an even custard all over. There we all looking at that - and the temptation was too much for me with the boy next to me, he was more or less hanging over the - an
d
 I helped him, with just a little push. And he couldn't bring himself back to balance and he stepped in up to his knees, in this putty lime. Well he was a - we had to help him out, but I had run away by this time. Well when I came back to school - the boy
s father had come, so that the headmaster dealt with me. And on the way home he called o}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16523642\charrsid6557717 n my parents. And - I was dealt}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
 with there.. Put it off a minute.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 How did you feel about being punished?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 If I deserved it - if I deserved it well - that was a
ll right. I reconciled myself to that fact. And - but very often - very often having had the name of - in our - had a - a name for being - a bad boy, I had and was punished for many things afterwards that I did not do.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 How did you feel about that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
I resented that very very much. And I can always remember - some girl - who had made a complaint to the headmaster - and - I was absolutely - innocent of that - I wasn't punished for that but I still resented it, and - when I told them at home my father
 and my mother they were the first to go and to get that squared out and it was proved that I wasn't - they would uphold you in that but - that was - a very serious thing it was - it was she accused me of - theft, and theft of a coin which - I would never
 have done. Especially - well anyway - the coin was - it was discovered afterwards but far enough away from me. But otherwise I've have - my desserts and I've got away with quite a lot that I wasn't caught.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 But your father and mother backed you up then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh yes. They would, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Would you say that you received the ideas you had about how to behave from both your parents or did one play a more important part than the other?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 My mother played the greatest part in - in the influences. I rem
ember - when I was coming - fifteen, sixteen - where the time that we started looking at girls. And my mother taking me aside - and - telling me very very pointedly - that I had five sisters. And that I wasn't to treat any other girl - other than I would 
-
 treat my sisters. Which was a lesson I never forgot. But with my father, no, he knew - as a colliery manager he knew what was going on and the influences - in the colliery - were very very - they were influences for - bad, because - the element - of the 
Port Talbot and the Samfills boys that were working in the colliery - and the - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5178564\charrsid6557717 haulers}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
 with their coarse languages - and all those things couldn't but - rub off on - on boys. But - my father was conscious that we - that I wasn't so innocent as that, he kne
w - that I was in this - but I never gave him to - occasion to believe that I was - one of them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 When you had a birthday would it be different from any other day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No. Not - not the period of our childhood. The - birthdays were not - when you are
 - eight children - or ten in a family, they occur to often - to be made much fuss of.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would you have any presents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 The only present time was Christmas time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would you have anything special to eat on your birthday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No. I can't remember having celebrated any birthday - at a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5178564\charrsid6557717  }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Can you remember anything you did with your mother or father together on Christmas Day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Well Christmas Day was very mixed, we had a service, there was a service in the chapel we - which we were expec
ted to attend in the morning. During my - when I was a lad I always used to play football, and Christmas morning we used to have the - derby days - playing one village against another. And - there you are, back home for the Christmas dinner, and invariabl
e
 a - an oratorio was performed on Christmas night, or a celebrity concert. That was the pattern of our Christmas. Now one of those Christmases stand out very very clearly, and it - I'm very glad all this experience by today, although it took me many years
 
to live it down. There was a derby day, football match between Cwmowan and Pontrhydyfen. I was a lad then of sixteen and a half, but - when you think that I started work at seventeen I was that one year - started work at thirteen I was that one year ahead
.
 So that I was seventeen and a half. And a big strapping lad playing forward So after the match my mother - but before I went - my mother had told me, now you remember are back for dinner, and don't you go - and be tempted to drink anything down there tod
a
y, don't spoil the dinner for us son and for you. So - after the match - and we had won these boys were saying, come on, have a drink. Have a pint. I said, no. There's no pint today, I don't want to spoil my dinner. Oh very well. But one of the boys had t
h
e bright idea - oh - try this. And he came along - with a small little glass, a short Oh that was very very nice. And I asked, well what is this? Rum and peppermint, he said. Well being we were ten in the company, it went around of rum and peppermint, and
 
that's the Christmas I didn't see at all. Somehow or other - I got home, and to bed, without dinner. But for the next three days - if I would have tea or a glass of water - the rum would come up. But it taught me this one thing. It gave me - a - well I - 
abhor - liquor ever since, and that Christmas taught me that lesson, and kept me off spirits.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did you have any musical instruments in the home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, my father had a violin. A violin, he was a keen violinist, been trained - by - a Mr Moodie, that
 was - he was a music master in Neath. He -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 You mentioned earlier about him being with Doctor David Evans?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes. Ah but - but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Just your father played?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 He -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did anybody else play anything in the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No, not at that period, we did - later on - graduate to a piano. And then a few of them came to play the piano.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 When was that, after the war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh yes, it was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Was there anyone in the family who sang?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes. My brother who was younger than me, he was a - an 
eminent boy soprano. Much sought after during the war to sing in smokers that were held for the - soldiers coming home. And it was at that period - that a harp came to the village. And - with the harp came - penillion singing. And - that was an occasion. 
S
o that - Samuel Davis, he - taught himself to play the harp, my father had a good tenor voice and with his violin, but - singing with a harp came - for the first time to the locality. Well my brother, he was a - had been trained, and there was a competiti
on in the national eistedfood at Barry, for singing - twelve to fifteen, singing with the harp. Penillion singing. And Elwyn my brother won the prize - for singing the harp - winging with the harp in Barry. Was that 1920? Somewhere about 1920 that was.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did you ever make music together as a family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh yes, that was - as soon as the programme would come out - we would be well versed in the programme.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 You mean the Gymanfa ganu?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 The gymanfa ganu programme, yes. And - with the family I have
 mentioned, the Griffiths's that were a few doors - they - were more musical than we were. And had an harmonium. And they - and they still are today, if you will sing a tune, a hymn tune, they'll tell you the name of it. Or you ask the name of a humn tune
 and one of the Griffiths's will sing it for you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would you make music with them when you were children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Oh yes. Especially when we would come - carol singing. The two families would unite, and we would go out - and we'd sing - outside the doors through Oakwood, just for the sheer enjoyment of it, the two families singing Christmas carols.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did your parents play any games with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 The only game that I ever remember in our house was draughts. And - later dominoes. But - not with my paren
ts. Later - when the - memorial hall was instituted, that was after the war - there was an old man in the place who was a keen chess player, and he taught - a generation of us - the art of chess playing. And once you have mastered chess - draughts and dom
inoes you forget all about those.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Were there any books in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Plenty - plenty of books. Polenty of books. The - the books - were - everywhere, Cymru - cyrru goch, cyrmru - cenhadwr - cymr cogh, cwmru plant. And as those books came out - my
 father would have them and would give them to us - and all those books, we were well acquainted with those.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about newspapers, you mentioned that your father had the golaued?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 And the Faner?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 The Faner. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 And the Cymro?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh the Cymro I don't think was out at that time. No it wasn't, it wasn't no, no, the Faner it was then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about any other newspapers would you have then when you were a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 My mother would have Home Notes. My father would have ama
teur Gardening. And there was this Science and Art of Mining which you could always turn to. But the one thing that revolutionized our - our reading habits - my uncle - Uncle Morgan who had come from the university in Aberystwyth having graduated had taug
ht for just a - a twelve month, and was called to the war in 1914. He was a L}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5178564\charrsid6557717 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
eutenant that was - wounded in Murmetz Wood, and came back to Swansea, to Sketty in Swansea convalescent, and - he - was giving - presents of books, and I can always remember them, he gave us the Children}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5178564\charrsid6557717 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 s Tennison, the children Shakespeare, the children}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5178564\charrsid6557717 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 s Dickens and those were so absorbing that we swallowed those. Afterwards I graduated to when I had my own coppers - from school to buy Nelson Lee, the detective - story, and Sext
on Blake. So that I was well versed in - in those again.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Do you remember your mother reading?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Yes, I do. My mother used to read - the Home Notes - Home Notes were the - with my mother. And she would have - a periodical - the - Kenadur. She was a
 very very - she was very keen - on foreign mission work, and all - literature that would come from that direction - my mother, that was her life.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Do you remember your father reading?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh yes. And - Emerson - my father - was - he could be called 
to - speak on practically any subject, and he was so versatile that he could - I remember many saying, I didn't - remember so much of - of that, but I remembered others saying that he - he - was so well read, so versatile, that he could speak on any subje
ct.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did they ever read aloud to you or to each other? You did tell me that your father used to read aloud to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 R.S. Jones, Upper Brighton, I just mentioned that, and if there was anything that would - interest my father, or my mother, they wou
ld transfer it to us, it was shared.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would they read aloud to each other, your father and mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Only - snatches. Snatches of this - one would ask - especially - what do you think of this, and - there he would read it. And then again - my mother would have found something in her reading that - she would transfer it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Do you remember a funeral in the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, I can remember - there was one - one tragedy in our - life, between the - twins - and Rhoda, there was a - a little baby, Ei
rian, Eirian, and - he died in infancy, about six months old. And I can remember that - small little coffin, and the gloom that descended upon the household. That is my first recollection - of it, in the family.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 You'd only be about five or six, you don't remember the funeral or what happened?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Not so much as - well I can remember them - leaving the house. What I can remember is this little coffin, and it was painted white with blue - it wasn't the brown - oak - that is very vivid in my mind.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 You don't remember who attended the funeral?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Outside our family - I cannot say - so much about - about that, only the effect. The first contact - with death.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would you have to wear mou}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5178564\charrsid6557717 r}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 ning clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No, not then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Were you taken out visiting neighbours, friends or relations when you were a little boy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Not taken out to visit the - colliers home at that time was an open - open place for every - people came and went all day long and every day. Invariably somebody or other would turn 
in - at any time of the day, and night, and especially the - winter nights, where they would come in - to have a - tune on the - to learn the hymn tunes from the programme or anything and later after the harp came to the place, the - harp singing, that be
came the craze, but - as far as our house was concerned, there was always somebody there.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Who would be there, would they be friends or neighbours or relations?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Well our family - we were a very very large family, which were called - the wythien f
awr, the big vein, and that - went - the tentacles of the Thomases from - that village were everyw}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5178564\charrsid6557717 h}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
ere. So there were such a large family - one of the other would come in, and if we felt like visiting anybody, and even now after all the years - there's har
dly a house in the village that I can't go and just walk in without even knocking. Just a salutation, anybody at home? And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 People would come in without knocking would they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Wouldn't knock at all, there's - just - they would give the tap and op
en the come in, and just ask, in Welsh, any people here? And then the - they would break the news if it was news or they would ask the question if they wanted to know for if they wanted to borrow something, somebody had run out of tea or sugar or soap or 
something, practically every day.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would you be taken shopping when you were a little boy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
No. We weren't going - the - it wasn't a very big village altogether, and - after the Co-operative was instituted it was the Co-operative, and the - there t
he - we would be taken over and - with a long list of the order for the week. And then even back in those days there was a - a delivery by horse and cart. And if not - we would just carry - carry on - one or two journeys and bring what we wanted.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would you go as a little boy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, as - I was the eldest and quite a lot of that, the heavy work - fell on me from - when I was very young.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would you go on your own or would somebody be with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No, it's - usually on your own, the - you'd pic
k up with somebody if you wanted help you could always call on - your friends and he would only be too willing to oblige.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did you ever go out with just your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No. Very seldom, unless he - we - he would take us, he was a - a keen fisherman.
 And if there were - holiday, such as Bank Holiday, I can remember going with him - fishing. But - it was too tedious of a job for me when he - but he used to - make his own flies, and one comes very very - vivid back to my mind now. While we'll be killin
g the cockerel he would choose a few feathers from his neck to make this fly, coch y boncyff, coch yboncyff, which I think is still a well known fly for trout fishermen. Those were the only - outings that we would go with our father.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would you all go on Bank Holiday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
No. He would only take the - he would take the three eldest. Well then there were the - there were so many - attractions for the young ones and - what we - boys, the two boys - didn't want - was the company of our - sisters We didn't
 want to be seen with them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Why was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
There was something then - the old petticoat, that's the - and it - that was the worst thing they could call you, to call you a - call a little boy an old petticoat - was the worst - thing of all, so you wanted to avoid that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Do you remember any other outings with your parents, your sister mentioned the trip to Aberavon beach with Mrs Griffiths.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, those were annual - summertime trips. The train was very convenient and it would take us down t
o Aberavon, or sometime to the - the beach although there was - a mile of a walk from this - from Swansea Bay, Aberavon beach stati}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5178564\charrsid6557717 o}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 n down to the beach actually. Those were days when we used to take the kettle and - take all our food, and - over to the dun
es and it would be for a day, back and for into the sea, and - those were the kind - we would have those - about twice in the summer.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Who would take you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 The - there would be three or four families would be - coming then and the mothers would - 
and the strongest of the boys in the families would be carrying these - kettle, it would be a big iron kettle at that time, and another one would be taking some - sticks, that - to light the fire. And of course the - something to - teapot and a few mugs t
o drink the tea out of and - it was a big outing at that time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did you ever go away for a holiday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
No. I don't think I slept from home - only once, only once I can remember and that ended in tragedy and disaster. We had been taken over to our gra
ndmother. My brother and I - and - the tale had gone on long - so - we had gone to sleep while the elders were talking. My grandmother said, oh put those two in - in the bed there, and they left us there. We woke sometime, it was dark, found ourselves in 
a strange place and started bawling - and in the end my uncle had to take us in the middle of the night back home, and that was the only time - that I can ever remember sleeping away from home.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 And where was your grandmother's?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh she was only a
cross the river. In Pontrhydefen - the Pontrhydyfen part was - under the estate, Lord Jersey Estate, and the - across the bridge was Oakwood, which was the Margam Estate, so that is only just across the river that - separated us. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did any of the other members of the family go on holiday at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Not that - not while we were children. It was a long time - long time before we came to - to the holiday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would you go at all before the war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about Saturdays in those days, how would you spend Saturdays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Saturday, there were - in the place there was another - grocer - who had - opened out on his own. And there was always a chance on a Saturday, to earn a shilling, and it was a long - it was from Friday evening - 'til about
 five o'clock on Saturday, and - especially during the wintertime, people would order a bag of potatoes. And that - would have to be taken on a hand truck. And - a strong youngster - would be able to deliver the sack of potatoes, and - two or three orders
 the furthest away - these orders in the big box and - for that type of thing we could earn these - shillings, which I think were a help even I - I wasn't allowed to have it all for myself.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What did you do with the money you earned?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 I must admit 
to this, that - smoking - came - early in my life. When I was in standard three really, because it was - standard three of the school, there wasn't enough place in the school, so that we were in the vestry of a chapel, about two hundred yards away from th
e
 school, with plenty of chance for boys to smoke, and - to begin with we were helping ourselves to the shag that our fathers smoked. But then we graduated on to Woodbine, which were - at that time one penny for five. And the lady that was selling them wou
ld give us two - for a ha'penny, the first time, and you'd have three for the ha'penny the next time and she never made a mistake. So - that - smoking Woodbine - that was - and of course - those took our coppers.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 How old would you have been in standard three?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Eight. Looking back at - eight years of age.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 You were never caught?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Yes, caught and - but it wasn't considered - it wasn't considered a crime then to smoke - and anyway the - schoolteachers - sent us very very often to - to buy th
e cigarettes. And when we would fail to get tobacco of any kind we would resort to baco dail, leaf tobacco, and baco dail we used to have - the herb - foxglove leaves. I don't know exactly what those - what that is, it's a type - very much like the chrysa
n
themum leaf, but the bottom of that plant, the leaves would be dying and drying, and we would - dry those a bit more and rub them that we could make a cigarette - and - we smoked many of those when we failed to have tobacco, but I can always remember goin
g into - a - a - a patient who suffered from asthma who was burning Potters Asthma Cure, and that was the same - exactly the same aroma was from Potters Asthma Cure as we used to get from the - baco dail as we called it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 It probably didn't do you any harm?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would you work all day on Saturday at that little job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, it would be - up until - about four or five o'clock.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 And you said Friday night as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, you start - if there were - we would just call or the grocer wo
uld have called in the house and said that there was - that he would like to do such and such thing on Friday night, and - therefore we would do just those.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 How old would you be when you started to do that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 I was - I'm sure I was delivering for 
the - at the age of ten. But here's another - another sideline that we had. The - Echo was the only evening paper in the village, that was coming down - coming by train, and - there used to be a sale of about five to six dozen - of the - of the Echo. Well
,
 when somebody was wanted - new - a newspaper boy, Echo boy, the - man from Cardiff used to come to the school, and - having been recommended by the headmaster or the teacher for a likely boy, and then he would go and - ask our parents. So - I came to be 
- the representative of the Echo selling the Echoes. And I must - I did that for a few years. That -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 How old would you have been then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Ten. Well now, this is how I know so - that I was an Echo boy at ten. I can remember going to the station one 
night to fetch my papers, and - I was very surprised when the parcel for Pontrhydyfen came out - with twice if not three times the amount of papers that I usually had. Well I - took them with me, but to my surprise, before I could go very far from the sta
t
ion, half the village came to meet me, and all asking for a paper. And as - as I was giving them out, and they were - a penny I believe if it was penny or ha'penny the Echo was at that time, and that was the night of the explosion at Senghenydd. '13, you 
see. And I was born 1903, so that would put - so that's the - we used to have I think - tuppence a dozen, I think it was tuppence a dozen was the - the sale for the - for selling papers.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 How often would you do that, every evening?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 That was every night. 'Til Saturday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Not Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about the money you had from that, would you give any of it to your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh my mother did all of that, the - there were many bad debts - but sometimes when the fireworks were around there 
would be an occasional penny missing. But - taking all the - money that I received - for the papers, they paid weekly mostly, giving it to my mother, and she used to - send it away to Cardiff, and - I don't remember - having received anything - well to sa
y that I was having it for that, because - all going to the kitty, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 You don't know what she'd spend it on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Those little incidentals that - that crop up - such as - there were quite a lot of - small - penny readings and eistedfodds. And an occ
asional c}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5178564\charrsid6557717 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
ntata or something in other chapels apart from us, with an entrance fee of a penny or tuppence. And when they - those coppers were coming very useful - for that kind of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about the little job you had with the grocer, how much of that would you give to your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Well of that shilling - more than likely - maybe I would keep it one week and perhaps it was expected of me to give it the other week.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would you know what that was spent on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Well Woodbine would be coming 
into it. And the only other would be - a contribution towards - buying a ball. A football, or a - whatever was sport was in.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 How did you get on with the grocer? And the other boys you worked with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh there was - there was not much dissention but
 luckily I was endowed with a strong body, I was an aggressive youngster, and for that I was respected.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 How did your employer treat you, the grocer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh very very good. They - all through the years there was - somebody who'd say have a big order 
and - he - the lady might say, oh I'd like to get these over tonight. Oh all right, he said, I'll see that you get it. And when the word would come, whatever else had to go by, I would deliver those goods as wanted.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did you like the work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, I
 did because it was always a change. It was always a change of going from Oakwood to Pontrhydyfen, from Pontrhydyfen to Twyn y Pandy and then to - Cerrig Llwydon and then to Efail Fach. And - being the village was only a mile altogether but you had those 
distinctions between the lot. And every one that lived there were different from the others.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Why do you think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Now the - the difference I think came, Oakwood people - Oakwood being the newest - buildings, the new buildings were in Oakwood. So the
y would be the ones that were in the new houses, considered themselves or - were thought to be - just that little bit - higher than the ones that were in the old cottages of Pontrhydyfen and - then Twyn y Pandy again there were - that was a new - built - 
n
ew houses there, but in Cerrig Llwydon, as the name suggests and Efail Fach were the old part. But there was this difference also. It was in Oakwood, the church, the Church of England then was. And the church - the people that went to the Church of Englan
d - usually had - they were English or had English connections. Therefore we in Pontrhydyfen mostly - were the Calv}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5178564\charrsid6557717 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
nistic Methodists, who had come down from Gyfylchi, that started in 1777, so we were there first established, and over in - Cerrig Llywdon an
d Efail Fach, that's where you had Gwyr Sardis who were the independent of the Congregationalist as we know them today, so there were those distinctions in the village then.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 You think in different parts of the village, people of the different denomin
ations lived really in different parts? Do mean that the church people sort of tended to live in Oakwood?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Well they found themselves in Oakwood - mostly. The - the colliery officials for instance - they were living - they could afford the newer house
s. They came there. And then there were the business people. They more or less - went to the new houses that were built - that were built in Oakwood. And left the old - or came from other - parts of the - of Wales or the country, came to that part.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 How did you feel because you were Calv}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5178564\charrsid6557717 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 nist Methodist in Oakwood, did the people all mix with each other?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh yes, you couldn't - there - there wasn't a distinct line of demarcation but - it was - now a ni, they and us. That was - evident.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 The church was English of course,
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 The church was English, yes, yes, that - in my time. And all the other - chapels were Welsh.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 You mentioned that the business people went to the church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Publicans. Church.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Who would you say went to the chapel?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
All the chapel people were - they came the family - the old families - first of all there were the families of - the farmers who instituted Gyfylchi back in 1777, and then their offspring - as I say there were families, they - you - you could - say 
six to ten families, and they and their offspring, they were the ones that formed - Gyfylchi went too small of a place in - by 1826, and that's where Jerusalem, Pontrhydyfen was built. And that of course was the biggest one. I can't remember what exactly 
happened that the - the Baptist of course, they had - although the Baptist chapel was in Oakwood, and the Independ}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5178564\charrsid6557717 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
nts was in Efail Fach. I can't say myself when those divisions started, but - it always has been and it is today, that the Calv}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5178564\charrsid6557717 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
nistic Methodist - were the strongest in the -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 And it was the farmers you think really were the chapel people in the beginning, people used to walk for miles didn't they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 They did.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 There was a famous communion then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Service. Daniel Rolands. And wi
th - now - I - William Liams Pontycelins - relatives was in Gyfylchi. Well now, they had - Gyfylchi - Gyfylchi was allowed because it was outside - the five mile, there was a lwa that nobody could have an assembly - within five miles of the - Anglican chu
rch. St Mich}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5178564\charrsid6557717 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 el}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5178564\charrsid6557717 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
s in Carmarthen was the church at the time, and Gyfylchi was an old chapel of ease on top of the mountain, that came within that five mile law. The farers came, even as far as Pencoed and Llangan to the communion service at Gyfylchi, but the
y - it went too small and the first one they came to Taibach, and we read that the Hickocks of Taibach - were the - founders of the community that founded a branch of Gyfylchi in Taibach. Later - William Thomas, another farmer from Pyle in 1811 - he gave 
a plot of land that Capel y Pil as we know it today in Pyle, so that was the - or the circuit, Gyfylchi in the morning, Dyffryn Taibach in the afternoon, and Capel y pil in the evening.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 We were talking about Saturdays, how you spent Saturdays when you 
were a little boy, you were busy then because you were with this little job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Yes, you had to be - if anybody wanted something extra, Saturday was the job the time to do it, and - many of my friends - I can think of some of them, Saturday for them - t
hey had to do the housework, some of them even had to do the weeks washing. I know - my friend - he was living across the river, he couldn't afford any work on Sunday, he had the washing to do. And I've seen him many times - with a canvas apron in front o
f him, and the old rhuba then over a tub, that would be rubbing the clothes and he would see them all out.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 How old would he be doing that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Well he's - he was a - eighteen months older than myself. So he was in harness doing that before he was twe
lve years of age - long before he was twelve. And as I have mentioned before, he was the eldest of the Jenkins's family that - Richard Burton was one of the youngest of them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 The oldest brother was your friend?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes. And living across the - living across the bridge -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 The mother had died, that was probably why was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No, that was before the mother was -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did everybody do it, was it the common thing for boys like that to do the washing?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh - we did many things - if my mother w
ho did suffer - bilious attacks periodically - I would volunteer very often to scrub out. On condition that the doors were closed and nobody were coming in, I'd scrub from the front door we had tiles from the front door, into through a passage leading thr
ough to the kitchen, and then I would do the flags afterwards with a scrubbing brush I would - scrub out from the front door to the back door - if my mother had a bilious - but - that would be - I wasn't - wanting that to be a regular course.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would they ask you to do it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 I'd volunteer if I knew that my mother - had a bilious attack and you -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about the girls though, wouldn't your sisters do it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Scrubbing was considered the - the - scrubbing floors - that the boy could do that better
 than the girl. And of course my mother - used to say - there was such a grain after - my strong arms had been behind the scrubbing brush different of the girls.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about Sundays in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh Sundays was a day of - we - it was completely 
devoted to the chapel. There was a service at half past nine, from half past nine to half past ten. The service for - the young - members-. And - that's where they were taught to take part. And I can remember a few of them, one for instance was the Revere
n
d Emlyn Jones, in Johannesburg now, became an eminent preacher - but I can remember him in these meetings at half past nine - taking part, so we were graduated quietly to - give one - stanza of a hymn, and then we would be asked to read a few verses, and 
t
hen after quite a long time we may be asked to give the benediction, and it was in that way that young people - were - introduced to the work of the church. That was half past nine 'til about quarter past ten, we would just go outside and - but the mornin
g service would start at half past ten. Usually a sermon by the minister or some other}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5178564\charrsid6557717  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
minister. Two o'clock Sunday school, and we dare not lose Sunday school. The - different teachers from the vestry and you went from there into the chapel, and I can remem
ber one class - a class of mothers, and that - that time there may be a dozen women there with babies in shawls, in that corner. And - my mother, as soon as she could she wouldn't lose the Sunday school. We would all be in Sunday school. Back to a very qu
i
ck tea because the Band of Hope would be at five, and - to the Band of Hope. Then the - evening service at six, and invariably there would be a Ysgol gan after that - during the - period when we were - training for the gymanfa ganus at Easter, And the gym
anfa bwnc, which was on Good Friday, so there was not much time in the Sunday.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Who would take you in the early morning service?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 One of the deacons. William Hughes, he was - the - very devout - and he had a very very good way with young people.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 It wouldn't be the minister?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No, not the minister, at - at that, it was one of the deacons that would take us in that meeting.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would the babies keep quiet in Sunday school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, you'd have a kind of squawk now and then but - nobody used to take any - any notice. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did you have different clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Yes. All the Sunday clothes were different - and - smelling of camphor and - put away as soon as Sunday was over, and - wouldn't be looked at until the following Sunday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did you play games?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Yes, every game that went. And on - and on - cat and dog. And we'd have marbles in season. And if it came to a moonlight night, we would have a game - fox and hounds, where one would be chosen to be the fox and all the other pack would
 be after him, 'til they found where he was, and - that was the favourite on - on a moonlight night. Football, we had football in school - and - played rugby - from ten, from ten 'til we left school. Plenty of - of that kind of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about on Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Oh no. No, Sunday was - we weren't allowed to do anything. My - this was the experience - that I will always remember. I have just mentioned that I could earn a few}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5178564\charrsid6557717 
 coppers, and I can remember buy}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 ing and old boneshaker of a bike for five shilli
ngs, I had saved five shillings to buy that. But it was going - and - in school it was before I was twelve, in school then - one of our mates had had appendicitis, the first time we had ever heard the name, the only hospital to treat it at that time was S
w
ansea General Hospital, before Aberavon or any other hospital in Neath - everybody had to go to Swansea. Well we were four of his mates wanted to go to Swansea - visiting him on a Sunday. And the only way to get to Swansea on a Sunday was - either walk or
 
go on a bike, there were no trains, there was nothing. Before the days of cars. Well I remember coaxing my parents for a week, for permission to ride that bike on a Sunday. It wasn't done, you dare not take that outside, and if you defied - you - couldn't
 
be surprised if you found that somebody had - damaged that for you and they would put it out of order that you wouldn't go. But I did have permission to go with my friends, on condition that I was in the half past nine meeting, that I was in the half past
 ten meeting, I was allowed to lose Sunday school for the time but I was to be back by six o'clock. So that was - how things were - as far as sport and - any kind of - activity on the Sunday.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 You must have had a race to Swansea and back?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Not very, you were down to Neath - four miles down to Neath, then you'd go on to - Skewan, Morriston, oh we -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 You went to see your friend?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 We did. And that was - Revered Glyn - Emlyn Jones's brother - Gwyn Jones who was our age.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 So your parents thought it was wrong really to work or play on Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Oh yes. We - in - I can remember in my grandmother's house - there were no activities at all, even the vegetables had been cleaned and ready, and the meat cooked on the Saturday. And I've heard my 
mother saying she was the eldest of the children, of the girls in that household, and first thing on Monday morning you'd have the accumulation of all those dishes - and she would - that was her job first thing on Monday morning.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about in your home though?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Oh we had come from that, we would wash the dishes and - very often we would cook, the meat too. And would have them to - go to the - service, and come back - the preachers then come back to the dinner, but we - there were quite a lot of m
y - discipline in my grandmother had been lost in my time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about working on Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
No, there was nothing - no occupation - nobody would think of - of going to pick vegetables, or anything from the garden. And any kind of jobs as it is today such as painting or decorating, that was out.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 You mentioned that your parents attended a place of worship and it was the Calv}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5178564\charrsid6557717 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 nistic Methodist, Welsh?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 How often would your mother go?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh my mother would go - she would go to Sun
day school - with - she never told us children - to go to Sunday school, it was always - now come. And she would be leading. My father being a colliery official - meant that he very - he had to do quite a lot of - Sunday morning work, reports and so forth
. But apart from that my mother kept the family - and she would be - very near as often as we would be - in the service.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 When would your father go, would he go to Sunday school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, he would go to Sunday school because invariably he had a class 
there. He had a class of young people, and - as I have mentioned before he was a reader, and - he was - the winner of the - Arholiad, that is the - the annual examination - for all Sunday schools of West Glamorgan, and in the library we have at home now t
here are - the prize would be - a guineas}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5178564\charrsid6557717  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
worth of books of your own choice. And there are - I'll say scores of those, in the house now. And the - on the front page the fly would be that they were given for - as a first prize - for the Arholiad at such and 
such a year on the - either the Acts or - any book of the Bible, and the name of the examiner.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 So your mother would go to the morning service, Sunday school and the night?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 And the night service.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Your father would go to the Sunday school and the night?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 And to the night.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would there be weeknight services?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Yes, the weeknight service, Monday night the prayer meeting. And - Thursday night - the society. Society - society. And then there would be - in the wintertime, the literary 
and debating society would be - on the Wednesday night, and you'd have in the meantime the - the Band of Hope for the smaller children and - Merched y de the temperance people, there was some activity in the chapel - every night.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would your mother go to those meetings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
A few of them. A few of them, she would - either there the - my sister, the eldest sister would have to just look after the children, and the younger ones only that they were at home, and - my mother wouldn't lose - the - if there 
was an invited speaker - for the - literary society. She would always see to go to those. And - of course at that time you had the temperance - movement, the Good Templars, and - the missionary meetings. Those were the meetings that my mother would always
 -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
My father, yes, he would take part in - any of them. But his - contribution to the - society - he would have heard the sermon, he would have analysed it and - invariably, he would have some slant which was different - 
from any of the other speakers. So I've been told. Yes. He was very original.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 You told me that you went to Sunday school, were there any Sunday school outings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Only one in the year. It would be alternatively - Barry, Barry Island or Porthcawl. A
nd I used to enjoy the Barry Island, because at that time the train - we used to take the train - up the valley, right up and through the tunnel - in - Blygwynvy, and come out and down the Taff Vale, all the way to Cardiff and that - the - the t}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5178564\charrsid6557717 h}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 rill of go
ing - by train that way. Then when the Porthcawl would come we would go - down to Port Talbot, and without changing somehow we used to go to the main line and - have the train to take us all the way to - Porthcawl.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 A special train I expect?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes,
 because at that time the Sunday school - of Pontrhydyfen only I think it was about a hundred and fifty children then. Well with the grown ups you were - you would get the two hundred odd that would be required for a special train.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What other social activities organised by the chapel did you take part in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
The - first one I can remember was the Cantatas. The only one Welsh cantata we knew of and that was Joseph Parry's - Cantata, the birds, I don't remember that. But I can remember an English one.
 And I was given a part. It was only just one verse, I don't think I ever saw it in print. Afterwards, but I'll never forget it. The cantata was entitled John Bull and His Trades. And the various trades were dressed up and they had something to say on the
 stage. But this was my little recitation. The butcher and the baker, and the gloomy undertaker, the carpenter, the furrier and the carrier, now these and all the others, who were intended to be brothers, now like bulldogs in the bar}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5178564\charrsid6557717 r}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 el are at quarrel. No, 
that was the - the only social - as part of the chapel. But I'm going on a little while now, after the first world war, when they came back from the war, the - there was one man - there were three or four in the - locality, who were conscientious objector
s
. They weren't thought much of at that time, because - we all had school were brainwashed with the land of hope and glory and the patriotism and everything, and - this is just the type of thing we were taught at school. We are all under the same old flag,
 
Britain's in arms are we, one King and one desire, one flag and one empire, England, Scotland, Ireland, Wales, dominions o'er the sea. We'll fight with might because it's right to conquer Germany. That was the type of - in school. And our headmaster at th
a
t time - was - officers training corps and there they were with broom sticks until they had rifles marching up and down the village, as - an officer - OTC officers training corps - during the first world war. There were a few who - were conscientious obje
c
tors, and they who had to suffer. Well after the war they came back, and by that time I had been working in the underground and was a - a - full grown man who had my own pay and my pocket money, and a few more beside. But this - man who was a schoolteache
r
 he brought us together, and - formed a little class, and it was he that introduces us to a literature that was different from what we had in the chapel. And - the thin edge of the wedge of - he being an ILP he brought in political science. And very soon 
I
 had - graduated - to become a trade unionist very young, and - went from there to the committee of the - the works committee in the colliery, and this is important in my life, I was chosen as a delegate, to go to the - annual conference, three day confer
e
nce at Corry Hall in Cardiff, where representatives of all the lodges - of the coalfield gathered. I was representing the Argoed colliery - as their delegate. And those were the strong words at that time. I - you had Tom Richards in the chair, Vernon Arms
t
rong immaculately dressed. You had Sir William Jenkins - Beattie, and quite a lot more, and once I found myself sitting next to a young man - and - conference was - interrupted - by - a request that the conference should hear a deputation from nine mile p
o
int, those miners been on strike - had walked from Nine Mile Point to Cardiff. And - some were saying, oh we can't be bothered because Nine Mile Point, there's always some row or - strike there. But this young man next to me, he got up on his feet, and - 
a
nd - and start - started to stut - stut - stutter, but - once he got over that first stutter he spoke very forcibly, and - Nine Mile Point deputation was - granted an audience by the conference. And I found later that that young man was none other than - 
Aneurin Bevan. So - those - the activities - when I was young, that was when I was seventeen 'til - until we went down to Kenfig Hill I was in the Labour movement, and - would be put by this - Aneda Rees it was, put by him - to ask questions.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What happened to those conscientious objectors who were in the war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Those conscientious objectors they - they had a very - tough time of it, they were put in solitary confinement, and - then they would be - offered - a - they would be taken out for a bath, w
hich would be nothing but - cold water. Their clothes would be taken away from them, and they would be - offered a suit of khaki, and kept there sometimes - all day - and either they took the khaki or else they would - and a lot of them died young, the ef
f
ects of the one of them in particular I know - who after he came back - had lost his health, but he moved to North Wales, and - couldn't have known then that - he - I - he wasn't - he wouldn't have been - wouldn't have stood a chance of having the teachin
g position in - South Wales.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Why wouldn't he have had a chance?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Because - the Glamorgan County Council and the ones that were - fitting them in - patriotism had not altogether died, and - there were teachers that were coming back - from the - de
mobilized from the army, and they would be fitted first. But a strange coincidence - three years ago my son-in-law was appointed a headmaster - of a school at Berwyn in the Bala, and one of the first things he did - was to look at the school log book, and
 he came home and he said that he was so very surprised, a boy from Pontrhydyfen - has been a headmaster in this school. But he died a young man. And that was - the late Jenkin William James, of Pontrhydyfen, and}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5178564\charrsid6557717  he was one of these - conscient}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 ious objectors that - from the first world war.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What was the feeling in the village when they were conscientious objectors?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Now again you will find where the feeling of the village - was - evident - in - the church, the Anglican church. The Anglican church e
n bloc were - ultra-patriotic, the King the Queen and the - there you are, you're - looking back at it you can see that, and they were the ones - that would pin the white}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5178564\charrsid6557717  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 feather to any boy, who they thought was - should have been -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did they do that in Pontrhydefen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
They would, oh yes. I can remember one of them - during - Major Jack Edward's recruiting officers were coming - and - somebody was brave enough to get up in the meeting to speak against this recruitment. And this woman who was - she w
as a church woman, and I can hear her saying now, chuck him out, and - it was not - no opposition was tolerated against the establishment.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Was there a choir in the chapel?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes. There was a choir and I should have said that one more branch of the
 Sunday school and the Band of Hope, was - John Curwn's modulator had come out, and - we had a - a class of solfar, and that was an hilarious - experience to be there with Thomas Griffiths. We would run up and down the scale, and - became very very effici
ent - efficient in - the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5178564\charrsid6557717 solfa, and I am very indeb}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
ted to it, I - use it even today. Never having learnt the staff, but one meeting the - teacher would be with his pointer going up and down and we were - we were supposed - to - sing after him, or he'd put o
n the blackboard - a series of notes, and we were to - sing them. But one of the boys, he just had a look at the blackboard, and - on his feet, but this is just what he said. Me doh, ray do, so fa, so fa ray doh me. And that ended the class for that night
 
in laughter, we could never - instead of singing it he just said it. Now those kind of things. Afterwards we had - a glee party, under Thomas Griffiths, and that glee party - well for the first time, we - learnt something that was - different, for the - s
u
ch as - the Jolly Roger Boys. That was something new. Of course we had the old - Mevanwy, and - quite a lot of the old ones. But then we - went on to something better. We had a madrigal choir. And these madrigals, when we had their history - revealed to u
s
 - and to know that they had survived - all those centuries, and what was different in the madrigal - to the other parts in the glee party, was that there would be four or even six - distinct parts, which were sung to everyone, and the strains of those ma
drigals, even today, repeat themselves.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did the chapel run a temperance}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5178564\charrsid6557717  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 club? You did mention a Band of Hope?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 The Band of Hope yes, and there was a - I don't remember the Good - Good Templars as such - I don't remember my having - ever having si
gned the pledge. But the - boys that were just slightly older than myself, had done just that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Were you a member of the Band of Hope?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What did they do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh the Band of Hope would - would sing the hymns from - Swn y Jiwbili, and
 Swn y Jivili was the - the Welsh equivalent to the - Sankey and Moodie. Singing songs we would sing them, Sow Seeds of gentleness, whereas the English ones would be singing - Sow gentle seeds of kindness. Well it was - it were those - and would train us 
- for the penny readings, which we - gave us the grounding of public speaking and - gave us the - breaking down the - shyness that we could appear on a stage - that was taught very - early, and that was from the - Band of Hope.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 That's why so many Welsh people are actors and preachers and everything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Yes. There was plenty of facilities for you, you had it in - you had little tasks to do from the Sunday school, you had a chance to appear on your own in - in the Band of Hope. When the cantatas came a
long you were given a par and then later came - the drama, and when the dramas to be - chosen for a par for the drama - and - I was chosen for those too I remember doing the Portia, and had quite a lot of - I was Thomas Shaw in Geo Francis's Portia, and I
 can always remember the thrill of that, and then went on to do the \{BLANK\} and - many many more of these dramas, which gave confidence, which many today think is - audacity and cheek, but it was -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Grace was said at meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Was it always said, and who would say it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Yes. Grace was always said in our house at every meal. And one of the family had to say it. I can remember - the - allar deuluoedd, or the family altar, that was - carried on - without a break in my grandmother's house t
o the end, while she and my grandfather were. I remember it in our house, but on a Sunday night only. Where the family would congregate together, before we would go to rest on a Sunday night, and my father would read}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5178564\charrsid6557717  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 a few verses and he would pray and he w
ould give the benediction and - commit us to God if you like, for the coming week. And I remember that. But it would be - up until - the first world war, 1914. Many things went by the board from that date.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Were you taught to say prayers at night?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did your father take an interest in politics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Oh yes, he - my father was a Liberal, Liberal - to - an ardent Liberal, so much so that - when the - Mid-Glamorgan - elections took place, and S.T. Owens, the member, the committee rooms were 
in our front room. And the comings and goings at that time during election time - were an experience for young children at that time, and we would sneak into the - public meetings that were held in the school or in the chapel vestries and - well everythin
g - and we would - sing this - we children were taught. O give a loan of a penny to buy a red coffin to bury Vaughan Rehola in the middle of the pigs manure. Well, Liberals it was all the time, and Dad was a big man with Lloyd George and when the L}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5178564\charrsid6557717 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 oyd Geor
ge insurance came Dad thought that that was something exceptionally good. And there is one interesting thing about Lloyd George insurance. When the thing sta}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5178564\charrsid6557717 r}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 ted Dad was working as a collier and then part of the contribution was being paid in the colliery 
and he paid a portion but after he became the manager of the works he was not eligible then. He was not to pay because he was considered above the insurance of a workman. But dad because he had been from the start he was able to pay as a voluntary contrib
utor and I can remember the commotion when the card was being collected in, every six months, and the club superintend}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5178564\charrsid6557717 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
nt coming to ask for the card and no stamp on it and mother having to gather as much money as she had in order to stamp the card but then 
the promise was made to stamp it every week from then on. But this is what happened years later. Dad had been paying voluntarily the stamp, well he died a young man and mother with five little ones in school and the widow's pension had come in and mother 
f
ills the form in to have the widow's pension now, and a long time before anybody answered the letter but one day here is a gentleman coming to the door. Mrs Edwards? She said Yes. I see you've applied for the widow's pension. And - I see that the occupati
on of your late husband was col}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5178564\charrsid6557717 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
iery manager, do you know that he wasn't eligible to pay that insurance? Well, my - my mother said, well I have paid it. Well have you any evidence madam, the inspector? Yes, my mother. And she went to fetch these, a bundle o
f the cards that had been signed and filled in - through the years. And the gentleman looked at my mother and smiled and said, congratulation madam, you are a woman in five thousand. It is my painful duty so very often - when - I go to examine these cases
,
 to find out that somebody had given up maybe six months ago or just last years and would have forfeited their pension for that - neglect. But you madam, you are - case is straight forward, and that meant quite a lot to my mother, to have the widow's pens
ion - for herself and the five dependent children which made a big difference in the budget of our family at the time.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 You said he was a Liberal, your father, why do you think he held those views
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Well he had - he had gone through being a - an or
phan, he had lost his father very - he never remembers his father, and - he was very very conscious of the - of the state that people, especially widows were living in. And - undoubtedly the - the effects of - the ILP had begin - had begun even at the tim
e, to seep in. Well anyway, he - he was the Liberal because - Liberal stood for radicalism.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about your mother, did she take an interest in politics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Non-}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5178564\charrsid6557717 committal}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
, my mother was one of those people - she had seen so much of it Because we - w
e lived in a place and she knew that - if people started to argue - about politics that that would soon go to some kind of quarrel and dissention so mam was peace at any cost, and wouldn't - she never expressed her views politically.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 You don't know what her views were?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Oh she would follow her husband, she - she would - she - there is one thing certain about my mother, she would never vote Tory. Because we had seen the effect of - the landlords through the years. So - it is more than likely that 
it was a Liberal my mother was too.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Do you remember your father and mother voting in a general election before 1919?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh yes. Yes, I - I'm going back now - oh that was - I shouldn't be surprised that it about 1910 - the - candidate - Mr Vaughan R
heole, Mr Vaughan of Rheale estates, he was the Tory member, and - there was no place for him - in Pontrhydyfen at that time. So while - while the - Liberal flag was flying my father was all out for it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 In some places at that time men felt they risked
 losing their job or their house if they voted differently from their employers, do you know if your father felt himself under that kind of pressure, to vote for a particular party? Of course he was colliery manager wasn't he, and then he went back to be 
a collier, and then he went to be manager gain, how did he feel?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
It didn't apply in the village of Pontrhydyfen so much - the people that were affected - were those who depended upon their landlord. Now in the village in Pen y Bryn where I live now - 
the farmers there - before every election, even for a parish or a council election - were honoured by a village - a visit from - the - agent of the estate, of the Margam Estate at that time, and were told in no uncertain terms that if it was known - that 
t
hey had voted for anybody - but the candidate that was specified - by their - the landowner, then they would be deprived of their - and there are a few - instances of people - having lost their farms. But - at that time I don't think that it applied to th
at degree - in - as far as coalminers were concerned.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Was your father a member of the political party?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, oh yes, an active member.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 And you would remember him working for the Liberal party at an election? Was your mother a member?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No, I don't think that they were - that women at that time - I can't - remember - any active woman - with the - political parties.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 They didn't have the vote until after the war did they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did your parents take part in any political activity other than at election time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
No, there was nothing in the - nothing in the village - my father was - attached to the union, but they had the - the coal owners association - they had some functions - which their colliery managers were attending. Ap
art from that I don't think there was anything else.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 When your parents were not doing their work how did they spend their time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Well it was - my mother - was - always - either knitting - most of us wore socks, stockings at that time. Stockings t
hat were - knitted. And I think that it was considered a - a mark of slovenliness on any woman who was not doing something in that respect. I can always remember there was - a stocking, or a glove - and later on there came little jerseys for the boys and 
-
 no, it was more or less the - things about the family in the weekdays There wasn't a tremendous lot by the time - the train was going up in the morning at six o'clock, and it wasn't coming back until four. By the time the meal was over and bath time - it
 
was very near time to go to a weeknight meeting or whatever - was going. And the free nights that there were, by the time you had - read the paper and the Goleuad and - whatever periodical - either - mum or my dad were reading - it was time to go to bed -
 being you were getting up early.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did your mother have any interests outside the home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Only chapel - matters. There was - nothing else to interest my mother, the chapel - and the - the family.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did she ever go out to enjoy herself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Apart from an occasional outing to see friends in - the neighbouring village of Cwmavon or - that was just about the limit.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 With whom would she go?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 She would go either with her sisters, or one of her sister-in-law's, or the immediate neighbours.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 When did your father get home from work in the evenings?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Well really by the time you'd come in - when he was working in the Avon Valley, he was - the trains, the colliers trains that were coming from the - the far end of the Avon Valley, Blyngwnvy
 down to Port Talbot, it was a tremendous train of - fourteen, fifteen coaches. And - if you - if any collier lost the train well he either had to - walk, or wait for the next passenger train - and travel standing up - in the - guards van. But normally I 
would be home from - twenty to half past four.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 How many evenings a week would he spend at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Well, he would spend the evenings up until - the church meetings would start That was Monday prayer meeting, Thursday Society, and - I'm not quite sur
e how often the Bristol, West Of England, South Wales Provident he was - that he would be attending, that meeting was usually - was on a Friday night. But he wasn't -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would that be every week?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes. Yes. He wasn't going very far from the -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did your father attend any clubs or pubs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Oh no. That wasn't the - that wasn't - there was no club - in the - in the village. And the effect of the 1904/5 revival - had not - absolutely brushed off. There was a distinct gap - between the - ones that w
ere too - fre - to frequent the public houses, and the ones that frequented the chapels.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 There were people in Pontrhydyfen then who didn't go to chapel?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh yes, there were - there were people - there was a Conservative Club - that - was back in 
- but the revival - smothered that. And in the little hamlet of Tonmawr, up above, the - religious revival was sufficient - to close the only pub - that was up there, and - Tonmawr was dry, until very lately when the new craze of football clubs were insti
tuted.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would your mother go at all for anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Oh no - my mother - as I've said, she was - a temperance movement that - and it was - with her - one of her deadliest enemy, and - I know for a fact that she would refuse even for medicin
al purpose - she would refuse to have any - alcohol, such as brandy or whisky in the house at all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did your father take part in any sport?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 The only sport I remember my father, I have just mentioned that he was a - a fisherman, but - there was -
 one more sport - didn't live very long. There came as a minister to the place - a young man who had been to Cambridge Later he became professor W.P. Jones of Trevicker. He came as a young minister to Pontrhydyfen, and he was the first to introduce the ga
me of quoits. And I can remember as a child - watching these grown up men throwing those iron rings, which we became to know as quoits. And - but that only lasted - as long as that minister was in the - in the place.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did your father ever attend the races?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
No. Horse racing - had not started. It became later - but - very much after my father - but pony racing, pony racing started to come - the Neath races was only just outside Pontrhydyfen, but that again was - was not - thought the thing. And I may
 - mention by passing, that the nickname by which Pontrhydyfen people are known, and some refer to it now, as the money boxes. They had the name of being - very very thrifty, and kept their money in money boxes, but there is a reason for that too. My gran
d
father remembers the time - when a slick Englishman came to Pontrhydyfen and deprived these people of their savings, another one appeared afterwards, in my mother's time, and he - he again deprived - and later on, afterwards, there was a confidence tricks
ter came, so when people have been had three generations of them like that, the bookmaker hasn't got much chance with people like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 How were they had?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Well - the first one came - and asked people to invest - in collieries. And - painted the r
osy picture. But - of course after having the shareholders in and so forth, somehow the mine came to an end and - the people would lose all. The other one afterwards - I'm not quite certain of the - of the second one - defrauded them, but I know that the 
third - the third - got these people to invest - in some unknown company - and he used to pay - used to pay the dividends pretty regularly. But when it came that the people wanted - to have the bulk of their own money, when the crash came it was final.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 He didn't bet?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did they belong to any savings clubs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, the Bristol.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Was that a savings club?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No, no, the Bristol West of England and South Wales was a provident society, only to the extent that you - it was called -
 club claf, it would only - it would only give you - those few shillings when you were unable to work.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 It was a sick club really?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Sick club.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 He didn't belong to anything else like a boot club?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No, that -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 People used to pay a penny a week for burying didn't they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Oh that was - as insurance, yes, they did, because - my grandfather was an insurance agent. And - he made all the family insurance minded. That every child there was - from a penny to three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5178564\charrsid6557717  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 pence a week on them. And also there was - just sufficient to guarantee that the parish wouldn't have to bury them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 So they did pay that for all the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 How did you get on with your brothers and sisters, before leaving school when you were a little boy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Oh I was always kingpin, and - the eldest and that used to be the order, that the - younger ones, they did rebel but - in the end it was - they would - condescend to go and do what they were told by their elders. It paid them to do that, in many
 respects, because they were the ones who came to ask elder ones - to help them mostly.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Was there one you felt particularly close to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, perhaps - or not - we didn't have - we didn't have a weakling in the family thank God. Invariably I knew m
y friends - who were attached to a member of the family, if he was, for some reason, a weakling or deformed. But I don't remember having - to be - tempted to - give any - preference to one over the other.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Your sister was saying that she felt the three oldest were together more in your family? You didn't feel that?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
No, we didn't - the - the reason for the three eldest being - of course we were the - three - that remembered most - pre-1914. The others were - more or less - regimented by rationing, and the shortages of the war and all that came after it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 As a child who did you play with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Well the village was - very - prolific - in - breeding children, and you never - were short of company. There were plenty to play with. Boys and girls. And the girls were as much tomboys - they would join in - in - in the sports as good as the boys.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Who would you play with on the whole, your brothers, sisters or neighbours or everybody in the village?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Everybody, we would always be - more or less
 of a gang - that would - join in and - well - it's very seldom that we - would be - we wouldn't be without company.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Where did you play?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 The mountains were above, that used to give plenty of - of scope, we used to go to the mountains. Then we wo
uld have - the collieries were coming then, and - you could always - on the siding of a colliery there were trams to be pulled, and - the colliery stables, they were a magnet for the boys of the village. The river of course in summer during bathing time. 
There was a variety of - everything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would you play in the street?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Yes, we would play in the street because - they had the light. Especially in the winter time there was a light in - in the street. And that would afford the - the children - to - fool about round the light.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would you play in other children}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5178564\charrsid6557717 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 s homes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
No, very seldom. The - if you take the average of the families at that time you would find that there was the average of six or seven in a family. Well - there was no room for
 outsiders, when the family were congregated. And - some of the older boys, of the - of my friends would very soon remind you that it was out, your place was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 You mentioned earlier the sort of games that you played, were you allowed to get dirty when you played?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
The only game that would - we played football - that would make us dirty - but it was the - the unforgivable thing was to tear your clothes. You could if you got dirty with mud, remember so many times going into a stream, and having a ha
ndful of fern and - brushing the mud off. Never mattered that your clothes were - wet, as long as they were presentable to go -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Were you free to play with anyone you pleased?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes. There was - don't remember - any restriction ever put in our way to play with who we liked.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Your parents didn't discourage you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did you belong to any youth organisations?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 There came the Boy Scouts - to the place, but it never - caught on. Radicalism - and after that the Labour Party came. T
he - Boy Scouts - was more or less - connected - with the Anglican church. And being there were so few - of those - therefore there were few Boy Scouts.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 You didn't join?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 You didn't think of joining?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 How did you spend your
 free time when you were at school, did you have any hobbies, you mentioned that Friday night and Saturday when you were in school you were working?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Working, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 So you didn't have all that free time, you mentioned that you were playing and you used to fish, and you had a bike?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes. The -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did you garden or anything like that or collect anything or keep a pet?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh yes, we kept - I always kept a rabbit. A rabbit or two. And - they were just the angora type of - white rabbits with p
ink - pink eyes. And - oh I had - quite a lot of fun with - with the rabbits. And it taught me one thing, to have - the care for - something else. You cannot keep a pet without - we always had - had a cat. And I can always remember my father saying, when 
h
e - a new little tom cat would come, and we wanted to have a name on it. And he would say, well we'll call this cat Sam. I failed to have one of my children called after me so I'll call the tom cat. So - Sam, invariably they - the cat, if he was a tom cat
, was called Sam.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 You mentioned that you went fishing and you went walking and bicycling? Who would you go with? Your father took you fishing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about walking and bicycling?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Anybody that had the - that had a - a boneshaker, a 
bike, and - although the train passed - we would go to Aberafon by train but never - anybody thought of going to Neath by train, because you could walk - to Neath in the time it would take you to get by train. So - those bikes were useful to go to Neath -
 and by going to Neath of course we could see - football matches of a class - higher than we - although we had a team - in the village.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about Neath Fair, that used to be a big thing didn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh Neath Fair, we used to look forward to Neath 
Fair. And - my first recollection of Neath Fair, was as a boy - and going down under a bridge, I must have been about nine - nine or ten, and - had a passion for horses, and on the morning of Neath Fair - from eight o'clock - onwards, you would see these 
comin}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6450268\charrsid6557717 g because - farmers used to wal}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
k - ride their horses or lead them - from Maesteg over the Bryn, the - Avon Valley as gar as Glyn Corog, they would all brought - bring their horses down past our village, Pontrhydyfen, and then walk them to Neath. So - w
e would ask if a man was - riding one pony himself, and leading two, we would ask if we could sit on one of the - and were allowed to go to Neath. So I can remember now the string of horses by the Cross Keys, from the Cross Keys - right along the road, an
d
 these gipsies and dealers and farmers - and the shouting and the - well quite a lot but we - had to walk back afterwards, there were no horses going back. So there was an old saying - I'm as tired as a dog having been to the fair. Well that's how we felt
 after Neath fair, oh - that was the Thursday, Thursday the Neath Fair, the horse fair. But - Saturday - it wasn't until I had started working - that I could sport a shilling in my pocket that I could go to - that's what it was termed, the Fool's Fair.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did you go to any theatres when you were still at school?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
No theatre, the theatre hadn't come but there had come the living pictures, down - at Carmarthen. Eblies. And it was at the time when Tom Mix was the hero, Pearl White as Pearl of the Army, 
and these - well they were thrills but we could only afford to go - to the matinees on Saturday afternoon where we could have the entrance for tuppence.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would you go often?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No, not often other than - every - Saturday matinee, and that is when we
 could afford it. When we could afford the time between the - delivering the - goods for the grocer and - but it wasn't 'til later on that the - we would go to the - to an evening session, but always walking down and walking back. And - three miles.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did you take part in any sports?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, took part in football - as soon as I could.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would you go to music hall at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, we came there again the - the village was divided - into two parts as far as the children were concerned. Now it was a
t that time that the influx of English people came, following English managers to the different collier, we did have people from the Forest of Dene, and we did have people from the Monmouth Valleys. Names came by }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6450268\charrsid6557717 H}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 owdels, the Friars, the Wheelers, they cam
e - but what was surprising in our village - we did not condescend to speak English - to these newcomers. They were absorbed - they had to absorb into our - into our community, the children learnt Welsh and they are still Welsh, and the ones in the collie
r
y, they learnt Welsh - sufficient to have a - a - a reasonable working - grip of the language, but - they had different - they spent their leisure differently. Whereas the native of Pontrhydyfen, the Welsh non-conformist child - would think of the events 
i
n Neath - or the music hall in Port Talbot as something - well, terrible. But these young - English people, the Howdells, the Wheelers, and the Friars, they as children went to the music hall, and I can always remember with a thrill how they, for the firs
t time, brought back the rag times, and the rag time was something - and - well we soon started to jig to that, but that was the first introduction - of the music hall to -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 You didn't go yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No. It's - I can't remember going to the Vince at all - not as a child.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 But you went to the cinema?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did your parents give you any pocket money?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, if you were without. If you were without - but as I have mentioned - from very early on I - was more or less self-maintaining in
 - pocket money. But I wouldn't be - I wouldn't be - short, except for one - and this one - I will never forgive my parents, there came a circus - I've said that. I couldn't go.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 You still feel it really?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 I - there you are, but I have come to know after that that there was not a pennies to be had to spare then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 They wouldn't have minded you going to the circus?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Just didn't have the money.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Because you would all have had to go I expect if you went?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh no, that wasn't again you 
couldn't - that wasn't the rule, if - if my parents thought that - one of the members, never mind who it was, deserved to go - it didn't make any difference - it was there for him to go.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 You said you spent a lot of your pocket money on Woodbines?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Yes, to anything that was going we could - and of course we came after the football matches were coming and - more popular, and you would have to take unless there was a hole in the fence of the field - a - you have a copper to go there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did anyone outside the home help your mother to look after her house or family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
No, very seldom after we became - there was always somebody - or if it - it didn't matter if we just closed the door - I don't know that it was ever closed - because - anybody - oh 
somebody would say she had called but there was nobody in, the door was open and - that was the - the measure of trust between - the community.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What would happen if your mother was ill or confined to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 My mother was one of those that was endowed with - her}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6450268\charrsid6557717 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 d}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6450268\charrsid6557717 it}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
ary migraine. Migraine and if she - suffered all her life with that. And it was nothing new for us as children - that my mother would be with - a - a cloth around her forehead and that had been soaked in v}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6450268\charrsid6557717 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 negar, and she would be lying on the couch and there this migrai}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6450268\charrsid6557717 n}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 e - migraine would have been - but at though - at that time we would all rally round. From my father to every member of the family.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would any of your neighbours come in and help at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Not during the period of 
a migraine. But I do remember the epidemic - the flu epidemic that came - after was it 1919? 18. Just - it was very serious. And I can always remember that time, we as a family were all of us - practically down - I can remember my brother and I were in th
e
 same bed - and - my aunts were coming then, even though one was a headmistress - but she was passing and doing what she could. Until somebody came better, but - what I can remember about that epidemic - when we - when we did - get better, we started to p
e
rspire. The doctor was coming and - it was a dose of quinine - that was the only thing that was given. And then we, my brother and I started to sweat, to perspire at the same time. And that's the first time - I ever remember - the bedclothes soaking with 
perspiration. But after that was - after that experience, the - flu - the influenza would leave us and - but only on an epidemic like that would anybody.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Do you remember what happened when one of your younger brothers or sisters was born? How did your mother manage then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Oh there was a girl coming in at that time. It had been prearranged - prearranged that - of course the washerwoman, Mrs Cullis, would come in - that day - but there were - I - I remember - three or four girls, who would be with ma
m - about a day before, the child was born for about a fortnight, three weeks afterwards.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Stay there all the time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, they - no, no, they wouldn't stay the night. They would - just come in the morning, and - go in the evening.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would they be someone that your mother paid?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Oh yes, they were - they were my cousins on my father's side - they were older than we were, and - one I - she's still alive, I can remember - she would not drink tea, she wouldn't drink anything - only Van Houten's 
cocoa. And wherever she went, even on her honeymoon, she took a tin of Van Houtens cocoa with her, and still - it is Van Houtens cocoa if she can get it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Your parents did have relatives living nearby, your mother's family were all in Pontrhydyfen weren't they?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 And your father's?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 And as many as they were, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 How much did you see of them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh in and out, in and out all - well - they never would be a week that we wouldn't see - see them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did your parents have friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Oh yes. Quite a lot of friends. And - there's one thing - one incident I can remember. I must have been a little urchin about seven. And on a Saturday afternoon before Christmas, I was playing with the rest on - on the field by the house, and t
he man - came by, from the colliery, so he - told me to go and tell my mother to get me ready - to go and catch the four o'clock train. Well I got ready and the man called for me, and took, me to Swansea. First time I'd ever been to - Swansea on the night
 before Christmas. And I must have been just at that time that the - Woolworth's stores were introduced, the stores with nothing costing more than sixpence. I can remember the man taking me into Masters, and having a pair of gloves, the first}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6450268\charrsid6557717  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 pair of gloves
 I had ever had, I - well - just that trip - and it was so valuable because it was so unexpected, and - I always remember that man. Who were friends of my father and mother, and who - gave me that treat.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did your father and mother have the same friends? Or did your mother have friends of her own and your father have friends of his own?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh I would say who were friends of my mother's were friends of my father and vice versa. There were no distinctions like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Where would they see their friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
They would always see them in chapel. And they would always see them in - in the various functions that would go such as concerts or - eistedfoods. And that type of thing, but they - later on when it came that we had a memorial hall, there was m
ore use of the friendships then, they became - more together.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Were friends ever invited into the home?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Not formally. No. Everybody would be given well - if you're passing, call and - they weren't issuing - invitations as such, call and you'd be welcome.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would people call?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, they would.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Often?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 For instance, my - some people - would never pass, they - they were - \{BLANK\}
 they would say, and felt that they were constrained to call - rather than pass. And how often - however often they - would pass they would call.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would they be offered anything to eat or drink?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
As soon as they came into the house - that's the first thing a man - would come in, he'd be invited to sit down, and the iron kettle was put on the fire.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would they come on any particular days or occasions?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
No, if it was - well if it was somebody had been to Neath Fair, and - well - I've been to the fair and - at that time used to go - to go to Neath - to buy the pig, and - if you were lucky or I remember carrying a pig - a piglet - back in a s}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6450268\charrsid6557717 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 ck. Yes. And - there you are, bring back just little - a little winner and carry him all the way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would you say that the friends invited in were your mother's friends or your father's friends, or friends of both of them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Friends of the both. Friends of the family.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about neighbours, would they come in casually without an invitation?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh yes. The neighbours were in and out - many times a day. Living as we were one side of the big bridg
e, the bridge in Pontrhydyfen, anybody passing over the bridge would - would be seen. And - well you see somebody going midday, and - one of the neighbours or my mother would say, well, it's strange to see him this time of day. And would go next door to s
a
y, well - I wonder what's happened there. And I would either see him turning towards the station to go by train, or turning over and you knew he was going to the surgery to see the doctor and - they would ferret out - the reason for any - unusual happenin
g.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did your parents ever go out to visit friends or neighbours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Not by invite. Not - special invite.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 But they'd pop in and out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes. Unless there was a - unless there was an illness or there was - somebody having had a colliery accide
nt. They would be very faithful in their visitations then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
People often tell us that in those days they made their own amusements, what do you think your parents did when they got together with their friends? Or with their neighbours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh mostly 
they - they were influenced then - by story telling. Story telling was - had been worked to a fine art. And - they - my parents and many more in the village had come under the influence of the literature of Daniel Owen, and Rhys Lewis and Gwen Thomas, and
 books like the \{BLANK\}
 And those were - they knew them off by heart. And - they would always refer to something that Mary Lewis would have said - or Thomas Bartley would have said - then they would discuss such things as - as that or the - whatever literar
y - book or - a new book that was coming out or if there was a new literary star appearing in the heaven they'd know about it, and that was their - medium of discussion.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Was there music?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, there were music. And if it would go musical in our h
ouse the violin would - my father would have the violin out. And - well we had - referring back again to the - 1914 war - when the boys came back from the war and every Friday night there was a smoking concert in the hall - in Pontrhydyfen And - there the
 solos, there was new solos coming out, and my sister, my eldest sister, she was a very good singer, my father was a very good tenor and the violinist so they would be preparing - preparing for those concerts.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would they play cards or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No. Cards were considered the devil's - cards in - never remember a pack of cards being played in our house.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Many people divide society into different social classes or groups, in that time before 1918 did you think of some people belonging t
o one and some to another?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Oh yes. There were divisions then. The divisions - with the children, were in their mode of clothing - some people - they were poor, they were too poor to have - new clothes, but what clothes they had were very heavily patc
hed and clean. Those were the poor people - who were poor by circumstances. There were poor people also - some of these people who had come to the place from other places, and whose parents - at least their father, was spending too much time in the public
 houses, and that family would suffer. Now there - there was a distinction between - the poor people - who were poor for no fault of their own. And the people who were impoverished by their own excesses.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Were they the only differences in Pontrhydyfen, or do you think there were other groups or classes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Well I've mentioned the classes that - the Anglican church brought which clung more to the establishment than did the non-conformists - that name comes very very - the - the ones that would not con
firm, and they were very very much in evidence. They were - divided in that part.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Which class of group would you say you belonged to yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Well I believe there were - there was a - a - an upper class and a lower class. And of course - societ
y - graded our family - in the upper class, in as much that we - my father was a manager. He commanded more respect than the ordinary - and we were expected as a family, to live up - to a standard that was - well, we had to conform to the standard that we
 were placed in.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did that affect you as a little boy, would you have felt that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Yes, I felt that very very much when - during the 19 - 12 miners strike, the minimum wage strike. Then I was nine and in school, and the soup kitchen were opened - op
ened to children. And they were coming to school with their basins. But - my mother's family, there were a few teachers in - in them and one or two colliery managers then, apart from my - my uncle was a colliery manager, and - they had resolved that their
 grandchildren weren't going to go to the soup kitchen, and I can remember crying - and defying my mother and taking a basin and going to the soup kitchen, but that was family pride more than anything else.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 You wanted to be like the other children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Were all the children going or were there many that were not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Well - there were some - who would rather die - than send their children to the soup kitchen.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What sort of people belonged to the same group as yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh the up
per class of the village were - you could know them by their clothes. By their - mode of living. And - they were freer I should think, they - anybody who was free that could look a grocer in the eyes and - but there were those that couldn't help but go in
to debt, and they more or less branded themselves. The haves - and the haves not, you had them back there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
You mentioned the other sort of people that belonged in the other classes, can you remember being brought up to treat people of one sort differently from people of another?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Oh no. That was - absolutely forbidden in the house. If - if you were - known to have - shown any - any - preference to somebody because he was of your class, to the detriment of somebody who was less fortunate, then you would - that was not tolerated.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Were you ever told to touch your cap or show respect in some way to anyone?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No, we weren't taught that the - well I don't know that I had a cap very often to touch - to anybody. We would acknowledge - we would ackn
owledge the - headmaster - but otherwise I don't remember acknowledging anybody.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Was there anyone you called sir or master?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 In the teaching profession, only the ones that were - our -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Do you remember anyone showing respect to your parents in that way, curtseying or toughing their cap?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Only - an occasional - labourer in the colliery, who would come after - if he had been out of work and was looking for a job - I've seen those coming to the house cap in hand - I didn't like it, neither d
id my father like it. So he usually just treated them as - and if there was a job and they would have it, and those people who - well for years afterwards - not only thanked themselves but made their children and - yes, this is my special friend, he helpe
d me. I can remember that in a few cases.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 In the district where you lived who were considered the most important people then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 The minister. The ministers were - number one. There was a - respect for the deacons held - were held in - high esteem. 
The schoolteachers - they graded themselves - some of them were very popular, some were not popular. But - after that - the doctor of course, the medical doctor - he commanded our respect. But afterwards, if he was a working man - I don't think there was 
any - any - special -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did you come into contact with them, you would the teachers and the ministers wouldn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Why were they considered important?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 The minister - we were taught - to - the reverence - of the minister - position
, and his family, they were the people of - children of the Manse, or the - min - well that - in itself - well then the - deacons, so often - were our Sunday school teachers. And then - the few that we had - as - every day - teachers.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about the shopkeepers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No, the shopkeepers were not - they were not special, they were just - treated as everybody else.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Who did they mix with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Well the shopkeepers were - just members of the society, can quite remember them - they were members of th
e - chapel, they would join in everything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about the clergy then, who did they mix with or associate with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No, the clergy at that time - had to cater - for a growing need. Of - an intellectual community. And they did not have much time - th
ey spent more time in their study - than they do today. So - they - were aloof, and they kept apart, that's my experience of the clergy then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Teachers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Teachers were - of course - the boys especially the ones that had been to university - they i
ntroduced a new something - that was athletics. We admired their power as - athletics, and the different branches of athletics.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about the farmers in the area, who would they associate with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 The farmers in the area were - not considered very
 - high in the social list. True there were not many of them. But - they had - nothing to give - nothing to give, they always wanted to sell. And - and therefore they were a race apart, and - somebody that you had to bargain with, for everything.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about employers? Of course your father really was an employer wasn't he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Yes. Well now we remember - we remember some employers - the Gibbs - he was - in the small colliery owner, well the family of the Jacob's - Percy Jacob, Fred Jacob, they were 
the pioneers of the Avon Valley, and - they had everybody - respected them very very much, and you had - Llewellyn Howell, Herbert Hudson, now those people - we knew - that - we depended so much upon them for our livelihood, that they were - special membe
rs of our respect.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did they mix with the people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Very seldom. Very - very seldom we - we as ordinary people didn't come in contact with those. The only thing we knew about them was their contact with - my father.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Where you lived did all the people in the working class have the same standard of living, or would you say there were different groups?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
It was more or less uniform - the - the village did not cater - did not cater for - anything, everything that was in the Co-operative - was fo
r the higher middle class or the lower middle class it was there. The only part where the distinction became known - was when it became holiday time. Now holidays - were - taken then - the people that could afford - to go to the Wells for a week - there w
e
re some of my aunts - some of my uncles - who were saving up for this luxury. And - I can remember the time when - I also used to - save up - save up for two years after I had - been working in the colliery, to have a week's holiday in Aberystwyth. And we
 used to pay then two pound five - for board and lodge.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 That would be after the war that you would go?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, it would - after the war, between - after the war.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Do you think that any group felt superior to the rest?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh yes, there were. T
here were families - that - who did feel superior. And again I must refer, they were - the establishment, and - the Anglican church goers.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Who would you mean by the establishment?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 The establishment were the people that - would stand up for God 
Save the Queen or Kind and Queen, and - well by going - they - praised the Royal Family and - the big day in school, what is the meaning of Empire Day? Why do the canons roar? Why does the cry God Save the King echo from shore to shore? Now what I mean by
 the establish - people who thought like that. Well whereas - we never - never felt - very much - in that way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Were some families thought of as rough? And others as respectable?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh yes, they - there were families who were graded as rough - ruffia
ns. Their mode of work in the collieries very often made them that way. They were people who - followed - hard headings - now they - were hard - tremendous hard workers, they were earning - money driving galleries through rock, but they all suffered from 
it, they all went to an early grave, with }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6450268\charrsid6557717 silicosis}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 , for that. But they were - and - reve}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6450268\charrsid6557717 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 led in the fact that they were the tough roughs.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 And some were thought of as respectable were they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh yes, there was families who were more genteel. Little
 girls in school from the beginning - but I think that was - hereditary - endowed on them, you'd have a little girl who was very genteel, and she'd remain so all her life.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Do you remember a distinction of this kind between craftsmen and labourers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Oh yes. That was - that mark of distinction, and it was very very pronounced in the collieries. You had - a man he couldn't fool, he couldn't fool his fellow men - you were asked if you'd go and ask for a - a - job in the colliery, you were asked - your
 qualifications, could you - put a pair of timber up, what did you know about - this or that, were you acquainted with this seam or no? Well if you said yes - and you were employed on those terms but if you were found deficient - then - it was pity help y
o
u, you were out. And again with the - power of men - they - the best craftsmen were chosen to be - heading - the people that were driving the main galleries. Now this meant a little - well not - I - it meant much more skill than the ordinary men. For inst
a
nce he had to - you had to work - to a survey. And that's best explained by saying I remember - driving the main gallery, the main deep - in Aberboyden colliery, and was told on a Wednesday, you've got to stop. Why, what's the matter? Oh there is a disput
e
 - about the field up on Llangenud which was - miles away seemingly, but - the question of way leave - and the owner of that land up - on the mountain, would be demanding a way leave for the coal that was passing under. Therefore - it was so important tha
t everyone of these galleries was driven direct to point, and sometimes driven to avoid paying way leave to another landlord. Therefore - the heading men, and the deep men were a class above the ordinary collier.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about the labourers, the ordinary colliers were just sort of labourers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
No, there was a distinction between the labourer afterwards and the - collier. The labourer was - wasn't expected - to have any more tools than - a shovel. Maybe - a pick. But never a mandrel. A mandrel was for 
cutting coal, and a pick would - do many things. But - the collier - he only had to be proficient in cutting coal, and to protect himself by putting posts. He had nothing to do - with the drilling of the rock and the firing and - that business.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did your mother and father have the same attitude to people in different classes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Yes, they did, class distinction - was - not thought of. We've just said a lot about Sunday school - about Bible classes and so forth, well in the teachings of St Paul and al
l those, you are taught - that there were to be no distinctions, and anybody that would create distinctions after was hypocrity - hypocritical, and - I don't think that ever applied.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 You don't think your mother saw herself as a particular class?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Was it possible at that time to move from one class to another? Do you remember anyone who did? There were labouring classes weren't there and there were the upper?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, it - you would - but we would not }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6450268\charrsid6557717 create}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid489342\charrsid6557717  that. I'll give an example in
 this way. When we moved down to Oak - Kenfig Hill, all the officials of the colliery - were housed in - a series of houses - ten families. The first two - were double fronted, and - they had bay windows up and down, with a garden, an extensive garden. On
e
 belonged to the agent and the other to the manager. Well there were two gardeners employed by the company to see to those gardens and everything the wants of the families. Well then you had the - electricians and the mechanics, and - those for the two co
l
lieries in the other houses. That's the first time I saw - the distinction - in trades And it was very surprising - the agents wife and my mother - were bosom friends, and when these - people were so subservient and coming and cow towing, they laughed at 
that - because - not one of them - liked servility. It hurt I believe.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Do you remember anyone being described as a real gentleman?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh yes, yes, there was the real gentleman, you cannot - the real gentleman cannot - disguise - that aspect of him.
 His deportment. His - mode of - dressing. His salutation to you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Do you remember anybody being described as a real gentleman in Pontrhydyfen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh yes. There were - three or four of them, that had come to the place, and had - continued - on the s
ame even keel as when they came there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Who would they be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 They were people who were - commercial travel}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6450268\charrsid6557717 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 ers. Commercial travellers, maybe it was part of their make up to go and - but they never forgot it. And people who were - agents for differe
nt firms, they would visit you, and you felt that - that you were addressing a real gentleman.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Do you remember a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6450268\charrsid6557717 ny}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 one described as a real lady?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh yes. They had those - the wives - of these sometime. Again, there were - these young girls - that 
had gone - and - they had gone to do war work especially nursing. And they came to - they had been to London, they had been to different places, and when they came back, there was that deportment with them, and it never left them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Do you remember seeing a policeman around when you were a little boy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Oh yes, the bobby. A bobby was - a character - to be respected. To be - but I never have had - any much experience in my youth. They would walk the village. Very very seldom - that they were called upon - in my time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What did you think of the policeman when you were a little boy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
The policeman that I can remember - were - if you went very close to them they - always smelt of strong drink. Yes. Yes. I can remember the four of them, and - they were - visitors - to the - public houses.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 How do you think the policeman treated people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Well it - it - they treated the people as - that again where the distinction came in. People were then summonsed for debt. There was no sympathy for the de
btor. No sympathy for them. My own experience - the - policeman came to our house more than once with a summons - for my mother to apart - to appear - on my behalf for delinquency - for the truancy in school. If you - if the attendance officer then - if h
e
 - would prosecute - decide to prosecute, and I was to play truant when sheep shearing and sheep washing, or - that type of work was going on in the farm, and I'd lose school for about fortnight to three weeks. And then at the end of that there would be a
 summons. But the fine was the same every time, and that was five shilling. But it was my mother that had to appear before the petty }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6450268\charrsid6557717 sectional}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid489342\charrsid6557717  court.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Were your mother and father willing for you to lose school like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh they wouldn't - they -
 were against it absolutely, but - there you are, I was - I was insisting on going, and that's what helped in the end - to get - my ticket to leave from school at the age of thirteen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 You said earlier your home was not rented, they bought it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Bought it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Do you remember feeling that your parents had a struggle to make ends meet?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
If they did they never showed it. They never showed it at all, we - looking back at life I don't think really that they did. But - once they had gone into the n
ew house - and after the strike, the minimum wage strike and my father was in - as - worked as an official, that the - momentum just - went on and kept on going on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Your father wasn't ill or out of work was he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No. Luckily - we were a - we were 
a very healthy family on - as a whole. And - up - until the fatal illness of my father which lasted about - eight months, I don't remember any prolonged sickness.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What difference did it make to you as a family if he was ill or out of work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh as an official it didn't mean anything at all, an official could be - he could be away for a fortnight but his wages would come.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 So you didn't ever get help from the Guardians or the Parish or anything like that? When there was someone in the district t
hat the people disapproved of very strongly was there any special way in which they showed it? You hear of people being driven out of the district.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 I didn't experience - I didn't experience that, they - they were pretty compassionate - to everybody.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Were you given lessons by one of your parents, a tutor or a governess?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 When did you go to school, how old were you when you first went to school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 We weren't admitted I don't think until we were five, to the infants school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 When you first started what time in the morning did you go?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Nine.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 And when did you come back?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Nine 'til twelve. And from - half past one - until quarter to four.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What kind of school was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 There was the infants school - a mixed school, mixed classes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 It wasn't a church school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No. Board school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 How did you get to school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 On foot.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 How long did it take you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Well it wouldn't take a matter of - ten minutes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Who went with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Nobody that I can remember after going to the infants.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Your sister was older than you wasn't she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, she was but - we just - I - they must - maybe have taken us there the first day or so but afterwards we used to come - in companies.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Where did you have your midday meal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What did you think of school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 I liked school - all along, until - well until I got - twelve or so}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6450268\charrsid6557717  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 forth, and - then of course once I started - going with the farmers, it was then that I - got disgruntled in school.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 How did you feel about the teachers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Well of course we had our favourites at that time, and - there was some - who could make the - could make the lesson interesting, and who would not keep to the syllabus, can remember a few of those. And I c
an remember - others - that were - just waiting for the clock to - time to go away. But the - the - the - the one thing that impressed me after leaving - that I can never remember having had - one lesson in English grammar, nor in Welsh grammar. I came fr
om school from standard seven - without knowing anything about grammar.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did the teachers emphasise certain things as important in life, like manners or tidiness or way of speaking or punctuality?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh yes, one of the first things that we had on a Monday morning - the headmaster would come into the room - and he would - say, show your }
{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6450268\charrsid6557717 handkerchiefs}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
, and each one would have his handkerchief - up. Well on a Monday morning usually they were clean. But - I can remember once having opened my handkerchief 
out, and there was a hole in it, and this headmaster ridiculing me, and putting this handkerchief, putting the - his stick - through the hole and exhibiting it to the - much to my mother's concern - consternation.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 How did you feel?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Well, she was
 only - restrained - but then again you see, the headmaster was an Anglican and there was that - he wouldn't have done that with a - a - he wouldn't - had the hole been twice as big, in one of his flock, or his favourites, there were the favourites then.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did the teachers single out some children for different treatment?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Oh yes, that was very very evident - I - it was evident with the Anglican teachers and the headmaster. And it was also evident with the Baptist - as - compared with - Calv}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6450268\charrsid6557717 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 nistic Methodist. They did have their distinctions.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Was it because they were in a minority, because there were far more Methodists than anything weren't there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, and it was that - I think that it was - the success of the - Calv}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6450268\charrsid6557717 i}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 nistic Methodist - over all the denominations. The children of the Calv}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6450268\charrsid6557717 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 nistic Methodist - could sit a written examination, a paper on scripture every year and it was not known with the others nor ever attempted.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 If you did something the teachers disapproved of what would happen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh it was the cane straight - it was no hesitation.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would girls have it as well as the boys?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, they would.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What would you have to do to have the cane?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Well, trivialities sometime but - sometime it wouldn't take you 
- inattention would - give you one crack with the tail - with the cane. For being rough and - smudge your book, you'd qualify for two. But if you were fighting in the yard as often - happened, often very - that qualified for four. And I do remember - the 
-
 my - the other one that was fighting, I do remember him having the fifth, for being the vanquished. Because this teacher - this teacher had been watching the fight, but he had to punish for fighting. Well he must have read about old Robin Soldier in - th
e book of - Rhys Lewis, because he used to do the same, but I remember it once in my -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did your parents show an interest in your school work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 In mine not - so much - I was ordinary, I never was the top of the list. But I never was much further do
wn then the fifth, fourth and fifth. And as such we used to have report - but I didn't like to meet that one very often because - I - when conduct was coming - could - more could be desired. And such - such remarks.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did your parents ask you what you did at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Not often.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did they visit the school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 They were allowed to visit on St David's Day, only.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did they meet the teachers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No. They didn't -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did the other children come from similar types of home to your own or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Most of them.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Were there any gangs or groups in the school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Yes. There was. That was the geographical - that's what accounted for that. You had - a group from Aneybourhan, which was on the Margam side of the river. Across the river you 
had a group from LLegraw. They were very clannish together. Then you had the Oakwood group, the Pontrhydyfen group, and then the Twyn y Pandy, Carrig Llwydn and Efeail Fach. Now they were - those would - because they travelled to school together, they wou
ld form into distinct - groups.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Were there any children who were left out of things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Not - not by design. Some were - some would isolate themselves - feeling of - inferiority - in games or - they would be the lookers on - wouldn't join in. But - they were the insecure children, mostly.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did you go on to another school afterwards?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No. Only the one school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 How old were you when you left school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 At thirteen - thirteen, fourteen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would you have stayed longer if you'd had the opportunity?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
No, I wouldn't. I - I - will admit - that after I had been - working underground - for six months - and knew what it was to - fill carts - in the height of - two foot two, and knocking your elbows, and my head, I did regret that I had - left.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did you attend any part time education afterwards?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Yes, later I - the - mining and geology class - courses for night school. They were very good classes and - we followed those, up until the fifth year which - gave us a very very good grounding in mathematics.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Do you have any regrets about your education?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Sometime yes, I - I would - the only regret I have got now - but I have acquired - a taste for - literature, for books and so forth, but in - I never was able to write - to my s
atisfaction, and never to be able to write correctly. The regrets I had I - I am asked, I think that - I have an ability to express myself, verbally. But I could not do that - writing, as I never - I don't even know today - what - various terms - mean. An
d - I know by looking at a word that it's wrong, that it's - ill spelt, but I couldn't prove - were it is wrong.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 You had no lessons at all in school on grammar?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Never remember one lesson. We had - we were taught to slant our pens over our shoulder and given - penmanship, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6450268\charrsid6557717 Do you think you benefi}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 ted from attending school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6450268\charrsid6557717  yes. We benefi}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 ted - quite a lot, we were given a good grounding - in for}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6450268\charrsid6557717  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 the}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6450268\charrsid6557717  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 three R's if you like - although not to the extent that it - it impressed itself, b
ut there we knew how to read, we knew how to write, and - we used to have periodical visitors, who - used to - lecture to us. I can well remember - the time when - decline we used to call it in - in welsh, consumption was rampant, I can remember many of t
h
e - children in school just wasting away and - we would bring our pennies to get a wreath, they had died of consumption. Well then we would have somebody to come and - and give a lecture or give a talk - on - consumption, and then we would have to - write
 
a composition the following day on what we heard. Well during the - during the lecture, the - speaker had said about - the advantage of eat - eating - fresh vegetables. And - he mentioned - that - the - lettuce, lettuce was very very good for our health, 
and that they - they were composed of the drug }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6450268\charrsid6557717 laudanum}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
, and that it was a good thing to - grow these. And to grow them early and - protect them - with a sheet of tarpaulin. But the following day writing the essay, I said that the drug that came from lettuc
e was tarpaulin, and that it was a good thing to cover them with }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6450268\charrsid6557717 laudanum}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 , for which I had the blue pencil through my essay.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Your first job started then when you were thirteen? What was your first job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 My first job was on the - pit surface. The 
pit surface - they had - the empties after they had been discharged into the trucks, through the screen, used to come round and there was a creeper, an endless chain that were bringing these to a higher level, and coming around again - to the two - pit sh
a
fts, not the two pit shafts, but the two gage - the up and down cages And my job was to - regulate these trams, that one would got the - left and one would go to the right, and if that - there were sufficient trams on the track to stop the creeper. Which 
w
as called the creeper boy. Well the next step afterwards was to - graduate down to the pit bottom, where it was - to - couple up, chutler, to couple up these trams, ready for the horse to take them away. But one side of the colliery - the air was going on
e side and I had to stop the air going to another, which meant that there were three - brattis doors, they were wooden doors - that were airtight, and you had to keep these always airtight. So - there was another - distinction to become a door}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6450268\charrsid6557717 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 boy. And the door}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6450268\charrsid6557717 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 b}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6450268\charrsid6557717 o}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
y used to go in front of the horse, and he would open one and - the driver would come and - the horse would come along and he - would close the door after, and to - these three doors. Well - the - the difference in the creeper boy - that was - two a
nd six a day. Two and six a day was the starting - but when I went down to the pit bottom that became three and four}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6450268\charrsid6557717  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
pence. And then - it became - six and eight}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6450268\charrsid6557717  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 pence, it was such a heavy job, the shuttling job was six and eight}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6450268\charrsid6557717  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 pence. And of course that I
 - owe much to my physique for these kind of jobs, because the pit - the timber was coming down the pit in the cage and very young I had to acquaint myself to carrying - pit props, six and a half feet, from the pit cage and to put them in these trams to g
o away.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 You were a big boy at thirteen were you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 I was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 How did you get the job in the colliery?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Well the job in the colliery my father was so well know, although he wasn't the manager - he wasn't the manager at the time, but his frie
nd - was the manager and - that was - and of course it was wartime and there was plenty of need.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What hours did you work then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 We - left - we were starting at seven in the morning, and - seven 'til half past three.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about Saturday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Saturday we were finishing at one.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Nothing Sunday. No Sunday work.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did you have holidays with pay?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No. No holidays with pay at all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did you feel this was a fair wage that you had there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Well, beggars we
re no choosers at that time, you - you didn't ask for the wage, you asked for the job, and were thankful to accept what the rate - You always had - the rate for the job.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did you give any of the money to your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 All.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What was it spent on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh the family exchequer, it was mixed up with the lot.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 How did you get on with the other people you worked with, you were very young weren't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 I was young and - but I was very popular. I was always a popular - boy. Because I had the gift of the gab I think, mostly. I was s}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6450268\charrsid6557717 t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 rong enough to defend myself - and therefore you - and as long as you did your work you you were all right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 How did your employer treat you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Very good. Now the ones I worked with at the pit top - and at 
the pit bottom, those were my mates, my employer we never saw. Your employer - when I was on the top, my boss was the bank}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6450268\charrsid6557717 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6450268\charrsid6557717 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 man. The bank}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6450268\charrsid6557717 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6450268\charrsid6557717 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
man who depended on these trams. As long as you satisfied him you were all right. Well then down at the pit bottom it was the equivalent of the back }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6450268\charrsid6557717 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid489342\charrsid6557717  bank}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6450268\charrsid6557717 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6450268\charrsid6557717 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 man, the man who was - responsible for putting the coal on the trams into the cage and dispatching it up. You had to satisfy him. Well then on the other side when you were the door boy, you had to - the }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6450268\charrsid6557717 hauler}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 , th
e ones that were passing through, he was the - he was your boss, you had to satisfy him. Well then it came to the - after that period - I soon saw that - there was more - money to earnt - by being on the coal face. And then you were with a man - filling t
he coal that he was cutting. And if you had a good mate then - he would invariably, that's where - the tips would come in. There was no}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid949540\charrsid6557717  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 tips as such - to the other jobs. You had a docket which showed what your pay was and your parents wanted to see that, an
d then they would give you pocket money back. But - with the - on the coalface - they didn't know they knew what your wages was but didn't know what the tip was you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 So that was yours was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 You'd keep that then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 I'd keep that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 How did you get on with the mate?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Oh very very good with - with them, it was - a question of - well there get as much coal as you could possibly, and to fill the amount, you were paid then - on a price list you see after the minimum wage, t
here was a price list on the - so much a ton. And - when you were on the tonnage, there was a good chance to - earn money.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 How did you feel about the work, did you like it or dislike it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 I liked the work, there was nothing - I reve}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid949540\charrsid6557717 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 led in - in the - colliery.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 How long were you there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Yes, I started in - in 1916. And then - I was very happy in the various - I graduated from there, at seventeen - I - I had a stall of my own, because I said I was eighteen. Well as a collier, as one had wo
rked that year, well I had a stall on my own at seventeen - and - I was very very good, we had to - it was on condition - that you paid the way, they didn't want the ones that were on the minimum wage, you see, you were expected - you were expected to - t
o pay your way, unless there were - circumstances sometime the - the coal would go - the seam would go against you, and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 It wasn't your fault then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 It wasn't my fault, well - but - you know, I never was on the minimum wage.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 How long were you in the colliery?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Well then we left -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 1916 until when?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
I was very happy in the colliery up until - 1926. Now during 1926, at this time I had been - I had graduated from the stall - to be a heading man, and from there to be - driving the m
ain deep - but something happened - my brother and I were working together at the time, it was just at that time that he - had been appointed as an adjuster of weights and measures for the Glamorgan County council - and of course - it was on the - conditi
on that he passed the inspect}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid949540\charrsid6557717 o}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
rate in three years. Well having lost my brother, and I knew at that time - that I had been working - in front of the air, because as you were advancing in the deep you were in front of the air all the time, and there was - and
 I suffer for it today you can hear my chest wheezing now and then, that's what happened, but I could see that it was coming off then. So - I - went back to - to the heading from the main deep I went back to the heading, and to do some contract repairing.
 
Contract repairing meant that you would - agree - to do the job - for - a certain price, which was very good. Well - the 1926 strike came, and we were - went back - on worse terms, but the - thing that I can remember afterwards - were that - the collier -
 the - the coal owners then were - harder masters. And it was in 19 - about 1928 that they introduced mechanical mining - to our colliery, and I'll never forget, I was chosen to be one of a gang of \{ILLEGIBLE\}
 working on this conveyor face. So having come f
rom a generation - of few generations of colliers, I cultivate a keen - sense of hearing, you can hear things, it's bred into you. And we were on this coal face, and - you had the trays and the clatter of this iron conveyor working, I heard something. So 
I
 stopped the conveyor. Then I - what's the matter? Anyway I started up again. I heard it a second time and I stopped it. So my mates impatient said - Jack Edward's got the wind up. Yes, I said, I've got the wind up and he's going out. And I got hold of my
 
clothes, my cap and away. But I hadn't gone very far before the rest followed me in a great hurry, and that conveyor and the coal cutter, the lot were buried under thousands of tons of a fall. That never felt - after mechanical - I was never satisfied But
 
it came on - the church came in - sometime later - that - a head - under - manager who was very very officious, and he - insisted - that - we should walk - to stages, and I refused, being it was uphill, and we had to walk to catch the workman's spake, tha
t
's the journey that went on, and I refused. So he - said, all right, he'd go without me. Very well, I said, but don't forget, I know the coalmines act, and with these boys under our care we are it's against the act to do so. So the following morning he - 
w
hen I came to work, he came to try - he used to like to make an example of somebody, if he had a good audience. In front of the men. But that was the biggest mistake he ever did, because he had - more than he bargained for. I did go down - to the colliery
,
 but only to get the hatchet and the sledge, and - went home and asked the manager to - give me my cards, and I had decided to finish in the colliery. England were playing Wales in Twickenham, on the Saturday. So I bid my mother farewell, and the colliery
,
 and went up to see the match in Twickenham. That was in 1930. Well the - having gone I just wondered - my mother had told me, well you've thrown your job - you are not sure of having a job. But the train left Pyle at seven, and - got to - Paddington - qu
a
rter past eleven. They were building the - flats in New Bond Street at the time, some building going up, I walked in. I asked, any chance for a job? And he asked me, labouring? I said, yes. Well we finish at twelve, he gave me a green card. And he said, c
ome back Monday morning by eight o'clock and within half an hour I had had a job in London. However I went down to the -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 How long did you stay there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 I went down to the match in Twickenham and met some boys from the Avon Valley that had been up then some of them a few yard}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid949540\charrsid6557717 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
 before that. And among them a cousin of mine. I told him that I had the job, and he said, don't be a fool to go and work up in the city, there's plenty of work down here, in Harrow and Wealdstone district. So - he said, and yo
u can come and stay with us. So I went down with him and I only had the suit, the best suit I had at the time. So - the problem of having - working suit. So we went up on the Sunday to Petticoat Lane, and I always remember having a - rigged out, pullover,
 
trousers, a coat, a cap and boots, and I paid the princely sum of nine and six for the lot. Well - we - I went to sing on the - Labour Exchange on the Monday. Nobody - unemployed at that time, given a card to go - to Sudbury, and work for a - a - engineer
's - public work engineer's - Constable and Hart, behind the concret}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid949540\charrsid6557717 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
 mix - mixer, road working, road making, and - there it was very heavy work but it was - very good, I think it was one and ten an hour we used to have at the time, but it brought us more t
han three pound five a week which was a good wage when the minimum wage in the colliery at that time - was two pound five. But those jobs were coming to an end very quick, when you come to the length, to the end of the length - you were given a card and d
i
scharged, and it was then - that I - got acquainted with the - people who were working on the parks and open spaces at Harrow. And - having seen the - engineer - was employed - first of all as a labourer on the London Parks, very soon I graduated to be a 
ground}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid949540\charrsid6557717 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid949540\charrsid6557717 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 man, and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid949540\charrsid6557717 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717  ground}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid949540\charrsid6557717 \rquote }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid949540\charrsid6557717 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
man gardener, and I was there until 1935, when the - 1935 - job was - advertised in Bridgend Grammar School for a gardener ground}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid949540\charrsid6557717 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid949540\charrsid6557717 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 man, and I was successful in having it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 And you were there until when?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 I was in the Grammar School in Bridgend until 1948.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 And then you went on the farm?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
And then I - bought a farm, we bought a farm, and - I was - an active farmer having had the - reared my four children on the farm and educated them 'til I was sixty-five, and then - I retired - for a rest, I hope.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would you have preferred another type of occupation?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
No. Looking back on life I have no regrets. Many - many happy hours and the best - a - a - well one of the best portions of my life, I have recollections - of the fellowship, the comradeship of the mines.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did you serve an apprenticeship or a training period at all for any of the jobs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No. No. Never was - never was apprenticed as such, but I did - when you were in London, you become - efficient -
 by watching others. And - if you are strong - well - you may - I always remember the - my first - jobs on the parks - which is considered the hardest. That is picking up turf. You had a turfing iron, but - turfing iron was child}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid949540\charrsid6557717 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 s play to what a miner had been used to.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 It wasn't an apprenticeship really?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No. It wasn't an apprenticeship.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did you belong to a trade union at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, I - there was no trades unions as such then in Harrow. And they weren't - very - acceptable.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about when you were in the mines?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh I was an ardent - I was an ardent trade unionist there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did you take part in any of the activities?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, I was - I was an active committee member in the mines, and I was also a delegate in their annual conferences.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 You mentioned you sat next to Aneurin Bevan?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did you feel that employers and workers had the same interests or different
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No, there was - now in Harrow - there were no - there was no trade union, and it was at that tim
e - that the - National Union of Public Employees was started. Mr Bryn Roberts was starting lodges in London at that time, and I took an active part in that - and was a member - of the - of that - union until I left London.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did you feel that there wer
e divisions of interest among workers? Some people say that in those days there was a great division between trained craftsmen and other workers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, there was, and that still - that still persists. Yes. A craftsman will never - never allow a - shod
dy work you - you are a craftsman and somebody who - who doesn't come up to some standard, well he isn't in the same class.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would you say that full time work changed your general attitude to life in any way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, it does, full time work, you - 
we felt when we were miners, that we were pretty secure - in the - as long - the tenisure if you like of work, until - the 1926 strike, 1921 to 26 strike, it - there never was that security, and after mechanical - mining came in, that ended it. But again,
 
when you are under a public - body, such as I - moved to afterwards, you did feel - that there was a security there which - made for quite a lot of - even though the wages were - low, you felt that if you - well you had the security - it - it did - play a
 big part.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about life at home after you left school, did you continue to live at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, continued to live at home and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did starting full time work change your relationship with your parents at all
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 I was a bit more unruly. But
 never was allowed to get - right out of hand. My father would always - let us know that he was - boss, and my mother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about your relationship - with your brothers and sisters?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 There was no change in - there was no change in - in that at all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did you spend your Sunday any differently?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
No, I - even when I - left home - one of the first things I - hungered for - was the - the society of chapel people, and - I would find life very very empty - without that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did you continue to go to Sunday school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did you take an interest in politics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Yes, very very much so. As I mentioned I was - with the National Union of Public Employees - and after that when I became a farmer, I was one of the founder members - of the - rebel Farmers Union of Wales, that was formed some eighteen years ago.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What were your views, when you were working, what were your views in politics
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh I've always been - I've always been - a Socialist. I've been a Socialist and - will never al
ter. I am - disappointed - because when I look back and think how much - we as trade unionists back from the twenties and thirties - sacrificed and what we - had to suffer quite a lot of them, and in his latest book, My Generation by Will Painter, who inc
i
dentally was born the same month as I was in the same year, and my mining career has followed - very close to the - to the experience of Will Painter, and - quite a lot, Aneurin Bevan and we are - I am disillusioned with the representatives of the workers
 in these days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Why were your views like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 The - the trade unionists of old, they came - they were graduated - they - from the ranks. They were - one of us, who formed our check}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid949540\charrsid6557717 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 weighers and who were our - who spoke on our behalf on compensat
ion cases, and who were our representatives - on local government and on - at Cou}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid949540\charrsid6557717 n}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
ty level. But that has all changed, I think by today, that most places have taken over by the career boys.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about when you first started work, were you interested in politics then
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Very easily - very easily moved in the political meeting.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 You would go to meetings would you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Oh yes. Follow meetings.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Were you a member of a political party then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Ah yes, there was the - the - NFGB, the Miners Fe
deration of Great Britain. And before that you had the South Wales - Federation. Yes, always attached to a trade union.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 What about a political party, were you a member of the Labour party then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No, I was too - the ILP - the ILP - no, because - t
he members of the ILP - became the - dissenters - from the non-conformists, and became the - followers of Darwin, and the free thinkers, which ended up in the atheists, and - well - had no opinion in the end -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 You were too young to vote in a general election before 1919, did you ever work for one of the political parties in an election?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did you take any part in any political activity other than at election time? You have now because you formed the Farmers Union of Wales?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes. No, 
not at that - no, at that time when - when I was a delegate, I was a delegate for the - for the lodge - we used to have the lodge meeting on a Friday night, and - the miners agent - and I owe quite a lot - to that miners agent - Sir William Jenkins, he wa
s the miners agent and - he used to be the president of these meetings. And - I learnt quite a lot - from him of the way to conduct meetings. And of having orderliness - in everything. And to put first things first and forget the trivialities.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 So you used to go to quite a lot of meetings did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Oh yes. You were - if you were appointed - as - delegate - you had to attend the meetings to get your mandate, and even at seventeen I was able to put the mandate even to - an annual meeting in front of a crowd in the Curry Hall, it - your mandate.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 It was young wasn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 It was at that time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 So would you have to go to a meeting every week?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, it would be.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 I was going to ask you how you spent your spare time when you first started in the colliery?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Well - the - Memorial Hall had - after the war the Memorial Hall had come, and - billiards when you could afford it. And - chess and draughts, and the reading room, the library became a big part. So -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 So you would go there in the evening?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Who would you go with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Nobody in particular, but I could always if you were in want of a friend you could always find one there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did you make any new friends, boys or girls, at this time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, that was the time - of sixteen that we - we coupled up with the girls.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 How did you meet the girls?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
It was just you always knew where to meet them. The girls who were at home with their parents - they - after finishing their work, especially on a Friday night 
if there was a smoker they would be. And invariably would want to be escorted home, which would start - start it, it was all very platonic and - quite fun.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would you make new boyfriends as well at this time when you went to work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, you'd get 
acquainted with boys - boys - Carmarthen boys from lower down the valley, and - a few from Port Talbot, although they were much - there was a difference, they were coarser, but they were quite a lot of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid949540\charrsid6557717 redeeming}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid949540\charrsid6557717 features}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
 about those, and some of them had - graduated and had the experience of Borstal, even at that time. Yes. Yes, yes. Reformatory schools, yes. Yes, the -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Some of those working with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes. And this is how - I knew two of them. They used to be - paperboys in Port Talbot, for - what's the old sale}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid949540\charrsid6557717 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
man's name now, Wiltshire, old Wiltshire, and they would - get away with the money or some kind of thieving and that - but - it was reformatory school at that time. And they knew all the answers.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would you be friendly with them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, quite friendly and would revel in their experiences with them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Would you ever take your friends home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, they were - I was going for a meal and well come on inside and you share what was going and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did you have any special friends at this time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 
Oh yes, I had - we usually were three or four. And we still - are on friends - we still visit each other, and - it's the same friendship now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Boys or girls?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Boys and girls.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Where would you go with them?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Well we wo
uld go when we - did, or we'd go on holiday. We'd go on holiday together. Yes. And - now that we have separated we - visit each other periodically, and - we go out of our way to renew the acquaintance.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did your parents meet your friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes, they knew - there was -- an openness about it, there was nothing hid.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did they expect to know where you were?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 They would never ask but invariably they knew, they were told. Just such a casual remark - and where can you say that you've been? And th
en it would come, it would - whatever it was, good or bad, it would}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid949540\charrsid6557717  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 out.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Did you have to be home by a certain time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 No. There were never any restrictions - as to time. But - if any of the other members of the family were out, my mother would be 
very concerned. But - she always said, oh - he'll come. So -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 She treated you differently did she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14483652 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Why was that I wonder?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15352313 JE  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid489342\charrsid6557717 Well, for the - now what you can call it but - I don't - I didn't have much of a boyhood because I developed
 to a man so quick between everything, and between the war and starting work and everything it came - made all the difference.
\par }}