{\rtf1\adeflang1025\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\adeff0\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang2057\deflangfe2057{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}{\f38\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f39\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f41\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f42\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f43\fbidi \froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}
{\f44\fbidi \froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f45\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f46\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f48\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}
{\f49\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f51\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f52\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f53\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f54\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}
{\f55\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f56\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden 
Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs20 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}}
{\*\latentstyles\lsdstimax156\lsdlockeddef0}{\*\revtbl {Unknown;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid415648\rsid1203760\rsid3227008\rsid4266627\rsid4935455\rsid5729395\rsid8460570\rsid9069422\rsid12780690}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 11.0.0000;}{\info{\title Information about interviewee}
{\author SEENU}{\operator lhorto}{\creatim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min9}{\revtim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min9}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords31168}{\nofchars177663}{\nofcharsws208415}{\vern24613}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 http://
schemas.microsoft.com/office/word/2003/wordml}{\xmlns2 urn:schemas-microsoft-com:office:smarttags}}\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1800\margr1800\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0\ltrsect 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\donotembedsysfont1\donotembedlingdata0\grfdocevents0\validatexml1\showplaceholdtext0\ignoremixedcontent0\saveinvalidxml0\showxmlerrors1\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace180
\dgvspace180\dghorigin1800\dgvorigin1440\dghshow1\dgvshow1\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\splytwnine\ftnlytwnine\htmautsp\nolnhtadjtbl\useltbaln\alntblind\lytcalctblwd\lyttblrtgr\lnbrkrule\nojkernpunct\rsidroot4935455 \fet0
{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}\ilfomacatclnup0\ltrpar \sectd \ltrsect\linex0\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ltrpar
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid1203760 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\ul\insrsid1203760\charrsid16072257 Information about interviewee}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid1203760 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid1203760\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tx2057\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid1203760 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1203760\charrsid16072257 Date of birth}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1203760    
\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1203760\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1203760  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9069422 1899}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1203760\charrsid16072257 
\par Gender}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1203760           \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1203760\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1203760  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9069422 M}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1203760 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1203760\charrsid16072257 Marital status}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1203760 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1203760\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1203760  
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9069422 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1203760\charrsid16544153 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1203760\charrsid16072257 Occupation}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1203760 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1203760\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1203760  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9069422 Manager of hat business}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1203760\charrsid16072257 
\par Geographic region}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1203760 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1203760\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1203760  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9069422 Luton, Beds}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1203760\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\qj \fi-490\li518\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin518\itap0\pararsid1203760 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Can you tell me how many years you lived in the house where you were born? What was the address of the house where you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Chapel Street{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 - where I - where I was born? Chapel Street, Luton.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 How many years did you live there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Not more than two years. Two years. I've got a birth certificate here, death certificate. My father died in 18 -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Your father died quite early didn't he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 My father died at the age of forty, 19 - 1894. Now - 1894 - I must have lived in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Chapel Street{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} - about two years.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Where did you move to then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Tavistock Street{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}. Tavistock
 Street.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 How long did you stay there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Tavistock Street{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 - two - one, two, three, four - four years.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 And you moved again?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes. We moved again - sometime after - my other sister died in - 1903. She died at the childrens home. That was in 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Arthur Street{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}. Then we moved - we moved two years after 1893 - 1903 - to - Cavell Street.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Do you remember why you made these moves, it was quite a lot of moves wasn't it, do you remember why you moved?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Well we - why we moved? Well, the - if I g
ive you a his - a little - slight history, do you mind? Now see - as perhaps you would realize - there was in those early days a good deal of malnutrition, follow, shingles, tuberculosis, and - malnutrition with regard to children. I became a milk boy at 
t
he age of - nine. And - in those days, long before the - advent of the milk bottle - you served milk from a pail, you follow? I became this milk boy - an early morning milk boy, and - helped in the - helped in the - emptying of the - stale milk from yeste
rday, mi}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4935455\charrsid3227008 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
ked with the fresh milk of this morning, this was a customary thing. Also diluted with a certain specified amount of water. And then with a minute sprinkle of - a brown dye.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What was that for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Pardon? Well to make it look - take away th
e white look, you follow? Yes. And then of course - it was all set then to serve to the customer, well the old - the - the usual - amount served to a family was not more than a - than a half pint, a pennyworth. A gill, oftentimes families had - simply had
 
a gill, that's a ha - ha'porth, that's a quarter of a pint. A well off customer had a pint, and some even had a quart, very rare but - well now with regard to - can I tell you a little bit more about this - excuse me, but I'll - I - I'll have to demonstra
t
e. Oval pail, do you remember - you wouldn't know those would you? A large oval pail which the milkman used to take round to serve to the customers. Well the - the lid - was quite a tall lid, and that - used to come straight - bolt upright. And then - the
 
- away from the cus - to divert the customer's - gaze, do you follow, and or to - obstruct it. Well then you see - the measure, the gill measure or the half pint measure, as - the case may be, well whether they had a - a ha'porth or - or a pennyworth, was
 put into the can, follow, there's a trick with this, and when that was poured into the j}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4935455\charrsid3227008 ar}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
 with the customer not seeing what was happening - always leave a little drop in the bottom. Yes, now that was then - put in like this in the can. Not put right down 
into the milk, but - making the customer believe - it was done. Follow? And then - it was pured out and that drop - she thought that little drop was over. Do you follow, but she -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 She'd think she was getting a little drop more?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 That's right, wel
l that - that's - so that was one of the tricks. And of course they - there was always the - milk inspector nearby - floating around, the crafty old milk inspector, trying to catch people - and with the instructions to milk boys like me, follow, always to
 
- keep a watch out for the milk inspector, and then do a quick - vanish, anywhere, follow, to keep away from him. Well that's some of the tricks of those early days, but you see - a family then, a normal family as was - six or eight - quite usual. My - I 
was a - one of a family of eight. My wife was too. Yes. Well - you can understand - there's a - a little county there, a village round here, families of about eight or nine, so you can understand that a pennyworth of milk -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Didn't go far?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No, but
 you see they used to buy tuppenny tins of - condensed Nestles milk, then, it's quite a popular - milk - part of the grocery, follow? So milk itself was - was - to - a luxury to lots of people.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 You had eight brothers and sisters but what were they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Well no I - I -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 How many boys and how many girls?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Funny enough my - mother was married twice. She had - two boys and two girls of each family. Well now - this gives you some idea of - actual history, because these are death certificates whi
ch I - purchased many years afterwards. Now you see, excuse me - now that was my father who died from heart disease, you can see - he died suddenly but he - he - he did die from heart disease. This give - gives you some idea of malnutrition. If you - if y
ou - you read carefully, now you see he died at the age of forty didn't he, leave my wife at the - my mother at the age of thirty with four children under the age of eleven. Now - that was 1894 wasn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 This one is 1904.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh - no, I beg your par
don, 19 - 1904. well then you see - there were two little girls, two little sisters, myself and an elder brother, my brother was about ten. I was - five. Olive - now she - when - when - when - my father died I was five, that little girl - was about eighte
e
n months. Well this one was about eighteen months. Annie May. Now she died in 18 - 199, didn't she. You see, she died quite - see after lying three years ill with it. Now - she died, well now my other sister, my next sister - she died - in the Luton Child
rens Home a few years afterwards.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 She was nine?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes. Same - same trouble. Heart disease.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 It must have run in the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 See? 1903. You see that - fourth of March, 1903. Well my brother - my brother was about six years my senior. He di
ed - in 19 - there - no, my father.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 1894?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Ah now that's my -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 That first one was your brother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Yes, that's it. He died at twenty, ten months after the little girl. All died from heart disease. Well now - it's rather strange, but the - 
the local Board of Guardians sent me to Brompton Hospital - oh I was the last one left, see, the others had all died of heart disease, including my father. I was then about thirteen. And the local Board of Guardians sent me to 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceName}}Brompton{\*\xmlclose} {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceType}}Hospital{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} for my dise
ase, the last one, I was expecting to die in a very - very short time. Anyway - I didn't. Well then it went on to the - 1914 war. And I'd recovered. I recovered - I don't think I ever had the actual m}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid4935455\charrsid3227008 o}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 rtal disease. But - I tried to enlist in under - in - L
ord Kitchener's army at that time, you know, that was a voluntary - that was volun - no conscription. And queer enough I was turned down for - mital disease. Anyway right through that war when conscription came on I was called up again and again for medic
a
l inspection, and each time right through that war I was turned down for metal disease. But when - then - which - of course frightened me a lit - considerably, so to make sure I had these - I had these - four death certificates - produced in 1918 - 18 - 1
9
18 somewhere. 19 - is it 18 - 1918. To see actually - to present them to - the medical profession which had got more acquainted with these sort of things, and of course well they said it was all through malnutrition. As children. Quite - and quite a lot a
t that time died from this sort of thing. Dropsey and so on, heart troubles. So -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 How old were you when your father died?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Five. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 And when did your mother marry again?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 About four - four years afterwards. Then she had two boys and t
wo girls, of the - yes, that's right. But this was quite - this was - wasn't a very unusual thing for - for children to die as a result of malnutrition, which caused something or other - a lot of it was - responsible for - for tuberculosis as - as perhaps
 you would - yes, rickets and so on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Do you know how old your father was when you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 When I was born? Yes. He was - thirty-five.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Where did he come from?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Harpenden, out - just outside Luton.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What was his job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 He was a blocker - in the hat trade. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did he always do that?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
No, he - he was a - his father was a - a boot - used to - have a boot shop in - on the main street in Luton, his father died and - there were three boys left and - he - became associated with the - hat trade.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did he go on doing that work until he died?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes, until he died, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did he do any kind of casual or part time jobs do you know?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No, he didn't, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Do you ever remember him being out of work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 How old was your mother when you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 How old my mother was - when I was born - oh mother she was - she would be twenty-five.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Where did she come from?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 She came from Bedmond - originally came from - Popular.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 She was a {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}London{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} girl?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Yes, well now you see, her father - now this might interest - she came from Popular. And her mother died in 1866. That was the time of - she died from Black Death, the - yes - rat disease - yes, and - quite a few died at that time, they did used to
 - that used to happen every now and again in the docks. And she - she died from - this - this - Black Death disease - and quite a lot of people died too, excuse me - and - at that time Doctor Barnardo - was finding the orphan boys - simultaneously with t
h
is - it was a happening that - caused him to - put these boys up, find them a - a - a shelter and so on, perhaps you remember the history of Doctor Barnardo, he was going away - he was going away - abroad somewhere, but anyway, just temporarily he was put
t
ing these boys up, these orphan boys, collecting them - and he got seven un - under his roof one night, another one turned up and he couldn't accommodate him, wintertime and he said, well I'm sorry but I haven't any room, come tomorrow I'll do it somehow.
 
The boy was found dead in the dustbin, frozen to death. You see well Shaft - Doc - Lord Shaftesbury - at that time - had been investigating certain things and he went round one night with this Doctor Barnardo, and - discovered these boys under the roofs a
n
d all sorts of places, tucked away, and that started the Doctor Barnardo's home - homes. But then my mother died - my father was - my father was a seamen on one of the famous clippers, the Northfleet, there was about twenty of these famous clippers and fo
r the - before the -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Your grandfather this is?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
My grandfather, sorry, her - her father - my mother's - yes, all right, so - he was - can you do it mum? The Northfleet was one of the famous clippers, and that went down in the Bay of Biscay, he wa
s going across to Tasmania, was taking - they were taking then of convicts and all sorts of people at that time, from Australia and so on you know, and - the boat went down at - the - the clipper went down in the Bay of Biscay, twenty-six were saved only 
b
ut he was one of those that - drowned, so - my - her grandmother, his - his father - his mother, this - this lady, who was born in 1799 - 1799, and I can personally remember her - there's not many can contact two - two centuries like that is there? And sh
e
 died - she died in 189 - 1894, four years, 18 - 18 - 1889 - no, 18 - 1894, that's right, she died in 1894 when I was five, so I can distinctly remember that old lady. Now she bought - she bought my - my mother - my - she bought my mother up, that was her
 
grandmother you follow? But she'd already got seven children, she was a widow and the - the - the friend next door, a widower, had got seven children so she teamed up and they had the fifteen children plus - plus my mother. That was at Bedmond, you see, n
earby here. And of course they -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What made him move out here, do you know?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
To here? I'll tell you. In those days - like the Duke of Grafton who perhaps you heard - you - you know all about the Duke of Bedford and - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4935455\charrsid3227008 Marquis}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008  of Bute and all those s
ort of people, were quite the people weren't they, they sill around your - your particular district. But you see in many many places the children of - well the people around - their children became associated - with these houses, being parlour}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4935455\charrsid3227008 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 maids - all 
- gardeners and so on. And - oftentimes - they were dictated as to where they went. Now there's the Squire Solly who - who - r}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4935455\charrsid3227008 eally owned the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 hold of Bedmond - Bedmond is still a little - quite a sizeable village now, near - Kings Langley - Hemel Hempstead
, you wouldn't know that though would you? Would you, yes, well you find Bedmond there, if - if you - if you - were to ride round. Well Bedmond was owned by Squire Solly apart from - the bakers shop. But everyone - everyone - all the children had to bow o
r curtsey. The boys took their caps off and so on. And this Squire Soll - Squire Solly's wife - used to dictate as the children came along and grew up, now you have to go to so and so, friends - round about you see. - Or you've g}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4935455\charrsid3227008 ot to be with me under-gardener}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 , parlour}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4935455\charrsid3227008 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 maid, housemaid, whatever it would be, chambermaid and so on. That used to happen - not many years ago, at - Duke of Bedford}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4935455\charrsid3227008 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 s Estate, going back on there - talking - I'm talking now about a hundred and seventy years ago. I can remember - I can remember - not more than forty years ago - a cousin of mine w}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4935455\charrsid3227008 orked on the Bedford Estate, Du}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
ke of Bedford, and the old Duke of Bedford, this one's grandfather was the - quite an autocratic old boy you see, and I was out one Sunday morning - in - part of 
the Estate, walking with my cousin and his small boy of about - ten, ten years of age. Right in the distance walking across was - the Grand Old Duke of Bedford, this intolerant ari}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4935455\charrsid3227008 s}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 t - aristocrat you see. And - my cousin said, Billy - off with your hat. Th
is boy took his hat off, I couldn't quite understand why. But - he had to do that you see, in case - the old Duke had been peering round to see if the boy did, and quite a long way off. Well this Squire Solly - Squire Solly's wife who - said that my - my 
m
other had got to come into her service. And her grandmother, my great-great-grandmother says, she does not. And - so - and she was the local midwife, used to set bones - all sort of - she a source of I suppose black magic and what have you, she brought he
r away and they settled at Slipend, just outside Luton, and her - her gravestone's still in the - Slipend graveyard, 1799, so on.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 So your mother lived with her grandmother did she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 She lived with the grandmother - all the other children had married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4935455\charrsid3227008  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 off, my - my mother was only a smallest one you see. And - that's that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Do you know if your mother worked?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Pardon? Oh yes, she worked in the hat trade.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did she work after she was married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes. As a matter of fact after my father h
ad died, I can remember as a small boy - you see, she was awarded - eighteen pence a week and two loaves to keep the four children and herself, the local Board of Guardians. Anyway she used to supplement that by - lodgers. And - by - sewing hats by hand. 
That's quite the thing you see. See my -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 How big was your house if you took in lodgers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Pardon? Only two bed}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4935455\charrsid3227008 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 roomed house, but we slept downstairs see? Yes. You see in the story a little mark where it's my - friend wrote, Doctor Dony up there is 
all - all these sort of things to do with the hat trade which you could borrow if you like. There's a history of - education - which you'll find any amount of - conditions, with regard to - poverty and so on. If you like to borrow it I mean I - would you?
 
Well - this - this sort of - this sort of business with regard to poverty went on very considerably. My mother - lots of times would be sewing hats - wide plait, sewing into these - sun brazes, sun - sun - hats you know, and I'd come down in the morning -
 to get to the milk job and so on, I started - I started work - many years before that - eight - I started work at eight, one and three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4935455\charrsid3227008  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 pence a week. But -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 I suppose every bit helped didn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Beg pardon? Too true, yes. And she'd - oftentimes I've come down and she's been asleep in the chair with a hat half sewn.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Neverbeen to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Pardon? No. Oh no, oftentimes sat up all night at work.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did she go on working after she was married again for the second time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No. No, you see, m
eantime my - my other brothers and sisters were - I had two sisters die and my two sis - my two - half sisters died this year, one in March and the other in May unfortunately. I've still got the youngest brother, my half brother, he - he's still alive, th
e youngest one, I'm seventeen years older than he is. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What sort of man was your step-father, what did he do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 He was a plumber, he came from - he came from - a market gardening family at Maldon, and he came to - he came to Luton in the build
ing trade, he was the only one of a big family who got away from the ordinary agricultural - sort of work, you see, gardening - market gardening, vegetables and so on. He - he became - associated with the building trade, became a plumber, decorator and so
 on, but only working - follow, he never became a - a master man. And - he - he gradually - helped bring up his little family with my mother, he died and then she carried on - little alone, wouldn't move out of the house.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Can you describe the house that you remember best out of the first houses that you moved to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Funnily enough I remember the first one, it's rather queer. I remember the first one, it may be because my own father - although I'm not going see be - five years of age and earlier than 
that, it's rather queer, I can remember the first day I went to school at the age of three. With long hair down my back and - the boy at the back pulling the curls and so on. Then - this - dear old grandmother, I remember going out for a - a trap ride wit
h
 - with - my father who was then alive and - the pony falling down just outside St Albans, down a hill, and we all being thrown out - well most - and - and the dear old girl being thrown out too, out sitting by the wayside - also I can remember seating he
r on the bank at the side of the road and so on. But - my father was very - artistic with regard to making picture frames, you see - I I paint these things, he - he'd make the picture frame you see and I - so that's rather queer.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Was he handy about the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes, oh yes, he - yes, all the ornamental gardening - he made all sorts of ornamental fences. And so on as a hobby.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 You say there were two bedrooms in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What downstairs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Only the two - just the front and t
he - back - rooms, plus the small scullery. That was customary you see, you'll find - you'll find any amount of house there - like you would at Toster, round there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Was the front room the best room?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Supposed to be, yes. The front room was the best - well like the lounge.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 And you lived in the back room?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 We lived in the back room. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Which was the kitchen as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 That's right, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Where mum did the cooking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 You said you had some lodgers? What sort of people would they have been? Did they come and go?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
One was - well you see, my - my step-father was a lodger. Yes. Now he came with another man who - man came from Barton, man named Pearce, now you'll see round here there's a huge estate nearby here, 
Pearce and Barker. Pearce and Barker - is a prominent company name around {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Luton{\*\xmlclose}
, Pearce and Barker - huge builders. The son - is the Pearce of this - the grand - the grandson. From the original Pearce that came from Barton and lodged with my mother and my 
step-father, it's rather queer, but it's rather queer because - he was - a very strict Baptist, and these others - all were strict Baptists, rather queer - it's rather -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Were your parents Baptists?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 My parents? No, my mother was like me, an agnostic. Yes. Yes, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What about father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
My father - he would be - just an ordinary sort of fellow I - I don't think - I don't think - he would have been - a religious man probably.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 You don't remember him going to church or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
No. No. You see, I - I - I went to all sorts of Sunday schools but never - never ordered by my mother, it's rather queer. She was an agnostic but I was allowed to do as I liked, so right from a young - age I started with the Primitive Methodists th
at I went to the - the church of England, the low church was then - there's the low church and - and occasionally, or very rarely - oh, very rarely at a high church. Now it's crept in you see, in those early days confession, a crucifix and all that was Po
pery. Yes. And - the great majority of people, especially in a town like {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Luton{\*\xmlclose}
 which was non-conformist it was - very much opposed to Popery. Processions, incense, and I went to one of these churches - the - Popery church in Luton, St Savaiours, at the same
 time I was going to a - a Seron Hall, that was the - Methodist - Bible class, I get mixed up with the two of them, then I started to - to study up Darwinism, the - got the \{BLANK\}
 and - I didn't understand much about it but gradually was reading - those sort of books - I became an - an agnostic like yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did your mother do all the cleaning in the house herself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes, oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 You never had anyone to help?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Still we all helped you see, it was customary in those days for the children 
- from young children, for instance the knives in those days was sharpened with brick dust what - and my duty - my duty was to - after I'd done work mind you I was at work each - each night you see and Saturdays and Sundays - so it didn't give me much tim
e apart from my half. I was a half time schooler. Until I was - I left school at the age of twelve, but from eight until twelve I - I was part time. So didn't give me much - time to - to acquire academic qualifications.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you just go in the mornings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
I used to go late in the morning and part time in the after - part in the afternoon, leaving off about - half past three, so on. Yes. Start at ten.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did mother do the mending of the family clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 My mother was a - quite a qualified - ne
edlewoman - through sheer necessity I suppose. For instance she used to make shirts, she was quite a shirt maker, all hand of course. Pardon? So - she'd be - she made - she made all my clothes - she even made my clothes when I was a milk boy, when I was n
ine, yes. Short trousers and Sander Jackets. But she was wonderful shirt maker and used to earn money making the shirts. Yes. So that was - that was quite an addition you see to the family income.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Do you remember if father helped mend shoes or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No, no, no, he was -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did he help around the house with jobs, cleaning or cooking or washing up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 He would help - yes, he would help, he was quite a good step-father, yes, he was - he's my step-father, I was the only one left you see.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What about your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Oh he was - quite a man about the house. Yes, he was - yes, and - I'm afraid my mother - of course he was forty, she was thirty when he died, but - there must have been a lot of regard because when she came to Luton
 - she - as a young girl in the hat trade - she - she was pushed around quite a bit you see with relatives and - more or less she was -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 We were talking about father doing jobs around the house.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes. But of course in those - in those days - in th
ose days - unemployment - was - as would be confirmed in - in - in my friends book, a History of Luton see my step-father - was in the building trade and the building trade was controlled to a large extent upon - the - the engineering trade, those two if 
i
f engineering was rather bad and of course that was - I'm talking now before the advent of the car. See I can remember when there were no cars about at all. In my grandfather's - horse and cart, which I was - been riding around with him - was going along 
a
 country road just outside Luton, and - one of these chunk-chunk cars came up the road, and the horse shied and - jumped over the - short hedge into the field, so was half in the field and half in the ditch you see. That was quite customary. You could wal
k up the centre of {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Luton{\*\xmlclose} at that time - any old time of the day without being interfered with at all.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 You were telling me about your mother being pushed around from relation to relation a bit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 And her regard for your father, do you know how they met?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
They met through - they met through the - my father being associated in the hat trade, and the people that she was living with - as a young girl - were - going to this particular - warehouse, run by a man named Osborn, who became even
tually the mayor, and - she met him in that way. Well then she became - she was - working at the time - for Carruthers. Carruthers of - quite a big factory in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Luton{\*\xmlclose}
, and so they sort of teamed up between the - the three factories, that's how it came about.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 And when he died she was very upset was she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Yes, right - right 'til the time when she - when she died I can remember - she said - my Al's - Albert, his name was Albert, she used to call him Al, so I was always a favourite boy somehow - if I - 
that she - always remembered - her husband by - when she saw me. I was belonging to him. Nevertheless she was - she - she had a great love for - my step-father. I did, I never - I never made any difference between - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 You never resented him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No, never resented. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 I expect he was a nice man then was he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 How did you feel about your step-brothers and sisters?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Well just my brothers and sisters.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 You didn't make any difference?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No. Not - not the slightest, rather queer, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 That was good wasn't it?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you remember at all your father helping to dress and undress you and put you to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh yes. I can remember my own father - my own father - customary to kiss children, I remember one
 particular day he went off to work, and - I'm I remember, I must have been about - I must have then been about four years of age, I can distinctly remember the - the - the part of the road where I managed to run down and catch him up and he'd forgotten t
o
 kiss me. And it must have been at least a half mile away. Yes, so - I was - a great deal of affection. I think then in those days that - family life - if you follow, meant a - a great deal - mixing in together, especially Christmas times and so on - one 
-
 is all the the - joys of getting together, there wasn't much money, I remember the - the very - stringent times, when my brother was then alive - helped me tie up our trousers and the bottom and hang 'em on the bed then - pretend to be asleep and mother 
would come in and fill 'em up with bundles of firewood and so on, with - something nice just at the top you see, but deliberately - playing a joke. Those sort of things happened, you made your own enjoyments.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 You had a lot of fun even if you didn't have a lot of money?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you have any tasks in the house that you had to do particularly?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Any what dear? Task -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Was it your job to clean shoes or lay the fire or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh yes, I - I - I used to - my - my - my - p
articular - jobs were - cleaning the - cleaning the - the cutlery - on a board you know, with the brick dust, you - you don't know of that do you? Well of course - they were steel knives or were supposed to have been, and in order to clean them this brick
 dust was bought, it was a very fine powder, and there was a board for the purpose, you sprinkled the brick dust on the board, and then you - you sharpen - you sharpened and cleaned the knives the same time, do you follow.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Rubbing them up and down?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
That's - rubbed it up - well the same with the fenders - going - coming round the - and even the fire grates, they had to be polished with - black polish. The fenders, the top of the fenders were again steel that came round, see the - the kerb there, th
at would be - a steel top which had to be cleaned with the brick dust. And that brick dust - method of cleaning the steel ware was quite a common thing.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you like doing it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Beg pardon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you mind doing it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No, well one had to do
 it you see because there was more disci - there was a good deal of discipline, to bring up a family of - four, six, seven or eight children needed - some discipline, and although - one loved one's parents and the parents - returned the love and so on, bu
t
 - there was an occasional clip - so - to bring you up - as a matter of fact although I had a great respect for my mother, she had grim times in - losing those children and her husband, and fighting to - to keep things going, pay the expenses, oftentimes 
g
etting up to her neck in debt - I remember the baker refusing to leave her - the bread, because she was so much in debt, owing to unemployment, and my step-father being unemployed for a long four months. And so those sort of things happened. But - but nev
ertheless - there was that sort of respect and and love - you know, which - it - it - it forced people that - that way didn't it. It brought out the - it brought out the deep feelings.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Sometimes its mothers it altogether I think.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh possibly. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 But in your family obviously there was a lot of love.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you have to help - you were the youngest in the end weren't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 I was the youngest of that first family. Yes. But meantime - meantime you see my step-father - w
as a live when my two sis - little sisters died-follow? See I - I went -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Do you remember your older brothers and sisters helping you at all with things like dressing and doing up your buttons and your shoes and things like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Well when my bro
ther - my brother, 'cos he was the - he was the only one older than me - follow? I was - yes, I - yes, I used to help in many ways - he used to help me with a - with my school - school work too, yes, he helped me even - a - a labour exam was necessary in 
order to leave at the age of twelve. A labour exam. That was like - like university qualification you see. But it at twelve, otherwise you - you - you had to stay until you were thirteen. Follow?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What sort of standard was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Pardon? Of educatio
n? Well - I suppose primitive according to present day standards but - we got by reasonably well, for instance - now - my friend there Doctor Downey - is - some years my junior I know but - he had a - an ordinary - school board education, an elementary ed
ucation - and he - he became an apprentice at one of the little firms \{BLANK\}
 served his five year apprentice, but - at the same time he - he qualified for his - equivalent to the - GCE, got his teacher's certificate, he came - BS Bachelor of Science and th
en - PhD, and - those sort of things did happen through - sheer force of personality somehow. Yes. But I - I wouldn't have - we could - we could read and write and I'd got some idea of geography and - a little bit - and a little small knowledge with gramm
a
r, not much, but by - carrying on as so many other boys did - children - joining the - the - there's - in those days there was the - the Friends Adults. The Friends Adult Movement was of course fostered as you know by the Quakers, and there were Friends A
d
ult Schools all over the country, the idea was - at the back of it, the Quakers wanted to help - people to learn to read and write in order to read the Bible. That was - that was the - original idea. But those schools gradually - there's not one left in L
u
ton, I became president of the Central Adult School - and was - president for a number of years, and I also belonged to another - adult school at the same time. But they became debating societies. Mostly agnostics. Yes. It's rather queer. But those - earl
y schools, they competed with the School Board and the Church schools in those very early days. So you managed to get some knowledge if you - if you want to, that's right, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Going back to when you were small do you remember having to go to bed at a particular time, was your mother strict about that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Well - in the later years you see, when - when I was on - I'm now talking - when I was - now when I was - eleven, I became - I became - an errand boy for a chemist, the firm still exists in Luton. A
nd - my - time for leaving off was nine at night. Saturday night ten. Follow? That was not unusual, in the - in the hat trade used to - see, in - in the hat trade, there's the history of it in here, very often times people - young people worked all night,
 until it was forced by law the Shaftesbury - Act, prevented them from working, girls, not boys - not men, but girls, women - but - up until - not nearly in my - my age - boys could work all sorts of hours.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 When you finally went to bed did you put yourself to bed or did mother help when you were little?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh no, I put myself to bed, oh yes. We all did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 And you shared the bedroom?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 I shared the bedroom with my brother. In the early days I shared - there were four of us in one room see. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 One bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No. But oftentimes the - the history there, you'll find lots of times there's been five in a bed. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 You didn't have a bathroom obviously but did you have a bath occasionally?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh yes, there was this - this method of a - of
 the large bath which we used for washing purposes too, is - well you've seen them - no, perhaps you haven't. No - you're too young. A - a - just a - a - a sort of a steel - iron - there be what we - what is called spelter, a mixture of iron and steel, an
d - quite a sizeable bath, which quite customary - in the back kitchen, do you follow, and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 How did you heat the water?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Pardon? Well heated it - on the fire you see. On the - big boilers. The fire then was a coal fire, but built right up it was 
- with the ovens - the oven one side and another sort of container the other - for other purposes, but - the - well the - the coal fire had to heat the oven, for cooking purposes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 How often did you have a bath?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Once a week. Somewhere about that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you all have it the same night?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
No. No, that was spread over - some period you follow? The younger children had - I remember my mother - washing the little girls, those that died - quite frequently, I suppose everybody - body would have don
e that but I mean the - the - the bath was quite good for young children, and - and - youngsters up to the age of - seven or eight you know. I mean I can remember - pop as we used to call him, having his - weekly - wash down and so on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 That was your step-father was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Yes. But nearly all the houses - well of course as you perhaps know, you - the houses - there must be any amount I know exist round where you lived - they were just the two up and two down weren't they, with the outside toilet up t
he - end of the garden and so on. Quite customary.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you have clean clothes after you had a bath do you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Pardon? Yes, my mother was rather fas - I think most women were - but, now I - I - you see, this washing - was quite a - quite a
 terrific business, because they were large families. I mean - invariably meant - two or three washed a week, or - if there was a long long line, you did - the - the - did the job, but I remember on one occasion things were so awful - that - my mother - h
u
ng her washing out one evening - must have been - in the autumn time when the darkness would come on, and when she went out to fetch them in they were all gone. So she went - in the next street where - we had been friendly, up to that time, with a - a - a
 
man named Detective Chamberlain, and - he said, is there any - is there any mark that you can remember on any of these clothes? She said, yes. She says, there's a scissor's rust mark - on a table cloth. Well he immed - immediately went down to the pawn sh
o
p - there were the clothes. Chasing - chasing the - tracing where - where the - the clothes came from, the particular person who'd pawned them, it was the young girl next door, aged fourteen. And she had seven days hard labour. Yes. My mother - my mother 
was - frantic about it. Because - she wouldn't have - she wouldn't have proceeded if she'd known - 'cos - they were even worse off than we were I suppose.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Punishment was hard wasn't it in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes. Seven days hard labour, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Can we talk a bit about meals, where did you eat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
In the - in the sort of middle - in the middle room which was - which we - we would say was the dining room. That was the back - back room, the front room was the - the - the parlour and - and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you ever eat in the parlour, special meals or tea or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
No, well it's just - one - it was living up with the Jones's, there had to be a parlour somehow. And if there wasn't any - any furniture in the parlour well the - the blind was kept closed you see. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 You had a parlour but no furniture in it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 That's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 And your mother cooked on this coal oven thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes, but you see - now - I can remember - I can remember very well lots of times going down to the butchers - the che
apest butcher in the town which was in the main street, and buying two penny \endash 
 two pennyworth of pieces, that's beef, two pennyworth of pieces, that's the odd pieces knocked off here and there, you follow, and a pennyworth of suet, that was three pence, and that made a pudding for the lot of us. Then again -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Your mother was a good cook was she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 I beg your pardon? Oh yes, but of course that was - that was a must you see, any amount of people did that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What did you have for breakfast, do you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Well - butter of course was - no, butter wasn't - butter wasn't used by - the ordinary - working class people. It was dripping, see, largely dripping. Lard wasn't known much but there - there was lard because that was - lard from the - from
 the - various cooking - there wasn't lard - lard as we know now. But the - the dripping was - bought quite cheaply. Butter then was - I - remember - selling butter as a milk boy - a shilling - shilling a pound, shilling a pound, that's right, yes. Shilli
ng a pound, yes, but of course milk was tuppence a - tuppence a pint follow. And beer was tuppence a pint.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 You'd have bread and dripping for breakfast would you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Bread and dripping, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Anything else, anything to drink?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Well there was - there was - there was tea, you bought the tea at four pence ha'penny \endash 
 four pence ha'penny, plus - some sort of token for a present when you got enough tokens. There's - a sixpenny ha'penny bazaar which sold tea and you had a - a present at the same tim
e. And of course the penny bazaar then was in operation, the penny bazaar which was - the - origin I suppose of Woolworth\rquote s and those sort of people. So -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 So you didn't drink tea very much because it was quite expensive?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What about midday, what would you have had midday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Midday, well there wouldn't be - there wouldn't be meat, you'd only have the - meat would only happen about once a week, meat was beyond you follow? It would be bread and - dripping and so on, there might be occasi
onal - little - puddings. Puddings - mothers would concoct puddings up with very little cost and - make them quite nutritious. Vegetables - vegetables were - were cheap you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 So you had vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you have a stew at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
There was - vegetables. There was - a mixture of vegetables, you could - potatoes and the rest, cabbages and what have you, vegetables, quite - quite reasonable in - cost.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 You used to come home from school for that did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Come home from school at lunch time, yes, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you have tea in the afternoon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 When we come over from - from school, there'd be - there'd be the bread and dripping and so on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Was there anything else after that, any supper?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 I remember that 
we used to have - there was a - a - there was some sort of a four - four meal day. Yes. There would be a supper, I remember coming home late at night and having - having a meal. Of a sort. Because fish and chip you could get a - you could get fish and chi
ps for three ha'pence, a penny piece of fish and - and a ha - ha'penny worth of chips, or a ha'penny piece of fish. A penny would - in those days would - buy a supper.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 That was quite good value wasn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 So you'd have that when you came in at nine o'clock?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
On - on special occasions, I didn't get those - that very often. No. But - but - we - used to have it - on the odd occasion, oftentimes Saturday evening. That was pay day you follow. Of course you see the step-father the
n would be earning about twenty-two shillings a week. I remember on one occasion - on one - winter time when things was - tough - there was nothing in the building trade, and he managed to get - a temporary job with the local - railway - company at that t
i
me, and - he worked from six at night until six in the morning and six days a week for sixteen shillings. That's for twelve - that's sixty hours a week. But I worked you see until I retired a - a few years ago, I - I worked sixty hours a week right throug
h my working life.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did mother make her own bread do you remember or jam?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes, my mother - odd occasions made her own bread but - they didn't seem to have much - time for making bread.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did she make jam or pickles or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Oh yes, they used to make their own jams. Yes. Blackberry jam. Was quite a - that's quite a seasonable - quite - quite a - a seasonable thing to do, making jam from blackberries, we used to go blackberrying, almost all - everybody went blackberrying round
 - round the district.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 That's was free wasn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes, right, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did she bottle any fruit or vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No, I don't remember her - her bottling. Pardon? She might have done but - it was - mostly - for the immediate - needs, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did father make any beer or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 He liked a drink did he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
He drank - yes, he - he drank in his - I'm afraid that's another point you see that - that oftentimes spoilt - you see in his early days my step-father did lik
e his drink and it was my mother's determination to cure him which she did. Gradually. She was that forceful nature. It needed - sometimes a - a - a friendly biff. But - but my - my - my own father was more or less a teetotaler, it's rather queer. But dru
nkenness then was very rife. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 And of course it went away with the money didn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Yes, and - and I mean - it was customary those days for - in the hat trade - for men to have Monday off to get over Sunday's drunkenness. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Do you remember if they kept any - did they have a garden?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did they grow any vegetables or fruit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Yes - used to grow - oh yes - used to grow and - and of course my step-father he bought - eventually he bought - forty poles of - land nearby for vegetable growing. Sixteen shillings a pole. You can imagine what it'd be worth today.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you have any livestock?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes. Now - it's rather queer that - my mother and - my step-father very fond - and - yes, they were very fond of chickens, a
nd in keeping rabbits. Unfortunately they used to make - make such a - favourites of the rabbits, you see, and eventually when they'd be killed well we couldn't eat them. They used to have a name like {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Alice{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} and so on, Tom. But the chickens I can - I can re
member - oh right the way through my step-father's life - with - with us that he would have his - this chicken - hen house as they used to call them, with about six or seven - fowls and lay - laying the eggs you see. Chickens.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 So that supplemented things didn't it? Your own father didn't keep anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Yes. I remember an ornamental garden he did a wonderful ornamental garden with - these fancy - these fancy - fences, and - oh yes, I can remember a hen house at the top - quite an attract
ive place, going back in my memories, yes, yes, he had fowls too. I suppose it must have been - it must have been the customary thing to have done.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 It helped out didn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 How many times a week would you think you ate meat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 How many what duck?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 How many times a week did you eat meat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh not more than - twice, no. Oftentimes only once.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Was there much poaching went on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes, as a matter of fact, it's rather - my father's brother, there were three brothers, Alber
t - Reuben, one named after who was a manufacturer of hats and in quite a nice way of business, and - Eli, who was a plasterer, but his one fun in life was poaching. And he - I think - I think he still holds the she used to go round - if there did happen 
to be any odd pieces left on other peoples plates - that she had them. She always used to clear the plates up.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Were you allowed to talk during meals when you were children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 How do you mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Could you talk while you were sitting at the table or did you have to be quiet during a meal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
As a child you mean? Yes, we could talk. Yes, my mother was - quite - reasonable with regard to - the - conduct - mind - mind you, she - she was pretty stern like they had to be. Follow? But - she was - she was very - friendly to us all, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you have to eat everything up or could you leave something if you didn't like it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 We'd eat everything up. You see - you see, food wasn't too plentiful. For instance, as a - as a milk boy - as a milk boy -
 coming in - in the winter time - off the round - sometimes I remember distinctly - the snowy morning - when I looked forward to - to getting in the home, having a - what was then a pepper and salt mess, you wouldn't know would you about - a pepper and sa
lt mess was simply hot water, pepper and salt with - broken up bread - a hot - hot meal, sometimes with lard or a little drop of - of - dripping, melted.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Was that nice?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 It was, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you ever have second helpings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes, we didn't - w
e didn't go short, we didn't go short of food, but the food you see was - lacking in the - nutrition, you see, my two young - my two sisters died as a result of malnutrition.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 How about table manners?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Well we had to - we had to conform to - a str
ict - method of table manners. Yes. I think that was more or less general. I wouldn't say they were - ultra-aristocratic with regard to the techniques but still they - they conformed. Yes. I should think that would be general. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Were you allowed ever to bring a book to the table or a toy?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Record, according to my - historical - friend, he still holds the record around here for poach - a hundred and twelve convictions - for poaching. In those days - in those days - a man couldn't be arrested on
 Sunday for poaching. And he was particularly good with his - he could run. He was very good - he - he was quite a good runner, and - he could - if necessary of a Saturday night, it was always night time poaching in the nearby - what was called Kidney Wic
k
 belonging to the - the - the big estate, which of course - now belongs to the Werns, but these huge woods were just the ideal for spots for poaching. My uncle - used to supply - or - like - used to - always be able to get rid of his - his - partridges an
d whatever they were to a well known - shop in Chapel Street, and - I can quite remember that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did any of them come your way ever?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Pardon? I don't - well my - that's rather funny, my father got a - a - an aptitude for poaching, but not - not that
 sort of poaching. I remember - my mother telling me that when - when he - well, hadn't been married very long and - a friend of his used to - go around to the - public houses for some reason or other with a card. And on this particular night - the - his 
f
riend who was driving the cart, horse and cart, told my father that his - wife was - ill, or she was recovering - and she liked chicken, so - and I know the pub - still know the pub at Barton where it happened, that while the - this friend was delivering 
something into the pub my father - went down to the back - into the - henhouse and just chose a very nice chicken and - brought it home and that was that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Do you remember at mealtimes seeing that your mother was having less so that you could have more?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
In the early days - yes, I can remember - before, of course this go - this goes back to - to the early days before she was married the second time, the - the - the very tragic days between - the years - of my - years of five and so on up to about ei
ght or nine. That - this - this food business oftentimes I can - well remember - her having - little herself. Because, well there wasn't enough food.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 So she gave it to you children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Do you know if father had bigger helpings than anybody else?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
My step-father? No. No. We - we went on - I - I can remember my sister who died in May though it's rather queer, she was the - she was the youngest sister, before my - last brother came along, she was the youngest, and she - A - a - toys? We 
did read, my mother - rather - strange but my mother was quite a - an educated woman considering the - the circumstances which she came about you see, she was brought up by - her grandmother who lived at Bedmond - in Hertfordshire, and she was - I believe
 
I told you before, she was the local - midwife and - a witch doctor and all the rest of it but she also must have had some sort of - education, which - she handed on to her children and to her - her grandchild, my mother. So my mother was quite a reader. 
Rather queer.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 And she encouraged you to read?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
She - she used to read - all sorts of - books, there was no sort of local library at the time - before the time of - libraries, but there were certain books - similar to the Woman}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 \rquote }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 s Own - and - in - 
in those - in those early days and I remember she used to manage to take - one book, and I used to comb her hair in the afternoon, her long hair, which - used to keep her going sometimes just for little - laps in between the making of the hats, sewing of 
the hats or sometimes when she was sewing the hats I'd brush her hair, which she seemed to enjoy, or - or she - she'd be reading the book at the Sun - on the Sunday - in the Sunday after - afternoon.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 She had long hair did she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes. Oh yes, that w
as customary, mind - mind you the long hair was then - plaited up you see, curled up in to a - a bun. And of course the - the bonnet then was quite prevalent - not the big hat, it was the little bonnet. I remember when - I remember as a small child - seei
ng her in her - widows weeds, the little - long frock you see and - the - the veil came - coming - coming down from the bonnet. After - after the funeral, some time. It was customary at that time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did I ask you if you went to the funeral?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 I - I - did I go to the funeral? No, I was only - I was only five you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 And you weren't taken?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you all have to stay at the table 'til everyone had finished the meal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 You could get down when you'd finished?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Well
 - you see, I - for - in the first place I was at work you see as a boy, in - in the young - in young days - we used to have to get around the house doing certain jobs and so on. As small children.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you have your own places at the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Always sat in the same place?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Yes, same - same places, yes. And the same with the beds you see. And naturally there were about two - two or sometimes - there has been three in a bed but two - normally, two in a bed I should say lots o
f families - lots of families as I said before would be - an average of about six children. Lots of families of course ten, one near us - was a family of twenty-three. Twenty-three, yes. Twenty-three children, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 All the same generation?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes, same mother, same father, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 How did they live?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Were they poor?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Mind - mind you the - the man was - the man was a - sort of builder, he was - a little bit more - prosperous with regard to the average type of - income. But - ne
vertheless the children, so far as I remember, were - graded right the way up but I think they were almost all of them alive. Yes. And he was a very tall of about six foot three - so far as I - remember, and - the woman was just about - about five foot od
d, just a little bit - it was rather queer. Quite strange.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What sort of house did they live in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Pardon? They lived - ah the house was a little larger than ours. I believe it was a four bed}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 roomed house. I - yes, I think it was a four bed}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 roo}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 med house so far as I can remem}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
ber, it was a longer back - a - the building at the back was more - commodious somehow. Either by length or width. Still - but ten children were - weren't abnormal. Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Who served the meal, did mother serve the meal?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Mother. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did father carve? Did you ever have a joint?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No, father - 'cos I'm now - my own father I don't remember quite well - see I was five when he died, my own father.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 How about your step-father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Step-father, no, he didn't - a
lthough he - he came from a - a market gardener family - who would be - well the family would be versed in that sort of thing, poultry and what have you, no, he didn't do anything like that, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Mother did it all did she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes. Yes. Well you see 
she would have to - cater - and she would know precisely what amount of this, that and the other each child would need, so - but the - the puddings and all that, although that type of food - she catered for. But as the years got on - see - with the second
 
family - prosperity came into it more because my - my step-sisters, my half-sisters I should say, were earning reasonable money in the hat trade but - that was before the first world war, but - later on then my family - my family happened you see last cen
tury.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 So things got a bit easier for her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 That was - that was more - more grim of course, conditions were grim.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Was mother an easy person to talk to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did - sorry? Yes, oh yes. Yes, rather, she was rather a - a friendly sort of person. Jocular. Very. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Was she affectionate towards you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 She showed her affection?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 How about father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes. Both of them. The step-father and my own father, my own father was - a very - friendly man. But of cou
rse - he died as - as you know, when - quite early.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did they expect you to behave in a certain way towards them? Were you expected to be respectful?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Well - yes, I think there was a mutual respect in those days from children to the parents, mind
 you I think - generally speaking parents had to be more strict, naturally in order -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Why?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
To control a bigger family. You follow? It was - oftentimes - a clip at the side of the ear is - which was - quite an accepted thing wasn't it mother? My 
wife's mother, now she was a very gentle person, my wife's mother - a - a different person altogether, my mother was - strict - she had to be. In order to keep us - alive as best she could in those very very early days, it - it - it - it was a grim time. 
I mean like any amount of people will - simply went into the work house automatically. The work house was quite a usual thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 Di}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 d you remember people going into it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh yes, I remember - I - I - oh yes, quite a number. The work house building is still at {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Luton
{\*\xmlclose} but it's used now as a - as an old peoples infirmary - been extended and - it's now for people - like for instance I had a sister die - die in it you see in May.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you ever go in it when you were little?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Not me, no, but I had - one sister die in the - the {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceName}}Bute
{\*\xmlclose} {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceType}}Hospital{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}, at the age of eighty.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Do you remember what it was like?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes. The {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceName}}Bute{\*\xmlclose} 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceType}}Hospital{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} was a kind of small hospital - and kept up by - voluntary - contributions, and - the - there was a means test, for instance
, my mother - my mother had to pay a half a crown a week for my little sister who was in hospital, dying from - from - heart disease. I broke my arm at school in the playground - my mother had to pay - she had to find somehow five shillings - to pay the d
octor's fee before he set my arm, or some - the - similar circumstances, and at the same time she was paying half a crown a week - my sister being in the hospital you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What was it like in there, do you remember?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh quite good. Quite a small hospital, it was quite a good hospital. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 You used to go and see her did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did your parents expect you to behave towards each other, your brothers and sisters?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh yes, they - I think - there was in those days a friendly atm
osphere with - between - I remember going to the - the nearby church. 'Course church activities in those days catered for the enjoyment - before - before the moving pictures - before there was anything like moving pictures - the churches and the non-confo
r
mist places catered a lot for the enjoyments of young people. The churches had their - the social activities, later on whist drives and - they learned to dance and so on, not so at the chapel, they were more - they - they were a Band of Hope meetings, the
 temperance meetings, those sort of activit}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 ie}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
s with regard to the non - non-conformist church but - chapels but with regard to the churches, there were - games of different - sorts, there was - calecinics - evenings. We even ran a - we even ran our church ran a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 - a nigger troupe, or a minstre}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
l troupe. Now the two main minstrel troupes in the country were - Moore and Burgess Minstrels and the Mohawk, the Mohawk Minstrels were similar to the Black and White Minstrels. Well any amount of the churches in the cou
ntry had their little nigger troupes, see, and I belonged to a nigger - this nigger troupe, as a matter of fact - I used to play eventually - you see, in a nigger troupe they have little chorus boys, about eight of us and - and then there were - eight - m
en who sang and then there were - corner men, three each side, corner}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008  men playing tambourines, banjo}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
s, and - bones you see. And these are - now these are - these are - these are in here - my brother was a - a corner man, when I was a small - when I was a yo
ung boy in the - in the chorus I wanted to become eventually a corner man, you follow, they were the stars at the time you see, and - they played the bones you see. See? See? And I - I used to - well I used to play four in each hand. Well - they - they're
 all gone apart from those two you see. Now they were the nigger troupe, the Minstrel bones.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 They're just wood aren't they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh yes. Very hard wood. And - and as - see we used to go round the villages of the little - village halls, the schools and
 out - and - our - and - give concerts you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 That must have been fun?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Yes. But all those sort of activities made something. You see during the year the pictures - come - used to come once a year, they were huge - magic lantern - entertainment
s, just sta - stationary static pictures, huge pictures but there'd be a series of them describing a play or something. Well then on Sundays there were magic lantern - lectures - the non-conformist used to have them - describing the - the drink question. 
O
f course the Salvation Army was born about the time of - my - my mother's - being as my mother died at - 1866 - and the - the Salvation Army - emerged with General Booth - these - these young - these girls, becoming the - Salvation Army girls, and the bon
n
et the - the - the Salvation Army bonnet was then the - the crash helmet. I - I blocked the last one last year - of the Salvation Army bonnet you see, they're going out now, 'cos they now cost nine - nine and a half to ten guineas each. And - now they - f
elt hats - replacing the bonnet, at about a quarter of the price, you follow, so the firm that I - my friend in - nearby, he was the only manufacturer making the Salvation Army bonnet, and at long last he's given up.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Why do you say it was a crash helmet?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Well I'll tell you why, because - the - the gin drinking at that time - was very cheap you see, and the bottle the men used to - the drunken men used to hit the girls on the - biff 'em you see. Oh yes. So right the way through - and even now - th
ose - Salvation Army bonnets had to be absolutely hard, and made from Chinese plait, sewn together, and - I've got two or three in the local museum, and then they were stiffened very very hard - and - go on the top of the heads, that - just over the crown
 
of the heads so that - they - it - it would stop them being - oftentimes knocked unconscious. So that's the origin of the Salvation Army bonnet. But you see, they - they were the activities then that you made - children have all sorts of games. There wasn
'
t this you see. Those days - you had your fun at Christmas time in all sorts of ways, various games - all sorts of games, to keep - keep the - the family going, and they were really happy times at Christmas although there wasn't much money. To - to get to
g
ether enough money to - to buy - the - the raisins and what have you for the Christmas pudding - and so on, needed - getting together a few - shillings over a matter of weeks. Because you see - in those days there was no payment for holidays, which meant 
to say that - if - if the people didn't work Christmas Day and Boxing Day they had no money. So oftentimes a - a holiday was - well, quite a nuisance.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 A day without pay?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 That's right, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did your parents have ambitions for you, did they want you to grow up to be particular sorts of people?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Well, no, you see, I - it - I'm afraid, as I told you, that I passed the la - labour exam, you had to qualify those days to - to leave school, not some - far - further education, in the main. And o
f course, it's rather queer, but the - quite - quite properous manufacturers in Luton - hat manufacturers and worth quite a lot of money, still sent their children - to the - what was then schooled the - the - the Board school or the - Church of England s
chool, or the non-conformist school. Very few sent them to a public school, lots of them could have - could have afforded too. I mean there was the public school at - at {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Bedford
{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}. The Harper Trust Schools. Harper Trust of course was to provide education with - hard up parents you see for the children. But - but it gradually developed that like lots of the other public schools from that source.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Was your mother strict about things like swearing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes, oh yes, there was - there was discipline - there w
as discipline with regard to that. Yes. I'll tell you - I'll tell you why I should think, because - almost all children went to some sort of Sunday school, very few - children - lapsed with regard to Sunday school. For one reason, that it meant that the c
h
ildren did go somewhere, follow? Again, that the Sunday schools did provide for lots of different - activities to help children. There was the Sunday school treat which happened once a year. Long - long since that has belong - is forgotten isn't it. Did y
o
u ever go to a Sunday School treat? That's rather queer. Once a year - the children - went to somewhere, now - I went - one - I went - to - about five different churches or chapels - over a matter of seven or eight years, in my very young days, and - the 
meanest one of the lot had a school treat which just meant walking the whole school - walking up to a nearby park which is just over the top of the hill there, but you see the - and that cost about - that - that was about four}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 pence, for the tea. But most -
 most schools went out of the town, or - either in the very early days before the advent of the coach, they went in what was then wagonettes - or brakes, that was pulled by horse you see and there might be three or four wagonettes according to the size of
 
the Sunday school, take the children out. Well they'd go perhaps ten miles away to some some park, or some - aristocratic - ground or something of that sort, from Luton here it used to be - it used to be Hatfield, which of course - is a - a very famous pl
ace - nearby here, or Bicket Woods, there's another place they used to go to, either by train - a little later on, or in the early days by the - the brake or the wag - the wag - the wagonette. And that would cost about seven}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid415648\charrsid3227008  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 pence or eight}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 pence, each child
. But that was looked forward to. From one year to - to another.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What did you do when you got there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh there were games in the park, there was a - there was a tea and so on. For instance, when - the Diamond Jubilee happened, Queen 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname State}}Victoria{\*\xmlclose}, 1897, I remember - all the schools at that time include - I was then eight - we went to the local park, which was then - before the Werners, one time the Mar}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 quis of Bute - well the Marqui}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 s of Bute used to be at {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Luton{\*\xmlclose}. The Marques of Torns, near - nea}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 rby as you know, and the Marque}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 s of - of - the - the Ma}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 rque}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 s of - where you live, all - the offspring - of the Charles 11 and his various lady friends you see. Which you know of of course. But that - the Luton Hooe was quite a - quite a place to go to, but you see 
- that - that - Queen {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname State}}Victoria{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}'s Diamond Jubilee, the schools had to walk there. And -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 How far was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 About two to three miles, some about three and a half miles I should think, we had to walk - in procession. And then when we got there we h
ad a mug of tea and a bun. See? Then eventually we came home. But children look forward to that, well now you can understand what children think about that sort of thing today wouldn't you, but it was something. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 I should think it would be nice in the wagonettes going off for the day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Oh it's quire fun because there was all trimmed up in various ways and then there was no - no - no great expense but it was always something there you see. And the - the Sunday - school authorities - it was - qu
ite an endeavour on the part of them to provide something for the children on that occasion. There was little Christmas parties and so on too. Oh yes, I - I think that helped to keep children - disciplined. At home too.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 When you were punished did you just get a clip round the ear or was there anything worse than that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No, no, that was - just a - just suddenly and - but anyway - you didn't - you - you didn't misbehave very often. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Obviously you got more guidance from your mother when s
he was a widow, but did your father or step-father have any influence on you do you think or was your mother the biggest influence?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 My mother had an influence on me until I was pretty well married. Yes. I wouldn't have - mind you it was in a kindly w
ay but - somehow - my mother - really dominated right the way through, right the way through her life. Yes she is -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 She was a very strong woman was she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Well she had to be I suppose.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What about birthdays, you tell me that Christmas was quite fun, did you make anything of birthdays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes, there was a little birthday - there was not much - there was not much with regard to - refreshments, other than the usual, but - }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 my mother would somehow con}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 trive something. And Christmas -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Would you have had a present?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Pardon? Might have had a minute present, I don't remember - I don't remember a birthday present. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you ever play any musical instruments in the home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes, it's rather queer because you see - now it's - well - t
wo cars and a - and a bathing pool outside living up with Jones's I suppose but in those days - later on - later on - it was a piano. Yes. Piano and - and lessons - afterwards seeing - as we got - as we got on my step-father - and trade - my step-father -
 
and his children, or my - not my half - brothers and sisters, they were out at work, before the first world war, and - the piano was bought, and music lessons happened with my two sisters. And I borrowed the books and I learned from them, their tuition. B
ut that was the sort of general thing, a piano.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you have musical evenings at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Oh yes, we used to have - used to have real fun, especially at Christmas time. Oh yes, Christmas time was a - we used to - fill the house - house out with - wi
th our little relatives, and my - my mother used to do all sorts of grim jokes and - so on, and - my two sisters could play the piano, I could do a - I could play - after a style, and I had a brother-in-law who could play so we used to have real fun. At C
hristmas time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 And singing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes. And I think that was general. They were family parties.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 And you played games?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes, all sorts of games, yes, right - right - right in the - early in the war and - I think it was a recognised thing those 
days to - get the females to bed and then the makes carry on playing nap and so on you see 'til about four or - four in the morning. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 You said you didn't go to your father's funeral but did you ever go as a small child attend a funeral of any sort?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh yes, my two sis - my little sisters afterwards. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Can you describe it to me?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Well you see the - I remember - I remember my - the first sister - of course I wasn't very old, about nine or ten - I can remember - the coffin in the - in what was then called the front room.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you see her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Yes, I saw - I saw her in the coffin you see, and I remember my mother showing some - friends - and the - and the pains, 'cos she'd had - heart disease for three years, and - the pain s
omehow had - swollen the - her little chest and it was - it was black with the pain, and it had somehow - it was almost to the - the level of the coffin. Those sort of things were - weren't unusual.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Were you frightened seeing her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes, yes, I wa
s - I was - rather disturbed about that. But the same thing you see, my other sister, the later one, she died - she died in the - February and my - brother - aged nineteen, twenty, he died within ten months afterwards you see, so I suppose - those - those
 funerals I went to.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Would all the family have come, did they all dress in black?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh yes. The -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Were there many people at the funeral?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh no. No. Oh those fune - the funerals in those - early days, they couldn't afford much. You see, t
here was the - the hearse and usually one coach. There wouldn't be two coaches. Not - not the average, be quite a - an economical -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Would they come back to tea afterwards?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes, a small tea, just a celebration, yes, just a - a little gathering af
terwards. But they would all be - be very sparse and - economical. I'm not - I'm talking now about the - the ordinary working class people. You see in those days well - a man earned about a pound you see, I'm talking about before the first world war, abou
t a pound - pound a week. Well they're a qualified engineer and so on. They was only earning about thirty-five shillings a week after the first world war.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Were you taken to visit neighbours, friends and relations?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh yes. Oh yes. I remember - I 
remember - my wife - wouldn't remember, no, I know she wouldn't, no, I remember the old lady - who was due to go into the work house. Because - she was having a job to keep the rent going.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Was she a neighbour?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Neighbour, an old lady of nearly se
venty. And we used to help a little bit with food, occasionally, and so on, and we were all very worried about her because she was due to go, then suddenly out of the blue - two gentlemen friends arrived - and they'd come from America, and one of these - 
t
hese men - had been an early - sweetheart of hers in her very young days, had gone to America and settled in Salt Lake City, Utah, or Caterham just outside Utah, and become a Mormon. And they were due to - these two were - two old friends, or the - this o
l
d friend and his - his - pal had - had - had - were going to stay with this Miss Cook for a few weeks, then return home to America. Well - the early days before I used to do - painting and I'd made a - I made a screen, a fire screen and painted flowers on
 the screen, and I remember this old lady saying, when I get married I'd like that screen. Yes, yes, you shall have that screen. Well eventually - she married this old - yes, and she went back to - to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Salt Lake City{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}. Not only that but this - this old gentle
man was a retired builder, and he was a Mormon, and he got several children, he'd got a big home, a ten roomed home, and he was living by himself he was a widower, well we all thought well he must have got a dozen wives - it wasn't generally known that - 
o
f course - the law marriage had been done away with in America in 1860/1861, but nevertheless - he wrote back and offered my step-father a job as a well sinker, a well sinker, which was quite a job and quite a big prospects, out in Caseville. But - And th
is - this - they went over to - {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Salt Lake City{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
, and - my step-father was offered this job, as a - as a well sinker with quite good prospects, and we were all due to go. Family. But - unfortunately the boat that took them over - took Miss Cook and her new husband over - sank, there was}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008  - there - there were no casual}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
ties, sank coming back, there was some - something happened to this boat. Well my mother - her father had been drowned in the North Fleet, the - one of the late - the clippers - in the bay of Bisca
y - she - was always rather frightened of the sea. So that gave her the excuse she wanted. You can all go, I'm staying here, so we stayed. But - the old Miss Cook, it was quite - quite legitimate, every - every - everything was all right, she - you know, 
used to send us the Desert Evening News every week - a pile of newspapers from the Salt Lake City. So I get touch with the Mormons for quite a number of years in one way or another. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Do you remember your father taking you out or your step-father, by yourself?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
My own father, I can remember him taking me out, yes. Oh yes. Around the - round the streets and so on, for little walks, and - my step-father, I used to go out quite - quite a lot with - with him. Yes, he was quite a nice man.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you do anything special on Bank Holidays do you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
There was always - oh yes, there was always trips out, in those early days, to nearby places. Now - I'm talking about a little later on - when - from a small boy, but in the - in the - very e
arly days - there was walks on Sunday evening with my mother, step-father and - and the children, not my elder brother, he was of course - he was - too old to come with us but - we used to go around - to places nearby, Candyton, Stockston and those sort o
f places, for - but quite long walks. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you dress up to do that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
We had our Sunday clothes. 'Course it was a recognised thing that those early days - when money was a little more plentiful, for there to be the Easter attire. Was always 
Easter attire. Yes. Even - even before the first world war it was customary for young girls and young fellows to have - I - I always had my Easter suit. And there was the Easter attire and the Easter bonnet you see. Was - was - the feature then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Was it a busy time in the hat trade?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Yes, at Easter - Easter was quite a time. As a matter of fact I'm - in the Easter bonnet parade - used to be a competition with the local park here, all the manufacturers - have this competition for the first prize, fo
r the smartest bonnet or the smartest hat, and the last time it happened I won the prize and so - yes, and then it - then it ceased you see. But anyway the - the Easter was - well you could tell in those day you see - you could tell a person coming down t
h
e road, a male or a female, especially a male, you could tell his station - in life by his attire. I mean if it was a high silk hat and a tail which was quite customary well he was somebody wasn't he. And the bowler hat and so on. The straw hat was - was 
something that - covered most - most men during the summer, the boater. I used to make boaters myself. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 All classes would wear that would they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 More or less, but you see the - the - the working class and the - the rural people wore caps. Lar
gely speaking. They did in the towns too. You see you could take - you could tell - you could tell what a man was - by his clothes. Now well you - how can you, how can you? He could be a millionaire, he could be - he can be a labourer almost with his long
 hair and whatever it might be in his - wear - his attire, you wouldn't be able to - there was a - there was a tremendous difference then. And - you see at Easter}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 time you came out in a new suit. And a walking stick and gloves and a bowler hat. That was customary-in a town.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Even the poor people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Well you - you strived to get your Easter suit. You might be paying a shilling a week for weeks and weeks to get it, but you got it. Or - or you weren't anybody at all. And you wouldn't get a girlfriend y
ou see. And in the same way they had their Easter - attire, like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Do you ever remember going away for a holiday as we do now?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Not before - oh yes. Well I used to go in those early days with my grand - to my grand - step - my step-grandfathe
r at Maldon who was a market gardener, that's only just out here you see when I was - about eleven, just for a little time 'cos I 'I've got my little job at home to do.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you like going away?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh yes, I used to - go backwards and forwards to Ma
ldon. Then eventually I'd did manage to get a - a - a cycle later on, which was - secondhand one of course, and I used to get around quite a bit.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you ever go away with your parents, did they ever get a holiday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No. Never had enough money you see. No. Oh no, I don't remember - I don't remember ever - my mother going away for a holiday. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Can you tell me how you would have spent Saturday in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Saturday, well of course in those days - you worked. In the hat trade we worked 
until four o'clock - on the Saturday. Oh yes, customary. For instance I used to - as a young - when I was a boy of - when - when I - 1901 - I used to work until six o'clock on Saturday evening in the hat trade. Oftentimes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Was there anything special about Saturday night?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Saturday night? Well of course when the - when the flicks - well they used to call them the flicks you know, now it's the - that's the - the cinematograph as we used to call it, they were the flicks. When they first started we co
uld get in the flicks about - about four}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 pence. So we used to somehow conjure that four}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid415648\charrsid3227008  p}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
ence up to go to the flicks of a Saturday evening. I remember when we - about 1911, my wife and I had been away on a holiday, not married - we'd been away with her sis
ter and we came back a day early to - earlier - early to see a serial at the local flicks. Oh yes, those sort of things happened. There were lots of things too on a Saturday evening other than the flicks. Largely to do with the - the chapels and churches.
 Yes. They catered - mostly I think they catered mostly - for - for young peoples - enjoyment.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Can you describe Sunday to me?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Sunday? Well I - I should think that with - I used to - mind you I - I was then religious - I used to go to Sunday scho
ol, either the chapels or the churches where I went.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 In the morning would that be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
In the mornings, yes, I - I was confirmed - at the age of fifteen. I was baptized at the age of fourteen and a half for those of riper years so I had no Godparent
s you see. I had to be baptized or christened - to become - to become confirmed. And then I went to confession which was then horrible, an English church to have confession - the Kenzie brothers then were - travelling over the country and - opposing any c
hurch with this Popery.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 This was in the Anglican church was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Yes, the Anglican - you see, in those early days - going back to the - end of last century, there was quite a - there was quite an activity on the part of certain big - high - Church
 of England people to join up the church of Rome. There's a secret history of the Oxford Movement which you - which you'd be able to get - from your local mus - library I should think, the secret history of the Oxford Movement was to join up the English c
hurch with the Church of Rome and Cardinal Mannering, Newman and another one were responsible for this urge, but it was snuffed out in some way - by the activities of the lower church people. See it was - there was a lot of ant}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 gonism - against - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 incense}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008  bu
rning - banners - so on, confession, Mass, it was called Mass then. But that - but now it's become more or less customary isn't it, with any amount of churches these days. This has crept in, con - the confessional is quite common around now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 So you'd have gone to Sunday school in the morning, then you'd have Sunday lunch would you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Would that have been a special one for Sunday?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Sunday afternoons oftentimes - rather queer because of a Sunday sometimes, Sunday afternoon school - th
e churches - in the morning there was - there was Holy Communion or Mass according to whether it was high or low church, there was the service, and then in the afternoon there was - there we - there were Bible classes or the CEMs, the Church of England Me
n}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
s Society which happened about half past five. Then the church service later on. And nearly all those were - they were - attended.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 You could spend all day at church then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes, but you see the - before - before the first world war it had started
 to drop off you see, at - at the end of last century the PSA, the - Pleasant - Sunday Afternoon for men - yes, the PSA - was - customary for - men - men to used to go to this PSA - in the numbers. There - there were Bible classes, there were brotherhoods
 
and so on - had been, until about 1904, 5, 6, 7 - started to fall away, and the - the numbers - diminished gradually. So much so the churches were trying to find out why. The women, the females were going to their - functions, but the men were leaving off
 
and even going to church. So - during the first world war - you'll still find the book - during the first world war the churches got together and under - under the supervision or the chairmanship of - of a Bishop, I forget now, I - it could have been the 
B
ishop of Ely, I'm not too sure - they thought it was a - a - an - a good idea, with about a four millions of men - under the colours, to find out - why. What - what - what was their religious opinion, follow? To see exactly what men believed. And this sur
vey happened over the {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}France{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 and other parts, men in the trenches and so on were questioned, conveniently and cautiously and so on. And - eventually this was - this was completed, and - the book was published. Why men had left going to - these - brotherhood
s, churches - church services and so on. And they found out that - a - largely speaking - the men - in the forces had become - Moslem in their outlook insofa}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 r}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008  that they were - they - they believed in a - a - what is to be will be, follow? Kismet you see, which is - a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 Mohammedan}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
 belief - that if a bullet had got your name on it you got it, you see, it gave comfort to soldiers, you see, if you stuck out your head above the trench and - know a bullet was yours well you had it but if it - if it - if it hadn't -
 if - it hadn't gone one - your name on one well you was all right you see, and it did give comfort. And then another theory - there was a - there - there were the - there were the two - there were two main - there were two main - things I remember, the o
ther was - that Jesus Christ had become a swear word. That was in this book, that should be still in - in the libraries. Was in the {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Luton{\*\xmlclose}
 library 'til not many years ago, I suppose it would be still there, it might be down in the basement or somewhere, not 
- not used much. But that's what happened. I - I went to a brotherhood in the afternoon, I went to a brotherhood at - a - a - a Methodist brotherhood, there were seventy of us, you wouldn't find that these days. And then I went to this -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What did you do at these brotherhoods?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 There were lectures. Largely - queer enough, this - this brotherhood I went to - {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Darwin{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} - the Darwinian theory had become more prominent - up until that time well the average person didn't know much about it. Men coming fro
m monkeys - which was then - the - the slogan going around - of course - wasn't accepted, Adam and Eve was still - largely the belief, follow? And - then it started to - it started to become a little bit - it emerged a little more - and I remember there w
as a - a big debate between Joseph McCabe who had been a monk and then became a - an agnostic, and - Joseph Tuckval, the leader of the London Tabernacle, a huge concern those days, a men}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 
\rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 s - Bible - a Bible - Club or class, whatever you might call it, and t
his debate was on Genesis. And - I - the - the report was - published and circulated - around the country widespread, to the Bible Classes. I had one of these and - it really - I was on the side of McCabe at the end you see. So this sort of things happene
d
 those sort of lectures happened. You know, different lecturers used to come along, like they do to some extent now - the various people we get round at the Jehovah witnesses and those sort of people, in those days it was - they were Bible lecturers, stil
l trying - to control or to - to keep - keep peoples belief with regard to - Genesis.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Were you very religious in the home, did you say grace at meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Or prayers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No. With the - loss of the homes would do but my mother was - like m
e, she - she was an agnostic. So - she - she allowed me to do - she allowed me to do what I wanted. Unfortunately the next door a lady had got three children, two boys and a girl, and she was - she was associated with one of the local - non-conformist - c
h
apels, and - she used to take these three children to chapel rig - religiously every Sunday three times, and oftentimes in the week, but the children got rather - they got - antagonistic to this. And they - rather envied me that I had the choice of going 
where I wanted to. Now they wanted to come to this church where I went, but she wouldn't allow them to. The elder boy - this is history, the elder boy - eventually left home. He was only about - thirteen. He got to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}London{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}, and he got - a job as a - as a bar
 boy in a pub. On - near Hackney - Hackney Marshes. And - it's rather queer that - he became - he became associated with a - with a girl a year or two later on, and - she - unfortunately - jilted him. And he cut her throat on Hack - Hackney Marshes. And h
e
 was sentenced to be hung. Reprieved. And - he and another prisoner - somehow got into the same cell and the next morning both of them were there with their throats cut. Sidney Bunion, Bunion. And the girl's - the girl's sister - queerly enough, came to l
ive - in years later on - and moved into the house next door to my wife. Extraordinary, yes. So - those sort of things - happened.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What about politics, were your parents political, did they take an interest in politics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 My - my mother - my mothe
r having - having had the - the associations in her young days - with the - aristocratic - pair that - that were in control of Bedmond, the whole of the Bedmond apart from the bakers shop - made - made he rather a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 n}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
gonistic to the aristocracy, so she wasn't Communist but she was - she was rather leftis}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 . Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 How about your father, do you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No, he wouldn't - no, I don't think he was had - had any political leanings.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What about your step-father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Or him. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 But mother was?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Do you remember her voting?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No. She would have had a vote - but I - I - I - I think she would - oh yes, she would have voted Liberal I'm sure of that. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did she do any party work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 She? No, no. No, but when I was - when
 I was twenty - when I was twenty-one - you still - it was only householders that had the vote. But I managed to get a lodger's vote - a lodger vote - could have a vote. The parties used to work one - one with the other, and - view the room, you see, I ha
d a room to myself at that time because my brother had died, and I had the - the room to myself, the bedroom, so that qualified me for a vote. So that -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 As a lodger?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 I - no, I was the lodger. I got the lodger's - I was a lodger you see. I got - I
'd got a room to myself, so that qualified me, so the day I became twenty-one I put in for my lodger's vote.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Do you think in general that men voted as their employers did because they were scared of losing their jobs?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Well - the - form the - in
dustrial revolution on of course - the - the - I think - I've always thought and I believe there's a lot of ground for the belief, my - my friend Doctor Dony is the - with regard to the - industrial revolution right up to now, he gives - he's given lectur
e
s, any amount of lectures - on the political issues over the years. And there's no doubt about it, that - trades unionism - coming into - being gradually from the industrial revolution time, from the Tolpuddle Martyrs on - alienated men from the churches,
 you follow, and they gradually went left, hence the Liberal party building up. Largely. Because - the Liberal party at the turn of the century was far more socialistic - than the Labour party today.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 You don't remember a time when the men would have voted automatically as their employers expected them to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh - no, not - not in this district anyway. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 I don't suppose your parents had much time apart from work but did they have any hobbies or things they did in their spare time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No, the
y had no time for that, you see. You see, for a - for men it was a sixty hour week. Invariably a sixty hour week, could be more. I mean I worked sixty hours a week.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did mother have any interests outside the home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Pardon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did she belong to any clubs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
No. There wouldn't be much - there wouldn't be - there wouldn't be much activity on the part of the - ordinary sort of working class - mother. Outside her home, she wouldn't have - she wouldn't have the - time - what with looking after fami
ly, see, washing and all those sort of activities in the home - kept her busy. In the main - I - I - those in - in - enjoying better circumstances - would of course - be attached largely to the churches, doing different sorts of things you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Were either of your fathers interested in sport, racing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
The one - my - my own father - yes, my own father was interested in the - in horses, not for racing, but for traveling around with them. He was friendly with the - the hors}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 
e trainer at the local - Marque}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
s of Bute, then he went - he - he - he went to Rumania and became - a trained or the then Royal Family' of Rumania - and - and he came into Germany, one of those - those states at that time, one of the - German states, but my father was very fond of ho
rses. My step-father was fond of football, but - but he didn't have much time really.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Do you remember them belonging to any savings clubs, for shoes or sickness or funerals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 There was a sickness - you see be}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 f}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 ore the national health of course - 
one paid the doctor's bill if one could. And there's no doubt about any men - man - amount of people died - because they couldn't afford a doctor. Must have done. But - in - in the local - in the local town here - there was a medical institute formed - by
 
- a society - similar to - the national deposit society and so on, got together and they formed a national deposit - this - medical institute - with about four doctors employed, and - the large membership paid a few coppers a week, and that qualified you 
for medical attention.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Your parents did that did they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No. No, that was - later on. But in my early days - in my early days people doing it but she never did. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 I think you said you started school at three?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes, 1892.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Can you remember going to school your first day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Yes. Definitely, I can remember the first day at school - with - I can remember the - there were three or four ladies who were taking their - youngsters too, to this infants school. I've been in the room sin
ce lecturing on the hat trade, it was rather queer, but - I can remember - I - I can visualize the women in their - sort of - aprons, the long bodies above me as a small child, you follow. And I remember these ladies frocks as I must have come past in bet
w
een them somehow, seeing - these long frocks and - perhaps aprons, I forget now, one of which must have been my mother, and then the - someone taking me up to the form where I had to sit, they were just forms then, there were no - no chairs or anything, i
t was just - backless forms. And - sitting in the form and - my - curls hanging onto the shoulder which was customary those days, boys had curls. The boy at the back of me pulling my hair.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Were you miserable?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Then a - a few - a little later on, t
he next year I - the infants school was in the same - next to the building of the - the - more adult - girls school. And four or five of these girls running around a corner knocked me over, broke my arm. And I - I broke it later on in the same - in the sa
me school but - broke my arm.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Were boys and girls separated?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 In the school yes. In - in the - in the - later on. In the infants no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What time did you start in the morning?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 School, nine o'clock.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 And come home for dinner?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Come - coming home to lunch - at twelve, then back I think at half past one or quarter to two if I remember. And then - until four.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you have far to go?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 I didn't, no - about - not above ten minutes walk - normally for an adult.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you go with your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
In the early days. Mother - mother - I remember, used to take me - or - a neighbour, you see, she'd got - at that time she'd got - I was the youngest, that's right, yes, I remember her taking me or the woman next - the lady next 
door taking me to school. But of course there was hardly any traffic.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What did you think of school, do you remember, did you like it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No, I had one big fear, I used to be - I used to faint at blood and - yes, I fainted at blood right through my 
life until about ten years ago. Even red ink - even red ink. I remember the - go - going up to the - up to the - headmistress, and - asking - she was asking my name and then taking it down on the register and I saw the red ink and - off I went. I think - 
it seemed to be rather - common in those days for children to faint at blood.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you like learning, did you like the teachers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 I liked - yes, some I did, but there was more discipline. Although my - this schoolmaster friend you see who wrote the
 books, he - he was a school - grammar school master, and he was also a master of a - a school of - during the war at Kentish Town, and - he used to talk about discipline, and his school was evacuated to - Manton near - in - Rutlandshire, into a little vi
l
lage, and - I noticed there the - the children - I went up with him - because he was take away from Manton because he had been a qualified engineer. Was forced into the London Polytechnic to teach engineering. So - we went up to see this school where he'd
 
been a master, I remember all the children, the London School here the Doc Dony as he was called - they were crowding at the railway station to meet him, and - but there was discipline even in that school, in that - village school, that's quite discipline
.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you have one teacher that taught you everything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
No. Ah I'm sorry. Yes. Yes. But except - yes, it's quite true, there was - you see as the forms - as you qualified the next form was a teacher of the next year, you follow, and again -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Were they all women?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Men in - men in the boys school, women in the girls school. There was no women in the boys schools.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Was there any punishment?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Cane. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What did you get the cane for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh any - insubordination.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you have it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Yes, lots of times, yes. As a matter of fact we feared - in that - in that book that you've got - there's a - there's a photo of - my school, with - there was a sort of a high - there was a - there was - Wa
ll Street High Grade School which was a little more educational with qualifications than the normal board school. And the top boy - top form boys from the board schools graduated to that - that school. And the schoolmaster was a very stern strict man, he 
was then the president of the PSA, Pleasant Sunday Afternoons Men}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
s - school, which - then we got about - well if I remember about two hundred men. So you see well they've all gone can't you. Got cars and so on. But - he got - he'd got a very deep frown and we were always frightened of the frown, let alone the stick.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did the girls get the stick as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Not so much. But there was the cane, they was more disciplined. Oh we daren't - we daren't do - as - as for playing truant, you daren't do that. Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Were your parents interested in your school work, was your mother interested in it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Yes. Yes. But of course - as I say, that - one only - tried to get on to leave school and earn - in order to earn money you see, I was earning - when I le
ft - when I left school I had been earning half a crown a week, suddenly I went to five shillings. So it was quite big you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Do you remember if the teachers had favourites in the school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes. They did. Oh yes, they were - yes, they had favourites.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What sort of children were favourites?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Well so far as I remember they were - the favourites usually were - favourites from those of the better off - parents.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Were there gangs in the school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Pardon? There was - it was rather quee
r - I - I don't remember gangs in the schools so much but there were gangs - there were gangs in the - in the - in the - in the towns - gangs between streets, streets, for instance I remember we - we used to walk - war - we used to war against New Town St
reet and Chase Street, the boys of - of the Streets a little lower down, they used to come up and - we used to - have - sham fights and so on. But there was nothing very -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 How did you get on with your brothers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Well this - my - my two sisters - d
ied before - when they were - quite young you see, seven or eight years of age, my two own sisters. Then my brother - he was older than me, by about -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Were you good friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Pardon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh yes. I - I thought a great deal of my brother, tremend
ous - tremendously. I copied him in many ways. Until he died. And then - as he died from - the same - trouble as the two sisters and my father, heart disease, I became very ner - nervous and frightened, do you follow - because - it was generally agreed th
a
t I was due to die. And so - the things that he did, the exertions he smoked a little, so I - I didn't smoke until I was twenty-six. And I avoided the exertions of swimming and - and those sort of hard exertions, well hardest ones, but - I got on wonderfu
lly well with him.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 When you were small did you play with other children in the street?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Oh yes. Oh - the streets of course the - streets were composed almost everywhere - of the - the - houses coming up to the pavements, do you follow, and the - 
long pavements down the streets, well - there were the competitions with - the tops, racing - racing each other, up one side of the street then crossing over the road and - race down the other. Oftentimes there was a good deal of - fraud you know, kicking
 your top - on the quite and so on, but those - those sort of - hop -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 How did you push the top along, with a stick?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes, with a - a whip. Whip, yes. You spun it - you kept - you - you spun your top and then - yes, there was quite a little art - a
ttached to it. Then there was the games of hopscotch wasn't there and - hopscotch was quite a - a - quite a - that's right, yes, then on one leg you see. And all sorts of funny little games such as that. But - with regard to the boys - there were the wars
 between the streets. Rushing round with - sticks and so on. Not too - not too violent.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 None got hurt did they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Pardon? Oh some - some did occasionally but it - that was more fun that anything. But - a - a war would be a - arranged between so and
 so street, a few streets off and your own particular street. We used to - we used to have a war with the - war - wars with a street named {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Chase Street{\*\xmlclose}
{\*\xmlclose}, quite a - quite a - a famous street in - street in the town at that time. Very poor street you know. Po
or little urchins, much poorer than our particular neighbourhood. But - we had a way - we had a way of - going over - various - walls and so on, creeping - through trees and so on to avoid them and then catch them and - and catch them from the back way, d
o
 you follow. All sorts of little games like that. There was - lots of games at night time of course in - in the winter time - 'course it's a mistake to - to imagine that all winters were - icy winters but - when one looks back one thinks that they were, b
u
t they weren't you know, really, because - there was quite a - a prominent man gave a history of Luton the other year - William Janes, one of the - old Lutonians, he's about - seven or eight years my senior, still lives, but he gave a - his experiences an
d knowledge of Luton those many years ago. And he sad about the hot summers, you know, the hot summers, always the hot summers, never wet. Or at least he - he por - portrayed {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Luton{\*\xmlclose}
 never wet. Well - 1907, that was the wettest summer then on record and I thi
nk it's not quite been beaten since. I was making the straw helmets for the - the - the straw helmets for the police straw helmets in that book isn't there? Well I made those helmets, those particular helmets. That time I was making for the firm who made 
-
 patented the helmets you see, and I carried on after the - the proprietor died I carried on the business until 1915 when - we closed down, but I blocked those particular helmets, that was in 1911, the - 1911 - election at that time. But Janes - mentioned
 
about the hot summers, and about the police helmets, but well of course really they - they weren't necessary really. Or - they - they were necessary, they wouldn't be necessary today, because of our wet summers. Then I - I - I simply - wrote an article fo
r the Bedfordshire magazine - describing the {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Luton{\*\xmlclose}
 of my young days, which is very similar to his, only that the weather was different you see. And I said that - the - the photo - a photo had been produced of the whole of the Luton police force supplied wit
h these - straw helmets, after two summers wear - one the - wettest summer on record, and they were still - lovely helmets you see. So it - it's surprising that lots of things -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What did you do to make them strong enough?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Well they was tightly 
- they were - plaited - well, I could show you how to plait - plait them if I got - if I got the straw here. Then they were stiffened with gelatine stiffen - stiffening. Very hard. And then eventually they were - the - the - the stickyness of the - surfac
e
 was got rid of, by what we used to call sweating. That was putting hot - cloths over - wet cloths and that took the - the - in a heated pan, in a hot mould the same - same - shape as the helmet, and that would take the - the surface - of the gelatine awa
y. Then we used to - then - treat them with glycerine. But they were still very very hard, like these - Salvation Army bonnets, they were still as hard as a brick, I blocked the last one myself - last - last year, this last year.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 How long did those police helmets last?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Police helmets, two summers. Two summers wear.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 How long did police go on wearing them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 The Police? Oh they - they stopped wearing in between the two wars but when we closed down, when we closed down another firm later on 
after the first world war started making them again. And - but they - I - they didn't make them so strong, the plait wasn't so strong, it wasn't the local plait made from the plait - the wheat straw in the district then plaited by the women who were in th
e villages. It was - plaits - a plait done in - made in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}China{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
. It wasn't nearly so strong. So - it - they went on until the boater - the straw boater, the bowler, and - those sort of hats went out when the car came in. You follow? When the motor car came in
 gradually - somehow the boater went out. The boater was the hat that used to blow off quite easily. But - meantime of course we made - we made the hat - of this wheat straw for King Edward VII and Prince Christian, our firm, and - for - shooting in Bavar
ia - shooting - sort of - these boars you know, and - it - those - those hats were copied gradually by - we made one for Whitelaw Read who was a - American ambassador down at - \{BLANK\}
 A.J. Balfour, Lord Balfour eventually and - lots of those people. They'r
e the high sort of people used to buy these hats, and then Dunns, you read - the Dunns, same Dunns - started to order them for ordinary wear, and suddenly there was swamped, and other manufacturers started to copy the idea, if you follow. Then the ordinar
y little - {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Bute{\*\xmlclose}
 brim, instead of that E - Anthony Eden rolled brim which was - the original hat that we made for - King Edward - the - the soft brim - really replaced that more - ostentatious sort of hat. And that - that soft trilby as they were called - re
ally beat the boater and the bowler. I know the bowler was still worn by the - the - the - more or less businessmen but - gradually speaking it went out of fashion. And of course, the trilby knocked the cap out you see. Up until that time dear - you could
 tell - you could tell a man's station as I said the other week, you could tell his station in life by his dress, especially his hat. 'Cos the high silk hat, used to make the high silk hat in straw too for - {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Ascot
{\*\xmlclose} and so on. And I made some of them, I still - one of my hats in the {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Luton{\*\xmlclose}
 museum on show. Used to make this very very fine straw - the - the shape of the high silk hat, very difficult to make but - used to make quite a lot of them.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Going back to the games you used to play did the boys and the girls play together or were they separate?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
The girls - well the girls were skipping you see, skipping was very very popular - little pastime again. Nobody - they used to play with tops of course, but not hopscotch - on the pavement.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 That was boys and girls?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
That was boys and girls but chiefly girls. Chiefly girls, the boys - had the more little rough game - mind you they played football a lot - in the street. Kicking anything about. Football was very popular. I - I played - played football
 when I was - eight or nine, I remember playing goal keeper and we lost thirteen nil. Ah but then I - I believe I've told you that coming up the - the London Road - the steep hill going up towards London from Luton - we left off the game - around to the s
ide - the verge of the road which is now all houses of course, to watch this - first car come - up the hill. The first car in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Luton{\*\xmlclose}
. Became a famous car eventually. Sometimes it got up you see and it did this particular day. So that was - of course the - the -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Great excitement was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Yes, it - it was quite excite - the - that - that car - the Langley car was - a high car, and - yes, they used to get up - they used to get up at the back of the car, similar to the old brake and the wagonettes you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 The door at the back?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 That's right, yes. So that was the first car, then eventually - I can remember just the one taxi, just one taxi in 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Luton{\*\xmlclose}. And motor cars were very very rare of course in those days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 When you were playing and you got dirty would your mother mind?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
No, no, mothers didn't mind much, it was the sort of thing - as a matter of fact I've been - I've been out this morning - and it - it - brought my - memories back to those old days. Been out with a friend of mine who 
- who was hat manufacturer, I've been doing some work - hat work this morning, and we went out to collect some hats - a lot of it - a lot of hats are trimmed round the villages. Do you follow? Or near - near the estates, this was on an estate. About two m
iles out from {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Luton{\*\xmlclose}
 here. And - we - went to this - council house - and there seemed to be a lot - I - I've not been before, went into the house, and - the place seemed filled up - with children, and I said - I thought - gosh, there must be several - people
s children here, so I said to the lady - what a lot of children, how many are there? She says, eight. So I said, eight. Well where do they all come from? She says, me. Me. Well that's very rare isn't it? Yes, there was eight and - they - they seemed to be
 
- from about - oh I don't know - not quite two years old, and the top one must have been about - ten or eleven, not more. It did seem - I might be wrong but it - the little girl didn't seem more than - about eleven, but - they were all more or less at hom
e. Well of course that was usual in those days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you spend a lot of time out in the streets?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh yes. Oh yes, oh - yes. There - there wasn't enough room - room in the home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you play late at night in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Sometimes. Yes - o
ne of the - I'm afraid I shall rather shock you but one of the - one of the sights of that - that - particular time was to see the fights - that happened between - the public houses when the men came out drunk. And drunkenness was very rife, as you can up
 - I don't know whether you - would know that but - drunkenness was - was very rife in those days. And it was - quite a sight to see these - these fights.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 You kids liked to watch them did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh yes, went down purposely. Then sledging of course
, sledging in the winter time, or sleighing, whatever you like to - like to - to call it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Where did you do that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 We used to make our - make the - or the fathers used to make the sledges, round - any - round the hills round the - in the villages 
and the towns, at - used to - sledge quite a lot in Luton here, down the - these -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 There's a lot of hills around {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Luton{\*\xmlclose} aren't there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 That's right. And then the skating the ponds. The ponds - lots of youngsters skated, I did, I skated when I was 
about - nine, I could do the outside edge and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Wouldn't skates have been rather expensive?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 We}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 ll - as regards myself - I - in}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 herited a pair of skates from my father who had died, and he'd - he'd had them - given to him by - a - a friend of his, 
who had won the - the Lancashire - the Fenn - the Fenn, there was a Fenn competition every year. Rather shows you doesn't it - that it was a yearly competition, skating. Whether it - whether some years I didn't happen I don't know, but - it was generally 
accepted that - the Fenn - the Fenn - competition happened every year, and this particular friend of my father - won the - the - the competition that year, the race. Well - it was long race you see, similar to what they have in 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Holland{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}. And - these skates w
ere made from a sword. They were beautiful skates and - I - I lost them when we moved into the flat here unfortunately. But they would be -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 They were made from a sword?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Beg your pardon? Yes, made - like - belonged to the sword blade, you know, t
he shaving blades, similar. They were made from a sword. He was a horse trainer, he trained horses eventually went to Rumania and then on to Germany, but he trained the - horses for the - Rumania Royal Family that time, so I prized the - the skates but I 
forgot to gather them up when I moved into the flat here. But skating was quite a - quite a prominent thing then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Great fun?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes, the ponds - there were quite a few ponds, lots of them now are done away with but - there was still lots }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 - the - the local - the Marque}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
s of Bute's - Hooe - Luton Hooe used to have a - a yearly - a - a - there used to be competitions there. But there was a com - there was a - a charge made, an admission charge which was given to charity. But that was - that was always a
lmost always on every year. {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Luton{\*\xmlclose} Hooe. To my memory. So whether the - whether the - the ice age was a bit more prominent then I don't know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 I think the winters were a bit harder weren't they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Were there children that your parents wouldn't let you play with? Did they disapprove of any children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Well, no, no, but there's just about one family, just about one family that - we had to fight shy of, the - they were rather - a rough crowd, but generally speaking you mixed in together. As you did at the schools.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What were this family like then, this rough family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Well how do you mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did they live in your street?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh yes. Oh yes, yes, that's rather queer because - I sometimes see - old friends of mine, one 
is - now eighty-seven, he lived just a - a - above where I lived - the - the streets used to - co-operate together somehow, the - the - the boys and girls in this - street named Tavistock Street - there must have been - not far short of a - a dozen - frie
n
ds who I - I could remember still existed not many years ago, some got killed in the first world war. But we used to mix in together. Competitions together. Football and up and down - down the street with it, 'cos there was no traffic to speak of, and if 
a
 cart came down we used to stop and let it go past and - and that sort of thing happened, there wasn't even cycles to ex - any extent then, because the three wheel hadn't been invented - vented. See one time - the - the bikes in those days, I can remember
 
a girl riding down a - a very steep hill in Luton, and - she - she'd lost - control of the pedals you see, and the brake which operated just on the front wheel - if you put it on too severe over you went. And - so it was a matter of putting it on very - v
e
ry softly, and if you could, drag your feet on the ground if you did get - over powered, but this particular girl I remember she had to put her feet out - and - there was - this steep hill with a - the bottom street - crossing of course, and she went - yo
u knew what was going to happen, she simply went into the wall.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Was she hurt?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Oh yes, quite a bit, those things were quite common until the free wheel came in. And then the brakes happened at the back too, do you follow. But the free wheel - I can remember the free wheel coming in.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you have a bike?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Oh yes. Oh I biked - I biked with that friend at the bottom, yes, I - I've known him for forty-eight years. I say while he was doing the Bedfordshire fllor we cycled round and round - bu
t I cycled from - it was some time - it wasn't until I was - seventeen that I could afford a bike, then I had to boy a -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 You didn't have one when you were little?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No, I had to buy a second - I - I bought the - I bought - the cycle of my boss the
 man who invented the - the straw helmet, and he was the - original captain of the - of the {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Luton{\*\xmlclose} - cycle - club. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 Penny farthings}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008  and all sorts of funny sort of bikes you see. Then he organised a trip eventually to - to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}St Albans{\*\xmlclose}, and I believe they sent o
ne or two telegrams to say we got there safely. But of course the roads were so rough you see then. Most of - cart tracks, except that they were like - on the - on Wapling Street here before the first world war, very similar. They were terrible then. Unti
l this - the lorries started to come on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you ever go fishing, did you have enough time to do things like going for walks or going fishing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Walks - I - I didn't go fishing but - tiddler fishing, oh yes, tiddler fishing with a jam jar, oh yes, 
yes, dear, a popular place at Luton was - just out}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 side the - the Mar - the Marque}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
s of Bute's - Luton Hooe, there was a pond there, it was very very popular, and the Luton - Luton - the Lee. The - Lee. Oh yes. Oh that was quite - that was quite popular. I d
idn't have much time though you see, I was - working - at nights you see, Saturdays and Sunday mornings, so it was a matter of - sneaking as best I could - the odd times but it - oh yes, tiddler - tiddler fishing was quite a popular sport, in all the rive
rs and ponds at that time. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you take part in any organised sports?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Only the - only the - only the football eventually, only the football, to do with the churches you see, it was the church - churches that fostered - more than the - non-co
nformist chapels. The churches, lots of them had their football teams. Yes. Only what the - unfortunately there wasn't - there wasn't much - there weren't many facilities for football playing - the proper match games. There were one or two recreation grou
n
ds in those very early days, fields that have been - moors - common land. That were - fairly suitable but they always rough compared with what they are today, 'cos the mechanical - the com - mechanical ways of - of doing pitches and - and that sort of thi
n
g is so much more - convenient aren't they. 'Course it was another game I - oh cricket with - with the - an improvised bat and - most of them were bats - knocked out of pieces of wood by the fathers and the - handle was rounded, and - all sorts of differe
nt types of balls. Oh yes, cricket was another - an improvised game - it was just a boys game. Just a -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you ever hit the ball through anybody}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 s window?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh - oh yes, was quite - was quite a lot of that, yes. And of course the games - the - th
e knocker ups - the - as I told you - fasten a - the cotton - to a door knocker one side of the street, fasten it over the other and put it to another knocker you see, then - knock at the door so - the person opened the door and then of course when he shu
t
 the door - then there was no one there, he or she - he'd knock the other one himself. That was done in the day mostly though. Pardon? Oh that was quite a popular game wasn't it. And - and putting something over some sort of brick - so they - a - a piece 
of paper so they could kick the paper as they thought. That's right, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you ever go to any sort of music halls or a theatre or cinema?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Not as boys but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 You told me about the cinema, were there any theatres or music halls?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Well the theatres weren't - didn't exist then. Not in - not before the first world war to any extent. Luton - 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Luton{\*\xmlclose} theatre had just started to - happen just after the first world war. Cinemas didn't happen at all. There was no cinemas. The - the Langton Shows, 
the magic lantern - what you used to call the magic lantern shows - chiefly - chiefly - to do with the - temperance leagues. Were quite popular.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What did they show?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Well all sorts of - horrible happenings, men getting drunk and knocking women do
wn and children and all - getting involved in it - oh yes. All done to frighten your lives out - keep you away from drinking.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 They were well attended were they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Well that - that was quite - there were quite a few of those. Yes. And there were no
 cinemas. Yes. There was no other entertainments apart from the little - social happenings. With - with the churches or the chapels. Well the churches - having their - having their - juvenile - evenings and so on games, so on, in the - in the juvenile - i
n the - in the parish halls. That's quite popular.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you get any pocket money?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Well that was a very diffi - pocket money was - you see, the first job I had was one and three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid415648\charrsid3227008  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 pence a week. When I was eight.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you keep it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 One and - a shilling for mother and three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 pence for - for me, but I never got it or very rare.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 So you weren't given any money by your parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Well you see a ha'penny - a ha'penny in those days - purchased quite a few sweets. There were the occa - I supp
ose - see, you sometimes had money given to you by people who were in a better position, but - generally speaking it might be a copper or two that they - accord -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you buy sweets when you got money?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Beg pardon? Nearly always. There were popul
ar sorts of - sweets weren't there - mum? That you could buy, a ha'penny bag of this, that and so on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What were they, what were the sweets?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What did they used to - the popular one? Popular - no, I forget. There was one - just one sweet that - we
 used to go for. Sort of a peppermint. Used to - used to name it like a - like an insect. Bugs - would it be. But some sort of -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Can we talk about social classes, how people were divided up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 How do you mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Perhaps you could describe to me
 what kind of strata of society there were in those days, there was the upper class and middle class, how did you think of them then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Well - generally - you see, in those early days there were the labourers and of all types, there were the - then the
re were the - then the building operatives.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 The unskilled people really?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
The unskilled people like in farm labourers, the farm labourers - who were the - well they were considered to be the underdogs completely - which - if you like to - to pro
be back into - Northamptonshire and round there - I've some little knowledge - of - Greens Norton - and saw what used to happen in the early days there. I - I - that time used to - be associated with - the Duke of Bedford's - estates, and there was a trem
endous difference I know between that top - those top strata, and - the workers. But - but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 The real aristocracy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 That's right. Well -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What about the difference between the unskilled people and the craftsmen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes. Oh - there was - the
re was a gap, there was a gap even between the - the - the building labourer and the carpenter, follow, and the plasterer and and - the bricklayer. There was a difference. But - it wasn't - it wasn't all - I don't suppose it would be much more pronounced 
t
han it is between the - the highly skilled - toolmaker and the - and the man on the - on the bench, you know, the - the men on the - the - vehicle going round. I don't suppose - you see, even today - a highly skilled worker can - considers himself superio
r - superior in a way doesn't he, even he -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 But it was so then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
That's right. But you see in those days there was a lot of difference between - there was a striving among certain people to become somebody. Now - the Masonic movement which today d
oesn't mean a thing - at one time a mason - was someone of some - some importance. Because he could afford the yearly - subscription which was something, a good deal, and his regalia and so on, and then he got to be a - he'd got to be voted in - by - by p
eople who - wanted to be a mason, do you follow. So the ordinary sort of - working man was never a mason. Unless it was in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}Scotland{\*\xmlclose}, funny enough in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}Scotland{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} it did happen, there was sort of working class - lodges. But now of course it doesn't mean a thing.
 I mean a top craftsman now can pay his fee much more than a good many of the masons themselves I should say. I know a good deal about the Masonic movement.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What sort of people would have belonged to the masons in your childhood?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Well - proprietors of - trade }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008  trades}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
people. Top - proprietors of building - of - of - of - of the building companies, those sort of people.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Industrialists?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Industrialists, yes. But - even the clergy of course - quite - quite a few clergy today - then - wer
e masons. Well - why - how on earth they managed how they could - how - how they could combine being a mason with being a Church of England clergyman, but they did happen, even bishops didn't they. I mean it was quite opposed - it's quite opposed to the m
a
 - Masonic ideas. So - but - they were the people of some importance, and then of course there was the importance of the lodges, one lodge against another. The - the - the - there - there were the more important - influential lodges compared with the - th
e very ordinary lodges, so there was a - there was a strata - yes, in lodges. But the ordinary working man though he couldn't afford to be a mason, so to be a mason was something.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Would people in trade have been kind of higher up the social scale than skilled craftsmen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh yes. Yes. In the main, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 But not as high as vicars and doctors?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Oh no. No. Oh no, the - no, you see - I'm going back - going back many years - of course the - the vicars - after the reformation of course as you as 
- undoubtedly you know they were quite - very poor people weren't they, weren't allowed to - only to wear - one sort of covering, this surplice, not any more, there wasn't the - Archbishop of Canterbury type in those days, with the - funny headwear and wh
a
t have you - but - then they gradually - they gradually got up until the little - village vicars were people of some account. The vicarages were quite - palatial places according to - compared with the - the ordinary dwellings weren't they. I know that th
at's gradually now being done away with, quite a few vicarages, I know just one been - quite a big - one being pulled down in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Luton{\*\xmlclose}
 now. There's three or four being pulled down at the moment - round Luton you see, they're being replaced by smaller places altogether. More convenient I know. Whereas they could have a dozen servants couldn't they.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 They would have lived quite a grand life then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh yes. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Who would their friends have been?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 You see - the difference between the - the Church of England and the - the non-conformist - churches was that the - \{BLANK\}
 Now in - in - in places like Luton, industrial towns, these small industrial towns, specially up the North, I mean Wales too - the - the workers were - largely speaking non-con
formist, and in Luton almost all of them non-conformist, and also - queerly enough, so were the manufacturers. Queer - manufacturers came from all these sort of people, you know hat - in those days, a hundred years ago you could start in the hat trade wit
h
 just a few pounds. Now it would cost - take many thousands. But they were - they - those manufacturers were - all these sort of people - workers and - somehow managed to get a business going and - make it grow and grow, but they became the heads as you w
ould see in John Downey's book in - in - education. That - they were - they were the non-conformist manufacturers. The Church of England had very very few of those sort of - manufacturer types.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Who would go to the church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 The church were - docto
r types and so on, they were a little - above - above the strata. Those sort of people. Solicitors - and so on, professional people, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 And the landed people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 That's right, yes. Yes. It was almost always -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Who were the most important people in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Luton{\*\xmlclose} would you have said?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 In - manufacturers. Yes. In those days because it was - it - simply grew by it's manufacture of straw hats.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 And they were the people who had the jobs to give?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes. There were of course be - before th}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 en there - there was the Marque}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 s of Bute and the Crawley's, the Crawley's were the other - very famous people in the district here. They were the - in people, like the Duke of Grafton's Spencer}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 s and round - round where you live. Is Spencer still there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 I don't know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Don't you? Well -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 The influence of the landed gentry wasn't so great in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Luton{\*\xmlclose} as the manufacturers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No, oh no, no, you see that sort of - there was a difference between the rural districts - and the - and - and the attitudes of t
he - of the - the - the workers in the rural districts - to those - very - high people, landed people oftentimes of - aristocratic birth and so on, as against the - the industrial districts - such as Luton - and up in - up in Yorkshire and so on, Manchest
er those sort of places. Very much like {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Luton{\*\xmlclose}, follow?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you respect these manufacturers in the same way that the farm worker would respect the estate owner?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you have to tip your cap and things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No, there was a good deal of 
that. It's rather queer because - even - I remember - I remember - going back now - nearly seventy years, the - the Duke of Bedford was - was a - was a - a very - a very - he was impossible type of man. He was quite remote from ordinary people. And he mad
e them realize that too, famous for it. The present Duke of course you can go up and say - converse with him quite easily, but - he was a different type altogether. And that was I should think pretty general. Madam Duval who was - who - }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 who followed on from the Marque}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 s of - {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Bute{\*\xmlclose}
 here, she was very similar. A very high - a - a very - she was - quite a - quite an important woman. As a matter of fact the - the Luton choir, the Luton choir and - parish choir, was a famous choir, choirboys, and it was - choirmast
er was an - an organist named Gossamer, he was quite famous round here, and after the church service Sunday morning the choir went to - Luton Hooe. Luton Hooe, to the estate there, and - the Luton Hooe - the Luton Hooe service was - it used the choir, do 
you follow?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 That was just for the people that lived at Luton Hooe?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
That's right, yes, but - but - it was rather queer. I - I went - I went with a - choir boy who had retired - a previous choirboy who was allowed to take a friend. So one Sunday mo
rning I went with him to this church service at Luton Hooe, and there was the choir of course from the parish church, and the church was filled up with - the church was filled up with the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 
\endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008  parlour}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 maids and the gardeners and the under}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 gardeners, all in th
eir particular places, coming up to the stewards and - and the what have you, and then - in the top - in the top - in the top box, rather queer there was just one double box at the top - looking down the aisle to the - the pulpit was - Madam Duval and Pic
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 c}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
adilly Tom, he was the - supposed to be the chief steward. Those two. With all the underlings you see - in my house - that's - in my house is many mansions, do you follow? But that - and of course, in those days, I remember going to a - Toas - to Brisenor
t
on church - this is rather queer. Because - in those days the pews - the pews were allotted according to the - the - the the station of the people - congregation. And the higher up the - the - the people in - in - in stature, they - they got the - the - t
h
e seat nearest the pulpit. Follow? But then there was an - an incorporated society - which - made all seats free, do you know that? Oh well. Well, now - if they - if they had a - a fee from the society that all seats should be free and for - not - hired, 
r
ented and so on, and - anyone went into a seat - they was entitled to that seat. Never mind who - who had been - there before him. And I went into the Brisenorton church once, got up near the pulpit, very early. Queerly enough my - my cousin's husband was
 
one of the wardens, and he hadn't noticed me, one of the church clerks did notice me afterwards. I was sitting in a seat belonging to a very influential family, and - they came and said - came and said - you must - you mustn't sit in this seat. I said - t
h
e - the mark up was the incorporated society they was getting the fee, I said, I'm sitting here, and I stopped there. The people came eventually. Looked at me, they didn't - take any notice. But I felt afterwards rather silly afterwards but there you are.
 
Yet that happened you see with the parish churches. Now of course the non-conformist churches as you know even now - they have their pews, their - their seats and they pay their subs - naturally don't they, that's a different matter altogether but parish 
churches were rather different. But - that's what used to happen.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Do you remember your mother being helped out by neighbours or relations when one of you - perhaps when she was ill or father was ill? Do you remember if relations came in or neighbours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Well she had - neighbours, oh yes, they were nice neighbours, the neighbours - relations, we didn't have any - relations to - to fall back upon. No, but the - the neighbours, they used to - used to co-operate together quite well, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 If your mother was ill somebody would come in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Yes. Yes. And even in hard times with regard to - I know that - regard to food, I don't remember as regards my mother, I - I don't suppose she was rather independent - well - we never starved but obviously the fo
od wasn't too - it wasn't - too appetizing you know, it was just the - the best she could do, but - lots of families in different times - you see the pawn shops as I told you - the pawn shops used to be very busy. Especially on Monday in order to - pawn s
o
me things in order to pay the rent. So oftentimes - food was scarce. There's no doubt about it. Remember one - I've a memory - one of the brief times - my mother paid - my mother owed - quite a lot to the - the local baker, and I think the - supply stoppe
d for a time. It was opened up eventually, but those things used to happen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did your mother have any particular friends, like a best friend?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh yes. She had a - she had - two or three friends, oh yes. Teamed up together for many many years. And 
- oh yes, until - until she died 1940, she still had - she still had a - one or two old friends. Yes, she did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Would they ever go out in the evenings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes. In those early days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Where would they go?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Walks and so on and round - or go and visit each others houses and that sort of thing, there wouldn't be much else to do.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 They used to go to each others houses?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Would they eat and drink something there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes, there'd be a - a little - little - tea together, or afternoon whenever it was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
People always say that those years ago you used to make your own amusements, can you remember doing that in your family and other families doing it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Do you mean - among ourselves? Yes, all sorts of - all sorts of - little g
ames, of course as I - I've told you in those early days, in those early days, if you could manage a piano, you - well you - you could afford one, as the years go on - the piano was - like this you see, which you had to have a piano. That's -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 And it wasn't just your family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Pianos quite a - quite a thing - and - of course there were the - there were the lessons somehow that were got for the - children, I'm talking about the - the - more fluent times after the first world war. But up 'til the firs
t world war - no, I can remember we had a piano, yes, we did, yes, we did in the first world war. When my sisters grew up and they're out at work, you see, when - when children grow up - a family of eight - eventually - there would be two or three out at 
work. You see, children - went out to work when they were - thirteen, fourteen and so on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 So they'd be bringing in a bit of money?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 That's right. In the industrial districts. But of course in the rural districts it was rather different. 'Cos there
 wasn't much for children to do. I'll give an instance, in the last world war I know that this doesn't refer now to your - this - this is too late but - the coupons, the - the clothing coupons - which you wouldn't remember would you - would you? Would you
 really? That's surprising. Anyway, it's rather queer because - there was a lot of - there was a lot of fiddling in - clothing coupons. Now a town like {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Luton{\*\xmlclose}
 where the women - going out to work, see almost all the women went out to work or did work at home.
 That's one of the reasons why - Luton became an industrial town, to entice manufacturers concerns, engineering concerns to come down to Luton - 'cos the land was cheap and - the - the earnings of the - women in the hat trade could supplement the low earn
i
ngs of the men - men in the engineering trades, that - that's - that's why you'll find that Luton in the - in the - in - in the Library now, same boo, the - Luton Van Company. Well you see, in a war, coupons were regarded as something you see, you knew co
u
pons to get clothes. So - I used to do business with a - a customer - at Nottingham, and he used to supply shops with hats - little village shops, but he used to buy - these clothing coupons from the women in the districts - who it would pay them to sell 
-
 sell the clothing coupons, rather than buy clothes with them you see. So I used to be able to buy - buy - coup - coupons by the hundreds. And then - I used to - a big man in Luton - a big - hood manufacturer, he - he had a nice - sized house near Silso, 
a
nd he wanted carpets and different things of that sort, curtains and - and he used to ring me up, can I have some more - he used to say - call them cigars, can I have another hundred cigars? Used to pay a shilling each for them. So that sort of thing happ
ened. Well the same thing happened you see in the first - before the first world war, those sort of things happened, but - there was certain - sort of things happened in the hat trade and other trades, these - funny little goings on, to get - money.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 D
o you remember your mother thinking of herself as the same social class as your father, was there any difference between them or were they about the same?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No, I don't - no, she came here you see, she was a - she was an orphan - being brought up by he
r grandmother, and she came to Luton - well she had rather a tough}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
time, because - she - she came to Luton when she was about fourteen, came into the hat trade - from a rural district, Bedmond, just outside - outside Hemel Hempstead, near Kings Langley - b
ut I told you the - the - the - the chief persons in the district were - the Solly's who owned the village, plus the estates nearby, and all the children had to do as - Lady Solly - said you see, she arranged for them to be maids here and there - there, f
or her friends and so on, and - people had to conform to her wishes. Well - anyway my - great - my great grandmother decided my mother - wasn't to be - made a servant she must come to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Luton{\*\xmlclose}
 in the hat trade. One of mother's relatives was a hat manufacturer in Luton that time so she came to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Luton{\*\xmlclose}
. But - this hat manufacturer uncle was rather an intolerant man and he - he treated her as servant.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 She was quite an intelligent woman wasn't she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 So she - beg pardon? Queer enough she - she could read wo
nderfully well as a - a - I don't know how that happened - but my great-grandmother could - she again - I don't know how that happened. 'Cos those days - I go back now to - long before 1866, about 1840 I suppose when my great-grandmother was a girl. So - 
how she managed to read and write I don't know, it was rather - it was rather unique in those days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did your mother have any views about class do you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes, she was very - she was very anti - she was very anti-aristocratic. Aristocracy - 
and of course she was - she was a Republican too, she was - got no time for - mind you - Republicanism in her time, before the first world war was quite rife, people like Joe Chamberlain, Neville Chamberlain's - father was a - was a very prominent Republi
can, at the time of Victoria, after Albert had died, some years afterwards she - she - she became very - she got into her shell sort of do you follow, and - there were any amount of - Republicans at that time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Your mother was one of them was she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Pardon? Yes. Yes, that's right, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Do you remember people saying, oh he's a real gentleman or a real lady? And what would they have meant by that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Well they would have meant - they would have meant one of the people like - the - the Duke of B
edford class, those sort of people, or to do with landed gentry. Largely speaking, landed gentry.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 How did people think about the police in those days, were they their enemies or their friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 I don't think they were averse to the police. I know there are certain characters - famous characters in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname 
place}}Luton{\*\xmlclose} like there were in other districts too that - were prominent - wrongdoers, but generally - generally speaking - the police were - reasonably tolerant - crowd of people.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Were you threatened with the police if you did anything naughty?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 It's rather queer because the drunken}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 n}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 ess that I used to see the police didn't seem to be - in my child's mind I don't remember the police interfering very much in the drunken}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 n}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 ess. N}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 o}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 . They would more today. Of course, yes, they would, but -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Your home was rented wasn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you ever see the landlord?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No, I don't think we did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did he have a collector?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 You see, oftentimes - the landlord'd own - well many houses. Very ver
y few people owned their own houses in those days, they couldn't earn - they couldn't earn enough money, although I grant you - but I know the average - the average house of workers house wouldn't cost more than about two hundred pounds, two fifty and so 
on. About two fifty pounds wanted a lot of accumulating.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 But you don't remember ever seeing your landlord?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 How was the rent paid then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh there was a rent caller. Yes, of course, there was a rent - the rent man called. Ah yes, that
 would be the landlord, of course, yes. Agents - now agents - I worked for an agent - oh yes, I worked for an agent when I was - thirteen for a short time, about - six months. And I used to collect rents. There were agents, yes. But - they were auctioneer
s queer enough, auctioneers - and estate and agents, auction - auction - auctioneers, that's right, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 And they would also collect the rent?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes. But of course you see - in the - in those days there was - perhaps you wouldn't - I - I put the cu
ps out mum, there's the tea strainer and - just outside too. There was in those days a lot of what we - what - what was known as - moonlight flitting, did you ever hear that. That's right, yes. Well it was rather queer because I had a cousin - I had a cou
s
in - well an uncle, he was a - he was a jewel - he was a - a gold chaser lived in - did I tell you about this, perhaps I didn't - well living in Finsbury Park and - he was a - a very skilled - chaser, gold chaser, silver chaser, had - that was - that - th
a
t was - quite a skilled trade in those days, he worked for a jewellery in London. Then there was a German - there was a German method came in and and completely wiped it out, like that, and he was - he was sacked of course. And - they got so much in debt,
 he couldn't find a job - and eventually - we managed somehow to in - to get him to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Luton{\*\xmlclose}
. His - his furniture. Otherwise you see those days it was - sold up, sold up was quite a - quite a - a - a well known term, people were sold up you see, if the rent go
t in arrears too much they were turn out of the house, the - the furniture was just put on the - in the roadway on the path, and it was sold by the landlord to any - any -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What happened to the family then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Well they had to do the best they could. Get anywhere they could.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you tell me if you ever had any help from the parish?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Yes. My mother - my - when - when my father - when my father died - she was left with four children under the age of eleven, I told you, she had Parish Relief - by the Board - Board of Guardians granted }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008  ei}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 gh}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 teen}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 pence a week and two loaves. That's right, eighteen pence a week.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 How did you feel, did she resent that at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 She gave it up after a few weeks time because she'd got to go to the Board of 
Guardians to collect it, and she resented it. So she - she used to - work in the that trade and - and sew hats you see, and keep us going that way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 She'd rather do that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh yes. But when - funnily enough, when - when - when my brother died those
 few years afterwards, about five or six years afterwards when my brother eventually died - the Board of Guardians somehow got the news of the family died from heart disease, apart from one who was - a boy of - thirteen, and - they paid my fee to - five s
h
illings each week to go to Brompton Hospital. Yes. I used to get the five shillings and the firm that I worked for allowed me to go - go to Brompton, and so I used to go to Brompton - I'd got to get to the hospital about - quarter past nine in the morning
, which meant catch - catching the train from Luton, catching a horse bus from - St Pancras to Brompton hospital which cost me four}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 pence, and I used to have to sit on the top deck, I think I got a - a little cheaper - rate, it was open you see, with just -
 leather covers to cover over the knees in case of rain - if it rained well it rained you see, and then - from Brompton hospital I used to save the four}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 pence coming back to - St Pancras, would walk - to City Road - City Road where - where I used to get a - a three course meal for five}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
pence. Now the - that was Alexandra Trust it was called, it was a - a new sort of - serve yourself - a self service restaurant, and she opened it, the - Alexandra, and - used to get this - three course meal for five}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid415648\charrsid3227008  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 pence. So I saved the four}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
pence which - with another penny got my midday meal. I went -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 It took you a whole day I expect to do that didn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 I used to get home about five o'clock, you see, we used to sit in the - in the hospital - at Brompton Hospita
l was nearly all tuberculosis, well I - did I tell you about the forms - used to - Brompton Hospital was just like a prison. Used to have a long room for out patients, {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceName}}
Brompton{\*\xmlclose} {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceType}}Hospital{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} was a TB hospital in those days, and - they simply had forms, no backs to them. And it used to be crowded - people used to get there, the 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}London{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
 people used to get there quite early. I used to - I used to get there before nine o'clock of course, that meant - it used to take about three quarters of an hour to get from - St Pa
ncras to Brompton Hospital. And then they used to sit on these forms for about two hours until me turn came for the doctor, but you could get a penny bowl of soup which was - brought in from a - in-patients hospital. And it was a - it was - it was the mos
t
 - ter - it was a terrible experience because these people - these people were coughing - in the - in the various - serious stages of tuberculosis, you can understand can't you, I remember teaming up with a little girl who was a little bit younger than my
self, she was a TB - patient, I wasn't you see, I was heart disease, and - or at least supposed to be. And - she somehow she - didn't come anymore after a time or two, I suppose she'd just died.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What treatment did they give you for your heart disease?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
What - what you call - there used to be a - a very famous heart - a heart - tablet, a Brompton heart tablet, there was also a Brompton TB tablet, Brompton lozenges were very famous in those days for TB. Don't think they did much good, but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 And they had a heart tablet too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes. Had a heart tablet.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 And you had to go all the way there just to collect the tablet?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes. And - and to be examined you see. By the heart specialist you see. But they couldn't have had - I couldn't have had m}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 o}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 rtal disease of the heart other - otherwise I shouldn't have -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Do you remember anybody in your district being got out of the district because they were so rough, by the rest of the people living in the area?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Well of course I do - I'll tell you what they used - the rough music, you know what that meant don't you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 You tell me what you remember of it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Don't think I dare. Rough music was - rough music was of course - the - the wives round the district - taking out the tin pans, the top 
- the - the - any}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008  sort of - saucepan lids and be}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 gin}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 nin}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 g them like that you see, like they do in Ireland, like the - the dustbin lids you see, for a certain - female who was - well she was - well, she was acting different to what she should have done, she w
as having - boyfriends or have another man in do you follow. Oh it was against - it was against immorality, oh - and they - that would happen somewhere towards midnight you see. And the rumour would go round and eventually they'd check up and - and then t
hey would start and they'd get together and rough music would happen. Oh yes, that -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did it stop the woman?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Well - I suppose it did but it's rather queer because it was regarded as - funny eventually, I remember that my step-father managed - he -
 he - he managed to work for - a firm whose still a - quite a huge firm now - who eventually - repaired the - Luton Hooe estate when - Sir Julius Werner took it over from the Bute people. But they - they - got a - a big job in London, my - my step-father 
w
as a plumber, decorator and so on and he - he was sent - he was - on this London job, used to come home weekends. And one particular Saturday my mother - have a bit of fun you see, she said, look - there was an alleyway coming up to our house and - he use
d
 to come up this alley from the bottom, you could see him coming up you see - from our - our window which was over the side of the street, and my mother said, now look, I want you to wave your handkerchief - when - your dad - enters the bottom of the alle
y
. So I said, yes, all right. So I didn't know what it meant you see. So eventually this Saturday - afternoon - come up in the alley and I see him come I went like this with the handkerchief I - then I got out of the way. When he got to the house the broom
 was sticking out of the bedroom window. You follow what that means don't you? With - to indi - to say to come in. Just to kid him on. So this sort of thing - those sort of things happened.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 She had a sense of humour then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 We talked about school last time, did you go to another school after the first one you went to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes. No, not - you'll find - you'll find that in the - you'll find that in the - you'll find that in the - in the book, well it's - in -

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 You were transferred to a higher grade?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 To a higher grade school. Follow? And - that schoolmaster then took over a new school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What was your higher grade school like, what sort of children were there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 It was a - a little improvement on the ordinary elementary board school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What age did you go there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Eleven. Eleven. So I had two years there you see. Well - ten and a half, had two years so I left school at twelve and a half.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What did you learn there, was it slightly more advanced?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Well - it was - it was more advanced on - on - as they used to call then grammar, you follow? Arithmetic - and - they had a woodwork course too. Which was quite good. But it was - but it was an in - it was a more adult - school, an adult -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did girls go as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Pardon? No. No. Only boys. The ordinary girls school - and that - that was that, a little attempt in Luton to - to grade the top boys somehow, from the schools into this - Water Street higher}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008  }
{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 grade school. That's cover - that covered the o
ther schools. But not the church school. You see, that - in that - history - that is the church schools and the board schools - but board schools there was that fight you see to get the board schools in existence. That's right, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Would you have liked to have stayed on longer for more education?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes, I would. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 You regret not being able to have more do you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Well of course you see there was schoolmaster, that schoolmaster - I referred to, I - I - we - I was supposed to do a - a - pr
esident of a Friends Adult School many years afterwards, several years, and he was the - he was syllabus secretary and so on and we - we got the - this schoolmaster who still existed, this schoolmaster, the higher grade school, a man named Neville, who wa
s
 also the president of the - PSA, the Pleasant Sunday Afternoon for men, which was then prominent in those days. Quite big - congregations of men Sunday afternoon used to - attend. But - we had him down this - this - schoolmaster Mr Middle, we had him dow
n
 to talk to us one - one evening, many years afterwards and - when - when I explained that I'd been one of his boys he was most interested. But - my friend John Downey's asking - had he - had he ever had a boy of extreme intelligence. He said, yes. One re
m
arkable boy, he says, as a matter of fact his intelligence was - really - en masse. He said, on equal, he says, I - I would say that it - it was - more - it was - superior to any of the schoolmasters, including myself. He could be-t us in this three - add
ing up three ways, the three - three systems you know, when up - running up the - the three - three tables together and arrive at the - the three totals at the top into one, and he could do it quicker than any of the masters.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 You started work full time at twelve and a half?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Twelve and a half.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Can you just tell me about your first job, what it was like starting full time
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 The first job I started was in the hat trade. And - 1901. That was taking orders around from the - main warehouse, wh
ich is in the main street - to the - the manufacturers the many many manufacturers around the district, do you follow?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 How did you go?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Walked. Oh yes, walked. But of course the - the - the manufacturers in those days - were - situated - they - t
hey were simply - making hats in - little houses, with tiny factories at the back, follow. Just terrace houses, they still exist in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Luton{\*\xmlclose}
. And - they had - just - they'd have the - the wife and perhaps another one or two, sewing hats, and the men would blo
ck them, what we call block them with an iron, do you follow, stiffen them and block them into the shape. And then they're taken down to the warehouses in the main street and sell the hats at so much - best - best price they could get, that was how it was
 done.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 And your job was to take the orders?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Take the - take the orders round well oftentimes of course in the busy seasons I was - I start work at half past eight in the morning, there was an hour for lunch. No tea time, or at least I don't remem
ber - there was some little - tea break or some little break in the factory, but there was no - definite teatime.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Would you go home for lunch?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes, which wasn't very far away. And then - we worked on - until - of times nine o'clock at night.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What was your wage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Six shillings a week.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Were you pleased with that at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Yes. That went on - there was a shilling rise per year if you deserved it. Well, you worked on Saturdays until - in the busy time you worked 'til six o'clock on the Saturday evening.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 You never go any more for that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Oh no. No. But then there was - but then - the dull season, there was a dull season - now making the straw hats - was - was a very big rush, for the summer season. And then there'd be
 a dull time and there wouldn't be so much work, and then it would come on again - somewhere about October. But - the dull time of course the - you'd get more time off but there was - cleaning up in the factories and the warehouses, all sorts of jobs doin
g to get the place right for the next season. Follow? So - it was a - a matter - it was a usual - usual thing was a - a sixty hour week. I only see Tolstoy this last week talking about the seven - seventy-two hour week they used to work in 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname country-region}}Russia{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}. Well sixt
y hours a week in the - in the building trade was quite usual. The - John Downey started as an apprentice - at Hayward Tylers, {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Luton{\*\xmlclose}
 and he worked sixty hours - six in the morning 'til six in the evening, Saturdays you see. And I -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What about your employer, do you remember him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Was he a good man?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Well - no, he's rather queer type, he - he started in the same way that I did as an order boy some very many many years before. But he was a very - rather queer because - he could hand
 - he could write with his left hand but not his right, he was a left handed writer, but - his - his left hand writing was - intolerable. Simply - simply - strokes. Now - there was no curves at all, he simply got his letters - by strokes somehow. But he w
as a man regarded in the town as - quite a - a - quite a clever man, it was the biggest warehouse in the town too. Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Was he good to his employees, was he good to the workers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes, reasonably - well there was - rather queer - because the - the
 insurance scheme that - the first insurance scheme came into being - somewhere about that time, nine}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 pence for four}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 pence was the one of with - the Conservatives all opposed, like they do the - the - the old age pensions as you know, perhaps you don't, th
e first old age pension scheme was brought forward by the Liberal party. And - the Conservatives - eleven voted against it and all the others abstained. First old age pension scheme, time of Lloyd George's government, Asquith, well in this }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008  nine}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
pence for four}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 pence scheme came in, what was called the nine}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 pence for four}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid415648\charrsid3227008  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
pence - and - that meant that people has got to have a card, a star card, sort of. In a similar way to what it is now. And the - the brother - the brother of the - Grafter, this warehouse 
where I worked was the sort of head accountant, or supposed to have been. But he was responsible for this card system, and he committed suicide through it. Yes, so it was rather queer, yes, he committed suicide. So it's rather strange. But - the - but thi
s
 boss himself became - he was quite a famous man. There was also famous buyers that used to come down - and were regarded as tremendously important people. At that time we were - we were - war with the Boers, and - the mothers used to frighten the childre
n
 saying that old Kruger will have you. Kruger was the Boer, the boss of the Boer - the - the - the - the Boer Republic you see, well we were fighting Krug - Kruger, and - he was a - supposed to have been a terrible man so - used to frighten us with - Krug
e
r, or frighten the small children. And - at that time of course - it was quite - quite a prominent thing that that - in the - in those early days of the hat trade there was certain fears - used to frighten us with different things in the hat factories. Th
e
re - there were certain things they used to do - they'd - set you on hot sponges in the factories, get up - they used to - you - very large sponges, quite as big as - about - as big as your machine there. Fill it full of barley water and put it on a bench
 and - and - if you - got up to anything - that was corporal punishment in a factory. And somebody get hold of you - yes, sit you on a hot sponge.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 The adults as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Well - the young boys, the boys, yes. To - to discipline us you see. So -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Was there any kind of trade unions?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Or a movement of any sort in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 There was no - no trades unions - to any extent, no.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did the workers get together at all in the hat trade?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 As a matter of fact - as a matter of fa
ct - up to the last - world war - during the - during this last world war the manufacturers, rather queer, that the manufacturers and I - of course I represented the firm where I was - I was managing, I went to a very large meeting where the manufacturers
 
wanted to get a union. There was a union in the - in the hat trade up in - in - the felt hat trade up in Stockport, man named Worthington came down to - tell us all about it, we wanted to get the - the workers to become - become trade unionists. So that w
e knew what wage we all were paying for certain types of work. But they wouldn't co-operate, weren't interested. So it's never come.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Never has been?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No. Not - not in the -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What about at home when you started full time work, did your mother treat you any differently, were you suddenly grown up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Not really, she - she - she was very fond of me 'cos I was the only one left of the first family. No, she - we were still - we were still disciplined. Even almost to the time I got married, I - I 
- I used to be - pretty careful what I said. It's rather queer. My mother was - which - would you like another cup? Pardon? Did you want one? Well the - the same with the schools. There's no doubt that -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Because you were a worker and bringing in the money, you gave the money to your mother I suppose?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 She didn't treat you any differently?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 How about your free time then, did you do anything different then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Well when I - it's rather queer that - in my particular - ci
rcumstances - the - you see, my mother then had married - and there were - my - half sisters - were coming - along, follow? And it oftentimes seems to me that - seemed to me that - my spare time was spent - in looking after them. And as soon as I got one 
of me hands another one suddenly arrived. Rather - rather strange, but - I used to - I -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you go out in the evenings at all with your friends?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 I used to to the church - to the church parish room, that was - and I had some very nice - boyfrien
ds nearby, one - one was quite - became quite a famous man. He was a cripple, and he belonged to the school then we - we collect - the school collected and brought him a donkey and cart - he was paralyzed all down one side, Bill Edward's - mum would remem
b
er, and - he started this donkey and cart - I was - a friend obviously until - 'til he died, he became Luton - the Mayor of Luton eventually, 'cos he - come around how, he became - he used to go around with the - greengrocery, greengrocery - do the greeng
r
ocery trade plus do a little removal, his mother was a widow and - and eventually she turned her little front room into a shop you see, and then - she had - two other - he had a brother and a sister, but - he - got on again - he used to sell programmes at
 
the football match, then he became - when the first cinema came in Luton, he be - sort of - attendant, putting people to their places and that sort of business. And he gradually worked up until - he became - he became the - the - the highest - he came - m
ost important removal man in Luton, became mayor of {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Luton{\*\xmlclose}, so that was rather queer.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What would you boys have done in the Evenings when you went out? Where did you go?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Well, of course, there was - rather queer, in those young days - the - there w
as what we called the monkey parade. And I suppose it's happened in lots and lots of places more or less in the towns, where the chief parade town - road - road - was where the young people used to walk up and down and team off together. The monkey parade
.
 That - that was - that was - - the Bedford Road was the monkey parade, especially on Sundays after - after chapel and church, in the best clothes, used to - pair off eventually, and - that was quite - that's quite a - that was a quite a prominent thing t
o do, the monkey - monkey par}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12780690\charrsid3227008 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 des, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 How about girl friends, what age were you when you were allowed to have girl friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Well - not very early.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did your mother mind about girl friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No, the first one - the first one I had - tur
ned me down because she - she - she got an idea I - I - I was told afterwards she'd got an idea I was going to die in a year or two's time and it would be a waste of time, that time I was due to die from my heart trouble. But of course she - she married a
 
friend of my wife's - and - and - she had seven children and she died from tuberculosis, so - so she - she - if she'd have had me instead - she was a sweet little girl too, but then that - that was when she was - that was - she was - then - that was about
 fifteen stages.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What was your mother's attitude to girl friends, did she mind you bringing them home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
She was - she was rather - my rather - my mother was rather jealous in those early stages of being friendly with - other boys when I used to g
o into their homes rather than - be at home with her. So - it might have been a - her regard - and of course up to the time she died she used to - tend to favour me a little bit with - because I was the son of her first husband you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 She was especially fond of you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Were you allowed to bring friends home, was there a tradition of bringing friends home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh yes. Oh that was universal. Yes. Yes. Going in each others house - peoples homes, oh yes. Well it - it - they was more intima
te, the houses were more or less - nearly all terraced houses, and you found that in terraced houses more, people going in and out, up the same passage, we'd go around to two or three houses at the back you follow, and you would congregate so - so much mo
re naturally together. You'd be forced more or less into - into company.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you have a bit more money to spend when you started work? Were you able to buy a bit more for yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 A little bit - little bit, it's rather queer - we had - a - this 
- this firm I worked for, there's two order - we two order boys, we used to share - the town. The main thorough fare of {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Luton{\*\xmlclose}
 was divided. He delivered the orders to one side of - that main thoroughfare, and I delivered the orders to all - all the others y
ou see in the other - other part and - and we used to meet - meet together after you finished in the afternoon and - walk back to the warehouse and so on. The immediate - our immediate superior was a - a fellow of about two years our senior. Who - was the
 eldest of a - of a family - a widowed mother - and they were in very strait circumstances but he was a - he was also - very prominent in the - main Baptist - church at that time. Quite a clever fellow too, he became quite a - quite a prominent man in 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Luton{\*\xmlclose}
 eventually, but - we used to in those days - used to - get Christmas boxes from the manufacturers. They all give - give us about sixpence or a shilling each you see, each Christmas. And we used to pool this money together, and previous to we two boys goi
n
g there this - this overseer - 'cos one of the order boys - and - and it was customary for the two order boys to give the money in to this - the - overseer and - so the three divided the money. And we carried on the good work but suddenly - we two decided
,
 well we did the work, he does - he doesn't - he doesn't do any orders at all, why should he have the money, so - we put it to him, well you don't do anything to do with this, the Christmas boxes are ours, so we are having them this Christmas. And after c
o
nsidering - in his Christian sort of way he said, well yes - yes, maybe you're right. We didn't realize that - he was relying on - this money to help through Christmas. Then - somehow he got reported to us in some way, we decided to give him a fifth and w
e're having two fifths each. And he seemed to be very thankful about that but of course we relented afterwards and we gave him a third. That's how - that's how the times were, that a few shillings meant a lot. And of course - sorry,}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12780690\charrsid3227008  well you see - the - the insta}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
lment system and the - the - the people had lots of things - on the tick as they called it then. And suits - I used to have my suits, a fifty shilling suit used to be a shilling a week you see, that used to make nearly a year to pay for that suit. Th
at used to come about Easter time. So - all those sort of things you see - you didn't have much money - to spare.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you take an interest in politics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes. At - at the age of sixteen I joined the Liberal party, mind - mind - let's be fair, I j
oined the Liberal party - because - draughts - draughts and chess, draughts chiefly, there were draught clubs. Yes. And these clubs - rather queer, the - the Liberal draught club was quite a club and I became quite clever at draughts, before - before I wa
s sixteen. Oh yes, that was another - that was another pastime. And I joined this draught club and I became one - one of the top players, I remember we went to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Bedford
{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} once and I tied - with a schoolmaster, which was quite an achievement. Then - draughts we
nt off somehow and chess - replaced it. Then of course there was snooker that - that came, snooker in the - in the - in the clubs, snooker and billiards, that became a bit - more - affluent you see and this is - with the - people - joining these - these p
olitical clubs. The clubs became quite a thing. The Lib - the Liberal and - and Conservative clubs were the two main clubs in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Luton{\*\xmlclose}
. And of course the Labour hadn't emerged you see, I can remember Kier Hardy, the first four getting into Parliament and they - they were sort of the - the under - the underdogs of the Liberal party, they were - nurtured by the Liberal party. So that -

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 You didn't work for politics at all did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh yes, I canvassed, yes, I canvassed for quite a few and I - I - I - not
 - not - not Parliamentary - meetings but I - I took the - chair at some of the - ward meetings, to do with the Liberal party, and eventually the - Conservative party. Nearly said the Labour party.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 It's a bit like you and your churches?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 That's 
right, yes, and so - that - that's rather - of course during - during this last war you could belong to all three parties, which I did. We were all fighting the same enemy anyway.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What year were you married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What year was it? 1915. Early 1915. The spring of 1915. Easter.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 How long had you known your wife when you got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 How long had I - known my wife, seven years. I had done. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 How did you meet?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 By a little trip at - to Bedford with a friend of mine, and - we were in
 a boat, this friend and my - and myself, and - my wife then - with her friend was walking down the prom and - we - we met in that way, and then came home to Luton, together, and from then on - my wife and I - came together.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 She lived in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}Luton{\*\xmlclose} did she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh yes, she - she was born -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 And you met her in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Bedford{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes, I met her in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Bedford{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
. Yes, rather queer.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 How far away did she live from you in the town?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 About - oh }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12780690\charrsid3227008 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008  three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12780690\charrsid3227008  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 quarters of a mile. Not far, no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Do you remember her moving at all, did her family moved around?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 From where she was? Oh yes, they -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Never out of the town?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh no. No. They moved into a new home - another part of the district up this way, and - so each night I used to - leave her and the
n walk home which was quite a - reasonable distance.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Do you remember the first time you met her parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes, that was in the first home she lived in - a Street called {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname 
Street}}Wenlock Street{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}. Oh yes, I met - met her - people, they were - very - very - strict Methodists, the whole of her family. And I was high church you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 You've been everything in your time haven't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 That's right, so eventually when - when we got married we - as she was in the low church district the banns were read the
re so - we were married at a low church, was the compromise between - the high church and the Methodist.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 When you say a low church district, did it go in districts?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh but the pat - no, in parishes you see. Only this particular church is high church was the - the ritualistic 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname PlaceType}}church{\*\xmlclose} of Luton.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 That was when you went to it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes, that's right. She went to Methodist - Methodist.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What did they think about you then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh they accepted me. Yes, yes. But though - as - as a matter of fa
ct - as a matter of fact now this - did I tell you - show you this? No? That was my - mother-in-law's wedding ring, that must be nearly a hundred years old. And when she died - I put it on my finger and they said, oh you'd better have the ring, I said, an
yway I'm the only male that could - wear it, I've never met a male since that could wear it on the proper finger.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 It's quite small isn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes. It's rather queer. Although - very charming, she was a sweet woman. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Do you remember the first time you went to their house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Can you describe it to me?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Oh yes - one - one Sunday afternoon - I went - I went to - a - I went to her home, rather queer, because her - her cousin - was on a visit from {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Yarmouth{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
. Very - large - nice looking girl but rather strong, she was an athlete again. And - during the afternoon - in playing around - all of us in the - in the di}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12780690\charrsid3227008 n}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 ing - in the lounge or the front room as they used to call them - she hit me across the head - ear quite - playfully, and burst the drum. She didn't know anything about it and never did, but it meant me - ha}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12780690\charrsid3227008 v}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 ing doctor's treatment in the town here, and the treatment was wrong, and eventually I had to go to {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname address}}
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname Street}}Golden Square{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose} hospital in {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}London{\*\xmlclose} - and they said - well of course it was damaged by the Luton - the {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}
}Luton{\*\xmlclose} doctor. The - the - the treatment was too fierce, you see, otherwise it would have healed up quite naturally. So I remember that particular day.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Do you remember being shy when you met them, or had you known them at all before?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Only a little. The sister and the brother, she had a sister and a brother, so I knew those - those two slightly but - hadn't met the parents.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Do you remember being shy about it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 I don't think so particularly, I had 
moved around quite a bit with - activities in the church so I - I wasn't a shy individual. So I got on along very nicely with her people.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did they ask you questions?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh yes -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did they want to know about you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh yes, they wanted to kno
w about my family, discreet questions, and my mother too, my mother wanted to know - because I - I took my - I took my }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12780690\charrsid3227008 fianc\'e9}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
 home, and - she was accepted there and - we got on very well with regard to family contacts, very nicely.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 How soon did you decide to get married after you'd met her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Took seven years.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Seven years before you got engaged you mean, did you get engaged as such?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes. Still got the engagement ring, it's rather - excuse me, it's rather queer - this might interest you q
uite slightly. Took it off - to the day she got married.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Eighteen months before you got engaged?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes. Now - see I can - I can - wear that too, that's rather queer.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you buy that for her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 'Course - yes, they're very - they're very modest, in the region of about twenty-five shillings was as much as one could afford. Yes.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Were you just going out together for seven years?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Without going out with any other boy or girl?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh no. On we - absolutely - it was recognized in those days more or less - too keep to the - the - the party one, follow.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Had you had any girl friends before that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh yes. They all turned me down really. But of course - rather queer. No, I - apart from one. I wasn't too - I wasn't too m
uch in love with her and - and her friend who became quite a big boot - merchant in the town - long since dead, but his wife - is still alive, and - we - in those days there used to be dances all organized - many dances. This - young fellow, this - friend
 of mine - seemed to take to this - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12780690\charrsid3227008 fianc\'e9}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
 of mine and - so I - sort of - got them together and they eventually married. So I got hold of - I got off that responsibility.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 You weren't too keen anyway?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 That's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 How about your wife had she had other boyfriends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh yes, she had - she had about two boyfriends before.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 How old were you when you first met?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Eighteen. Eighteen - nine - eighteen or nine - no, about - I was married in 1912 - I was married after - when I was twenty-s
ix, yes, about eighteen, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Why did you wait so long before getting married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Saving up for marriage. You see, it was customary then you see these days the - the parent - the parents of the girl - have to foot the bill for the marriage. Living 
up with the Jones's. There's the - church invariably, the church vows and then there's the choir, the reception afterwards. There the conveyances backwards and forwards which means - and the - of course the drink bill and the reception plus all the rest o
f it, means - an outlay of - two or three hundred pounds or more.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you have all that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
But, you see, in those days that did not happen. You see - parents are responsible more or less today, but then, no, you see - in those early days, I'm talk
ing about pre-1914 especially - family life was - well, the - the children - were responsible - for - their parents as they got old. You see, even if they went - even if they went to the - what was called the work house or the union, the children had to -
 
contribute a certain amount of money towards their upkeep. But most times the - the children - accepted the responsibility of looking after parents in the old age. Parents weren't able to - to save enough to look after themselves in old age. So it was the
 children - invariably, who - who had that responsibility, it's completely changed now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 When you say you saved up to get married, what were you saving for, were you saving for the wedding or for setting up a home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Wedding, no, a wedding was nothi
ng. No, we - we - we were - we were married I - I had - we certainly - there were one or two taxis in Luton, only one or two, and I engaged one taxi to take our small party to the church - and then after the reception, which was just a little tea -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 How many came to the wedding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh about - eight or nine, not more, that was customary.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Were they relations?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes, relations, the next door neighbour, we were very - neighbours and we were very very friendly with. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 They were her relations, your relations?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 A}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12780690\charrsid3227008 nd - oh yes, in my - my - above}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008  - yes - there might have been a - there might have been - twelve, I doubt it though. But there were - so I had my - my mother and father, my step-father didn't go but we - we celebrated in other ways you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 They didn't come to your wedding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
NO, just - they came to the wedding but they - then they went home you see, we just had a small - I believe my - I believe my - sisters came, yes, they did that's right, my sisters came. Then after
 - after the tea party - my wife and I had arranged with a - arranged to go to - West - Westcliffe, that's near Southend, for just the - Easter - holiday, 'cos holidays weren't paid - you see, those holidays in those days there was just Whitsun holiday, t
wo - two days for - one day for Easter, people worked on Good Friday, so they -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 So you got married on Easter Saturday did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Easter Saturday, that's right. And we had the - there was still hansom cabs, with a horse, hansom cab to take us from 
- my wife's - home to the railway station, see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 And then you caught a train to Westcliffe?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 That's right, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 And your mother and father didn't come to the reception?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 They went to the - they went to the wedding but they didn't come to the reception, my two sisters came, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Why was that, did they not want to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Oh - no, just the matter of - perhaps - I don't know, things happen - more or less like that, my mother had lots of look - to look after at home I suppose. So - but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What was her father's job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Beg your pardon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What was your wife's father's job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 He was a blocker - a straw hat blocker in the hat trade. As my father had been - in fact.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Was her home much the same sort of home as yours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Just about he same. Although they had moved into a new - their - their home was a - a newly built home, only a year or two, they went into the new home, follow. But you see homes in those days - hadn't altered much with regard to rent. People didn't b
uy their own homes, they couldn't, not in those days, not the ordinary sort of working class people. And of course there were no council houses, as perhaps you are aware of, no council houses. And the - the houses were put up by in - for investment, small
 
or larger - landlords who - just - gathered the rent you see, and - there were always seemed - for instance, getting a house was no trouble. I didn't worry about a house, getting a house. I - I - I had almost a new house, a friend of mine had been married
 
about a year before and he was - he was - he - he got a job at - at the Grey and White works which was at - one of the early aeroplane works at Hendon, long before Hendon became any air - airplane district, there was just this one Grey and White Works, Gr
e
y and White was a big - airman in the first world war, follow. Well I remember all the history of those airplane exploits, and he - he got a job, Hendon at that time was just a countryside you see, and he got a new home at - Hounslow which was very near. 
So we used to go up and see him occasionally, but we moved into his house. Just as -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Housing wasn't short then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Pardon? Oh no, no trouble at all. And the queer part about it - when you - when you - you realize about inflation now - you see, the 
rents of terraced houses and of course terraced houses were - the main housing - conditions - of sixty or seventy years ago, going back. They - your houses put up, two bedrooms, three bedrooms, and the rents would be in the region of five shillings to six
 and six, seven shillings according to the amount of bedrooms. Well now five shillings was - the - the rent my mother was paying before the end of the last century, five shillings. For two bed}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid12780690\charrsid3227008 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 roomed house, a nice home, but a terrace home, nice garden at th
e back, but you see now - I got married in 1915, and I - got a - a better, newer home - only two bedrooms - but with a nice garden at the back and a front - little front garden, plus by win - a win - bay window which gave it a little bit of superiority, a
n
d that was seven shillings. Now that was some - that was somewhere about twenty years afterwards at least you see. So rents did not alter very much, and that - that rent went on until they became controlled, and when I moved out I was paying about eleven 
or twelve shillings - in 1938. You follow?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 How about furnishing your home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Well you had - that - that was the point, in courtship - in courtship I think you - if you - if you - make enquiries you'll find that - courtship meant this. With the sinc
ere - courting couples - the man or the - the male - managed to get as much money to furnish the house and the girl - the bottom drawer provided the house linen. See? The bottom drawer.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Your wife had a bottom drawer did she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes. That meant all 
the - the - the bottom drawer meant that she got all the linen and the pillow cases, the sheets, the table cloths and what have you, all those sort of things, she was more or less responsible for. There might have been a few presents, always were, but not
 
often - not of a - of an elaborate type you see, like you - these - these days you see there's - there's a long list of presents you see, a long list isn't there. And you choose them look down you see, well that's - that's procedure these days so everythi
ng's done to help the courting couple.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 You did it all yourself in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Absolutely.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you have many presents at your wedding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No. No, I don't suppose I had more than half a dozen altogether.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 You didn't have them set out for people to see?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
No, simply gave - my mother gave me a fender you see in those days the houses you - you take - the - 'course there were no bathrooms of course - a top bathroom was not back - it was unknown, it was - it was not a prac - a practical 
proposition in the first place. Up until - up to the - first world war nearly all the houses had still got - the fire, with the oven one side, and the boiler - the other.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What was the fender for then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 The fender was just - it was a wide - it's a
 - it was a wide - a - hearth, with a fender - to dry things on, or - or a fender - a steel fender which you cleaned with brick dust, brick dust which you cleaned knives too with.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 This is what your mother gave you for your wedding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 This was - th
e fender you see. And then of course the - the grates were - were shone with - with this - sort of oven - black - polish, and they used to look very beautiful. The little brass tap for the - for the water, then you see - in those days - yes, there - there
 was a boiler one side.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 And you could take hot water from it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes, that was what it was for.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12780690\charrsid3227008  You cooked one side in the ove}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 n, and you usually kept filling up with water so you had hot water. You see there was no - no - there was no gas stoves. An
d of course electricity hadn't - wasn't known hardly. Follow? As a matter of fact I - I moved into this flat twenty years ago and my house that I came from which was quite a decent place hadn't got electricity. I'd still got gas inca - incandescent gas li
g
hting. Well you see, in those days - the bath - had to be - the water had to be boiled either from the fire or the more - new fangled idea of boiling water on a gas stove, and then a portable bath - conveniently somewhere near where the wa - hot water cou
ld be supplied into, then af - after finishing would be cleaned out and put on one - upside you see, in a convenient place and that was that. But up - upstairs, well of course it would be hopeless. In places -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 So a fender was really a quite important thing for you to have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 That's right, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Do you remember any other presents you had?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes, there - rather - yes, it's rather, I - I - it's rather queer, excuse me - quite a - modest you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 But you got some ornamental as well as useful.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 When you were courting did you go and see her parents quite a lot, were you in and out of their house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh yes. Oh yes, always. As a matter of fact, it's rather queer that - I used to oftentimes go to chapel with them of a Sund
ay evening. Instead of going to my church which I went to in the morning, I used to go to their chapel in the evening.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Were you treated as one of the family always?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes, absolutely.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Not as a guest?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 One of the family. My - my mother and father too, my step-father, my wife was always - part of the family. I think that was general.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did your two sets of parents get together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Hardly ever. Hardly ever. No, they - that wasn't - you see they were too busy in those days. You see, a m
an worked sixty hours a week invariably - and - the mother - you see, my mother - had eight children, and - so - I know that they - the four - four - four died but - there were lots of responsibilities.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 When you were courting was there much in the way of chaperoning, did they allow you to be together by yourselves?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
It's rather queer, now - oh yes, yes, they allowed us but you see - my - my wife's father was a very strict man with regard to getting in at night time. Even - on the point of getting 
married, we daren't stop out after ten. And we kept religiously to it. You see, I always used to say, now come on, we must run. So - we - I always kept round the right side of the dear old boy.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 But you were allowed out together by yourselves?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh yes, oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 And left in a room by yourselves?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Although they - they - they liked - they liked Sunday to be observed, for instance - I - we buy - we buy - we bought cycles, I used to - we used to cycle tremendously, we used to - we used to cycl
e to Toaster you see. Many times. And - they - they knew of my cousin there, at Brisenorton - but - we hardly dared cycle on a Sunday. Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 That would have offended her father would it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 That's right, yes. Sunday was observed very much more - w
ell it was. I mean Sunday school then - hardly any - child - it was very rare for a child not to - to go to some Sunday school of some sort or another.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you get on well with your parents-in-law after you were married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you go on seeing them quite a bit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 We - we used to see them - very very frequently, we used to go to her mother's and - to my mother, yes. Right up to the time they died.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 When her parents were getting old did you help in the house and things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 I
n a financial side - of - we helped - yes. Well it's rather queer that - my wife's mother died and then - her father - moved - in with her sister. And the sister's husband, into their home. And my - my youngster - my boy up there, he'd come along and he w
a
s then about two, and I used to - help the old boy - a little bit with regard to - the shillings and so on, and I used to give him a half a crown a week - for his tobacco. His - for his tobacco. And it wasn't until after he died that I found he kept all t
hose half shillings in a - in a tin box and - left 'em to my boy - my boy. Rather queer isn't it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 He must have been a nice man, I don't suppose you ever went drinking did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang1034\langfe1033\langnp1034\insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang1034\langfe1033\langnp1034\insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang1034\langfe1033\langnp1034\insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What did you call them before you were married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What do you mean, with regard to the names?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you call them Mr and Mrs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Well - I used to call - I used to call my wife's - mother, mum, yes I - yes I used to call her mum - before we were married. But - I avoided calling her father dad. So we managed to get along - without names, in some way. His -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Even after you were married you didn't call him dad?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No, I never remember calling him dad, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 You didn't call him his Christian name or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 I - I forget now what his Christian name was, oh, Ben, that's right, Ben, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 But you didn't call him that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
No. No. But I think the family - I think the courting - days and so on - were more - somehow - personal with regard to family ties. Granted the families we
re larger. The money was - more scarce, the way of enjoying - there was not the television, radio and so on so - you - you got together more and enjoyed yourselves more, in the majority of cases, it didn't happen always. But it did used to - to happen - w
ith the churches and chapels too, nearly everyone went to some sort of - church or chapel, mixing in the social groups so all that - all that helped with regard to family ties didn't it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Can you remember the first time you took your wife home to meet your parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Yes - 'course it was my step-father, it wasn't my own father. And - yes, he - he was - he was very very - so was my mother, but he was extraordinary friendly, it's rather queer - mind you - I was the only one - I was the only one left of
 the previous family, so it was rather unusual for a step-father, to treat a step-child as his own child which he did right up to - the time he died. But - oh yes, they took to my wife - they took to my - yes. And I - I - I should think that would be gene
ral, you can't -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
I remember you saying that your mother was quite a dominant person and she had a very strong influence on you, she didn't mind about you having a girl friend or getting engaged or anything?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No, she didn't, it's rather queer, and
 I was the eldest one, but mind you I kept - I'd kept - at home until - my two younger sisters had become established in the hat trade. And by the time I got married they were earning reasonable money. So much so that a piano had got into the house and th
ey were learning to play the piano.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 So your mother didn't need your money so much?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
So that she didn't need it so much, not towards the last two or three years, so - but up until that time - one would consider - you see, in those days - those days
, at least two thirds of one's salary went - to help for the board and lodging. You see, I remember - I remember when I was earning - when I was sixteen I was earning - sixteen shillings a week. Well I was paying twelve shillings for board. Didn't allow y
ou much did it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Do you remember when you were cour}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12780690\charrsid3227008 t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 ing if you were warned off certain things or they tried to discourage you from getting married at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No, not the slightest. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Your parents didn't know each other before you started courting?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Can you describe how often you would have seen your wife when you were courting?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Almost every night. Yes. Almost every night.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 For seven years?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What sort of things did you do together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Well there - t
here were walks. See in those days there wasn't much other to do bar cycle and walk. Those were all out - they were round the - the parks at Luton here, the new parts which were very popular, the Luton Hooe, the - the very large Luton park which perhaps y
o
u noticed at all have you. Well there's the history of that you see, that - that park was a - owned by - the - the people do with the London Brick Company eventually. And - it was put up for sale and - the Corporation was offered it for - sixteen thousand
 
odd but they turned it down, too expensive and two of the councils built - bought it between them, half each, and then eventually coaxed the council to take it over and they sold it to the council at what they gave for it. Sixteen thousand odd, well - wel
l the - the main house - the museum is in the - in the house you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 You say you went for cycle rides, quite long cycle rides? Did you ever go on holiday together during your courtship?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Only - yes, we used to come - to Brisenorton.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 To stay with relations?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Oftentimes to my cousin at Brisenorton and we - then we - of course we - we made friends with - their - there were the - I don't - I don't know whether the Gui}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12780690\charrsid3227008 n}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 ness family still exists round there but the Gui}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12780690\charrsid3227008 n}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 ness family was a famous
 family - of some stability in the neighbourhood, there was the - Hartingdon, there was the - the Crafton people - who my - cousin's husband used to - decorate and so on. He was also to do with the - the local water works, a queer - concern, so - the - we
 used to -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 You used to go and stay with them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
We used to - go there and stay with my cousin, we - sometimes - later on - the weeks holiday which began to happen. Follow? But we - we had - we used to go to Margate - with - my - my - sist - my wife's sister, used to go to a boarding house.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 The three of you together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 That's right. Pardon? That's right, yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Would you have been allowed to go, just the two of you do you think before you were married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No, that wouldn't have been customary. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Do you remember the moment when you decided to get married, did you actually propose?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Well it took us some time to - well we agreed between ourselves that we - we were - already - we already start - even before we're engaged - 
we'd started to save, follow. And in order to get enough furniture to do - furnish the bedrooms, the kitchen and - the - you see the front room, the lounge as we would call it now - often times - young couples - you see, this - even living up with the Jon
e
s's happened, but when couples got married - those that saved, they - they furnished the front room which was an achievement. Lots - lots of 'em couldn't do that so that room was - sort of - the blinds always closed and son on, 'til such time they could -
 get a piece of line down and a few chairs and gradually build it up, but keep it dark more or less obscured until that time. But it took, me that time to - to get enough money to furnish the house, I've still got some of the furniture now.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 So you don't actually remember saying, will you marry me, down on one knee or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No, I - it was - sort of - we'd already got together, we knew we would get married - I suppose.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you have to go and ask permission from your wife's parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 I
 remember telling - I remember - telling the sister - Alice a very sweet sister, she died from - she died from diabetic trouble, dropped dead, but she was a very sweet girl, older, and she was the responsible one of the family, the mother - she took over 
t
he responsibilities of the mother. So she was the one I - I told and she said, well - now when you get married I'll take charge of the furniture and I'll see everything's fitted up by the time you get back, which she did. And in two or three days and some
h
ow or another she arranged all the furniture which had come down - you see, and - and of course you see in those days - you didn't buy - you - you paid cash. It was rather - one was ashamed of having things on what they called the tick, you follow. They d
idn't buy on - so much a week. So everything was paid for - by - most of the companies - paid cash. It was a job to get anything other.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 So you didn't actually have to ask father's permission?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What about your own parents, did you tell them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Well my mother wanted me - my mother was - always more or less urging me - why don't you get married - Gray, my name was Graham so it was Gray you see. Why don't you get married. Be nice for you to get married, there's some nice homes up so and so
 and so and so. So really I - it was - I - she didn't want to get rid of me - 'cos I was the only one left of her - of her - previous husband who she was very fond of.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 How about the arrangements for the wedding, did you go to see the vicar or did your wife?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
We - we arranged between ourselves - that the - the wedding was to take place at St - St Matthews Church at which they weren't members. But I was - not in that parish so it was convenient anyway for them to have the bans read there, and - I ar
ranged all the other - all the other part. They arranged the little tea party which didn't cost much anyway. And that was customary you see, there - there weren't these big receptions, couldn't afford it. NO.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you arrange it on Easter Saturday for any particular reason?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
For Easter? Because - I'd have the two days off - I'd have the - the holiday time off, follow. It would be either Christmas, Easter - August Bank Holiday wasn't known in those days. Only the Bank Holiday Monday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 If you'd taken a holiday yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Too cost - cost too much. And oftentimes the firm wouldn't tolerate that. Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you have any argument about what sort of a wedding you should have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No. No, it was quite amicable, it was simple. She had her simple - dress, there was -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did she have a white dress?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 There was my wife's sister, there were my - my - wife's brother's wife, and my -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Were they bridesmaids?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Pardon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you have bridesmaids?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Just the two bridesmaids. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 And your wife wore a white dress did she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
No. No. It was a cream embroidered - dress - it was cream, would you - you wouldn't term that white would you? Cream, then she changed into a costume when we - when the - by the time the hansom called for us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What did you wear, do you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 The lounge sort. Moss Brothers - hadn't existed at that time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you have a buttonhole?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh yes, always buttonholes. You - you said the buttonhole? Well of course buttonholes were customary a
lways. You see, the - little - buttonhole in the coat which still exists doesn't it, only it's stitched up these days, you can't used it, but it's still there, which is silly. But - almost everyone wore buttonholes - Sundays and so on. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did your wife carry flowers, do you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
I don't know. No. No. No. Although the - the sprays did used to happen. But it's rather queer, now - we got a strict Baptist lady upstairs, no flowers allowed in the strict Baptist chapels at all, as perhaps you
 know. No flowers allowed at the - no wreaths at the funerals. Well now the Methodists they - they varied a bit. Flowers weren't very customary even at the Annivers}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12780690\charrsid3227008 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 ries. No. It's rather - it was rather strange.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 It was quite a small wedding, did you invite people by word of mouth or did you send cards out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh only word of mouth.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did anyone come from a long way away to come to the wedding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 They were all local were they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No. No. It was just a little family wedding, which -
 that was the customary business. Cards - in those days - weren't used by ordinary sort of working class people, and we - and we were working class.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you do anything the last week before you were married, a stag party or anything with your friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Oh yes. Yes, I had a stag - I - yes, I had a little stag party. They were yes, they were - they were in existence then. But that was a church party. Yes, that was a church party.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Just men?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh yes. But of course it was a nigger troupe you 
see, I remember them - the nigger troupe people, and it was - they were all - all people from the nigger troupe you see, but - oh yes, that - there were - there were little - there were little occasions - just before the wedding when - the fellows - mates
 as they used to call them, chums and so on, got together. Oh yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What about your last day at work before you were married, were you teased do you remember at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes, there was - there was - yes, there was - rather you see - I worked - I work
ed in a warehouse making the straw helmets and so on for police, and - there were - there was a - quite a - yes, quite a lot of fun, more so I think than you get - you would get today. Those occasions were occasions for fun, helping to make the }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12780690\charrsid3227008 social}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008  - happenings you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you see your wife on her wedding day before the wedding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes, because we went together. Yes. We went together. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Was that unusual?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 I'm sorry. No. We went - I - no - the best man and myself went to the church f
irst, that's right, yes. And they followed almost immediately afterwards, that's right, yes. But we walked. We walked. Yes, that's quite true, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 She came in a car?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 She came after, yes, in the - in the car.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Who gave y}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12780690\charrsid3227008 ou}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
 away?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Her - her brother. Her brother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Not her father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Was there any reason for that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Well the - he was a shy man, the brother would be more - he was a - a Vauxhall man, Vauxhall then wasn't the Vauxhall now, it was simply an engineering works
 you see, but he would be more - more capable of - because my - my - my father-in-law - couldn't read or write. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 So he'd be shy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 You had a best man, who was your best man?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 My best - my best man - was - the - my best man was t
he brother who became - brother of the man who became Mayor of Luton, it's quite the history of this Mayor because he was a cripple - and at the school - collected together and got him a donkey and cart to sell vegetables, and - eventually he became - got
 up and up and he became Mayor of Luton - and he died quite a wealthy man, but - his brother - was my age and - we teamed up, mind you he was - he was then courting the girl next door to my wife. That's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Were the bride and groom's guests separated in the church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh yes. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Do you know why that happens?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
I don't know the origin that - the white - the white - the white of course - was to do with - a French - the French - one of the French Emperor's wives what it - the French -
 came - that originated from France. Studying up fashions and all that one gets to know all those sort of things you see. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 But why they separated the bride's and the groom's guests you don't know?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No, it's always the groom's one side and th
e - and the - the bride's the other isn't it. Right - left and the right, yes. Oh I remember - I remember being on the right. As a matter of fact it's rather queer because - if such a large church and such a small gathering - that I - I suppose in some jo
cular way I showed them into the seats. While - while the - while the bride was waiting to come along, it was only about half a dozen or so, not many.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 So you were your own usher? Did you have photographs taken?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did anybody give your wife a present when she came out of the church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you have confetti?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Or rice or anything thrown at you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No, confetti - was used later on but it wasn't those - activities weren't - they weren't active in those - early days.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What about decorating the - did a car meet you, a taxi met you out of the church did it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 The car - the car took the - took them - took - took us back to - there was about - two or three journ}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid12780690\charrsid3227008 ey}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 s, and that - the taxi took us back to the - the bride's home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Was it decorated?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 I don't think so, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 It didn't have ribbons on or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 That could have - that could have happened at different times.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 But not with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 But see there weren't many conveyances in those days. In 1915 there weren't many cars available, if you follow, very very very few.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you have a wedding cake do you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Yes, there was a wedding cake, yes, there was a wedding cake which I think was made by my sister-in-law, the charming - 
{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Alice{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}, yes, there was a wedding cake, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you have speeches?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Yes. And I - the little ceremony went on until - about seven o'clock in the evening - when it started to rain torrents - torrents of rain, by the time we got to Westcliffe -
 and - it rained - when we went - we had a horse conveyance from the station to - our - board residence, yes, that's quite true, yes, I - a horse - conveyance but it was raining - torrents. Didn't mind that you know. There was con - I'm sorry, there was c
o
nfetti. I'll tell you why I - I - why I remember, because the - very small boarding house, very nice little - widow keeping this boarding house and we were the two only people because - they were only used in the middle of the summer - invariably. And - s
h
e'd very very - she'd very very - carefully managed to get - some pieces of confetti, and she put 'em onto the - sort of dressing table of us to see. Knowing that we - knew - well we were - newly married. Oh yes, I remember that so that - yes, we had conf
etti. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 When you had your little tea party did you have any dancing or singing?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No. No there wasn't enough room.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Who made speeches, did you make a speech?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No. No, it was a just a little happy gathering. And the same thing happened, now when my son was married, and he - he's in the Air}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12780690\charrsid3227008  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
force there - he was married in 19 - 4 - 46, there was just - there was a - a bigger wedding, I do agree there was bridesmaids and so on but it was still - it was still a little lounge reception. Still
 mind you we were still on rations, you see, so that would account for that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Do you remember anybody playing a practical joke on you when you were on your honeymoon, went away on your honeymoon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh yes, there was - there was - different little l
arks - when we found - yes, there was - the one - the one or two jokes with regard to our bag. Which - there - there was a label stuck on the other side which we hadn't noticed saying just married or something like that. But that was about the only - the 
only one.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Do you remember carrying your wife over the threshold of your home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Do you remember going to other weddings when you were young that were any different from yours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 No, all - all of a similar nature, I - I - I must hav
e gone to - oh quite a few, at that time. I'm now talking about 19 - 13, 14, 15. And of course in those from 1915 on they were soldiers weddings. And they were even more modest than ours had been, mind you ours was a - a - a real wedding. I've already bee
n - I - rejected for - {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname place}}{\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname City}}Kitchener{\*\xmlclose}{\*\xmlclose}
's army you see. So there would be an occasion, food was still get - it was getting rather - scarce, one had to be careful. So that would possibly account for the modest - wedding I suppose.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Do you remember when your son
 came along if you then started calling your in-laws anything different, did you then start to call them granny and grandad or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 It's rather queer, now he called - he called his grandparents as they were, it's rather queer because n
ow when - when - when my two grandchildren came along - I - they - they had in - strict instructions not to call me granddad but to call me Gray. Very much - my - my wife and my son and his wife were very much opposed to this, but right the way through wh
en they write they say dear - dear nanna, that's grand - grandma and Gray. See?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 What did your son call your wife's parents, do you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Oh grandad and grandma. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1203760 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 Did you call them that as well afterwards or did you go on calling her mum?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9069422 GL  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8460570\charrsid3227008 
Yes, mum - yes, yes. I didn't call the - the old gent anything but - but I've a feeling that my - I - I - I have a feeling that my son called his - grandfather gran. I feel sure.
\par }}