{\rtf1\adeflang1025\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\adeff0\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang2057\deflangfe2057{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}{\f38\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f39\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f41\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f42\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f43\fbidi \froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}
{\f44\fbidi \froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f45\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f46\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f48\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}
{\f49\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f51\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f52\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f53\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f54\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}
{\f55\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f56\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden 
Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs20 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{
\s15\qj \li0\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext15 Body Text;}}
{\*\latentstyles\lsdstimax156\lsdlockeddef0}{\*\revtbl {Unknown;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid675430\rsid868964\rsid1586059\rsid1707796\rsid5178298\rsid7365922\rsid8995913\rsid9393546\rsid11339072\rsid13788730\rsid15816437}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 11.0.0000;}{\info
{\title <pagez1>}{\author SEENU}{\operator lhorto}{\creatim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min9}{\revtim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min9}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords50306}{\nofchars286745}{\nofcharsws336379}{\vern24613}{\*\password 00000000}}
{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 http://schemas.microsoft.com/office/word/2003/wordml}}\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1800\margr1800\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0\ltrsect 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\donotembedsysfont1\donotembedlingdata0\grfdocevents0\validatexml1\showplaceholdtext0\ignoremixedcontent0\saveinvalidxml0\showxmlerrors1\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace180
\dgvspace180\dghorigin1800\dgvorigin1440\dghshow1\dgvshow1\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\splytwnine\ftnlytwnine\htmautsp\nolnhtadjtbl\useltbaln\alntblind\lytcalctblwd\lyttblrtgr\lnbrkrule\nojkernpunct\rsidroot13788730 \fet0
{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}\ilfomacatclnup0\ltrpar \sectd \ltrsect\linex0\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ltrpar
\ql \fi-461\li461\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid5178298 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\ul\insrsid5178298\charrsid16072257 Information about interviewee}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid5178298 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid5178298\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\ql \fi-461\li461\ri0\widctlpar\tx2057\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid5178298 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5178298\charrsid16072257 Date of birth}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid5178298    \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5178298\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5178298  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9393546 1901}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid5178298\charrsid16072257 
\par Gender}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5178298           \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5178298\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5178298  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9393546 F}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5178298 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5178298\charrsid16072257 Marital status}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5178298 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5178298\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5178298  
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5178298\charrsid16544153 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5178298\charrsid16072257 Occupation}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5178298 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5178298\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5178298  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9393546 Housework}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5178298\charrsid16072257 
\par Geographic region}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5178298 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5178298\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5178298  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9393546 
Galleywood, Essex}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5178298\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\qj \fi-461\li461\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid5178298 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you have any brothers and sisters?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes, there was eight in the family really. Yes. An
d - my - one brother died. And the first recollect - remember - I remember my mother's funeral. And I wonder if you remember - well you wouldn't of course - the horses wore plumes. And - they were covered with a - black velvet clothes. And of course there
 
was no motor cars. Therefore the - it was very slow. And - I remember I was - oh I should think, I was four year old, and I had a white frock on and I remember a black sash, and a white bonnet with black and white streamers. And then - well it - of course
 
we all split up then when mother - yes, all - some went to aunts, some went to friends and - I went to an aunt, and - she lived with my grandmother, that would be her mother of course and - we lived in a flat in London, which is Peabody Buildings, I don't
 
know - you've heard of that haven't you. Yes, probably Buildings. I don't know whether it's still there now, but - you - it was four stories up and all the - stairs were - stone. And - on the top was flat, the roof was flat. And also there was - rooms - o
f
 this size. There'd be about six up there. For each landing I suppose, and a - gran always - gran used to do her washing off there, there were wash houses and - wooden rolling - wringers and suchlike and us children used to play up there, of course, and -
 
there was walls dividing each - block of flats and there was a - a gap in between that us children used to go from one flat to the other, playing - down one flight of stairs. And of course our favourite game was sliding downstairs, being - stone they got 
-
 smooth. And - then on bonfire night we used to go up there and watch the fireworks from Crystal Palace, we could see that. We'd stand on chairs. Oh wonderful. There was - Prince of Wales feathers I can remember and - there was a huge boat, I think that w
a
s Nelson's - Victory, and the King and Queen, portrait of the King and Queen. What else do I remember? Emblems. The different emblems from the Empires. And then at school we used to do a bit - which they don't do now. It was Empire Day. They don't celebra
t
e Empire Day like we used to do. Each class had had - would represent a colony belonging to the British Empire. I remember ours was Australia. And as far as possible each child was - had a - something to represent the dress of that colony. And then - on -
 
say about twelve o'clock, midday we'd go out into the playground and the Union Jack would be - hoisted, and the girls would curtsey, and the boys would salute the flag. And then we'd all - get into our classes again, and each class would sing the anthem t
o that - or what do you call another name for an anthem?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You mean the song of the country?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
That's right. For each part of that colony. Like Wales they'd sing - what is that one now? Land of my father's, that's right, and - Scotland'd be - not Bon
ny Charlie, not that one - oh dear - I can't remember now - no, no, no that's not the one - oh I've got it on my own one had but anyway - that's - that was done and then we used to have half day. Holiday. That's what we used to look forward to. And - afte
r that I went to - Blackfriars, in London.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 The first Peabody Buildings was in Canning Town did you say?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, that was at - Blackfriars. That's right, yes. Peabody Buildings - was - was where I lived with grandma, and then my father, he lived in P
onsonby Buildings which is the next block - in the next street. Ponsonby Buildings. And we lived right up at the top. The last but one - flat. And from our window - we could see the railway this side, and then - all along here would be the arches where th
e
 - railway horses and railway vans used to be stored. And then - my sister was a cripple, the one next to me, and I used to have to take her to this corner of the street and the - the carriage used to come and taker her - a horse and carriage used to come
 and pick the crippled children up to take them to a special school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That was quite advanced for that time wasn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. Yes. And I was allowed special - permission to be late from school when it was my turn to go and take her to - to this corn
er of the street. So of course I didn't mind that. But we always used to have - my aunt that I lived with from - when I left grandma - always sent me to a - church school, you see, and nowadays, I don't whether they do now but we always had arithmetic - s
c
ripture lessons to start with. Started with a hymn. And - I don't know whether they do now but that's always - always a - always our - being a church school naturally we would. Saints days we'd have a half day - to go to church. And go from the school, yo
u had to congregate at the school to start with and then we marched from school to the church, which - which was nearest to that school you see. And then -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Would you have a sort of service there then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes, a little service at the church. Last abo
ut half an hour I should imagine. And then we had the day off. And that's - that's where we used to get the holidays that they get today in a different way. And - I can remember seeing a balloon on top of this flat - while we were playing one day there wa
s a balloon went over, and it wasn't until - what they call the - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 zeppelins}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 , that style of thing, but round. With a basket underneath. Yes. That's right. And we could see the people in them. We used to wave to the people, we used to think - wonder if they'l
l ever come back down. You know, we used to think - as children we used to think they'd never come down again and we used to watch them 'til they were right out of sight.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was it just a sort of pleasure outing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's all, yes. Often there'd be o
bservatory - weather balloons go over but they more or less it was - you could see the people in the baskets. And what amused us too - the different clothes they used to wear. I can remember my grandmother wearing a bonnet, and a - a shawl with sequins al
l at the - edging, and - long dresses of course naturally.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What colour did your grandmother wear?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Mostly black. Mostly black. With lace all round the edge of - cape. And of course child like I used to put this bonnet on. Yes. And - mostly in the
 evenings we used to sit by the fire and grandma'd let me - comb her hair, she had lovely long hair, and I'd roll it up all in little curls, Merry Widow curls, if you got tired and worried she'd say, come on, she said, comb my hair for me, and she'd sit o
n her little chair and there I'd be doing this - doing her hair and - thinking I was great you know. And - of course auntie used to go out to work. She used to work at - the White Hart in London - that was a - hotel. She was a cook. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was that all day or evenings as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 All day. She'd be home about six o'clock.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 She didn't do any evening work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh no. No. No. And I can remember - coming from school, if I was late, I was very bad at arithmetic at school, real duffer. If we had four s
ums I'd get one wrong - one right at the most. But anyway - gran had a dog, big collie dog, and - she always used to come and meet me, twelve o'clock, she'd be at - and of course I usually had to be kept in - for my sums, you see, to get my - correct my a
r
ithmetic. And they'd say, your dog's waiting for you. And - of course we used to get the cane too. Oh yes. Yes. That's the only thing I used to be caned for. Arithmetic. And I used to cry the minute was over - when the board used to be turned up - she say
s, you can put your handkerchief away, we've not started yet. Oh I used to be terrified.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Were you always caned if you got a sum wrong?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Yes. Caned and - any misbehaviour whatever we did. You see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But that was the only thing you were caned for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's all I had cane for, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Were there any other punishments they used to give you and the other children at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Well - sometimes they'd put you say it was summertime, they'd put you inside the fireguard and make you stay th
ere - and not go out to play. And - of course we used to get poor children as well - in the class. And they were very - good to those, they used to - some of them used to come without shoes on. I can remember that. And they used to give shoes - out to the
se poor children, and we also had a penny bank. Each child took a penny each week, and -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You each had your own penny bank?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right, yes. Yes. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did the poor children manage to bring a penny or not do you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, some di
dn't. Those that couldn't do it didn't used to bother. And - I didn't. 'Cos father was often - more or less out of work often. Yes. Yes, my father was more or less out of work. And in this flat I can remember - it isn't very nice to remember but - all we 
h
ad as one room - at the top of this flat and I - there was an alcove which took a double bed. And there was a couch there, there was couch there and a couch there. And my crippled sister used - sleep on the couch, but my eldest sister and I used to sleep 
on chairs. Wooden chairs, wooden - kitchen chairs, that's all we had to sleep - father on that couch and my eldest brother on that couch and of course my crippled sister had the other couch.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What about the alcove with the double bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Well that - 
we hadn't any mattress - so we couldn't use it. No, it wasn't used, it was just curtained off, that's all. You see? And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
You say your father and your crippled sister and yourself, what about your grandmother and your aunt?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Ah, they lived in the other block of flats in the next street.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You didn't actually live with them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 For part time - part time, but not - not - not for very long, you see. And -

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Most of your childhood you were living with your father were you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 With my fathe
r. And then - I went with gran for a certain time. And that's where - I - we - I saw most of the - street vendors and that sort of thing. With my gran, yes. I suppose that was holiday times more or less, you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You'd go to her in the holidays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Because your father was at work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
That's it. Yes. And - well he used to go out to find work. He more or less - used to come up to - oh dear, dear, that fish market. That's right, Billingsgate. And - what's that other one - Covent G
arden, used to go there. He used to go out early in the morning you see, and - I can remember the muffin man used to come round on a Sunday. And - oh the - the Sundays were very quiet. No playing in the streets or anything like that. Oh no, we were never 
allowed in the streets.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Were there children playing in the streets?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No. Very seldom. Very very seldom. No, we were always kept quiet on a Sunday and - no sewing. No sewing. Oh no, mustn't - mustn't get a needle. No. Whatever we could do without 
we used to do without on Sunday. I used to go to church. And then - Sunday school in the afternoon. Then back again home. Then after tea you'd hear the muffin man come round, he'd have a green }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 baize}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430  apron on with a tray on his head and ring this - huge bel
l. Of course we used to go out then - there were six muffins for a penny. And then there'd be the watercress barrows. Do you remember the barrow - you wouldn't remember the barrows, you'll have seen the pictures of them, barrow boys. Yes. That's right. We
ll they used to come - bring watercress, shrimps, winkles and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 It was mainly on a Sunday that they would come was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, in the week as well. Yes. In the week as well but - chiefly on Sunday was the muffin man, the shrimps and the winkles, and 
watercress and that sort of thing. But in the week there'd be the catsmeat man, there'd be the coalman used to call and - you could buy your coal by the bucketful. I don't know how much it was but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did your gran do that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. And salt. They use
d to have huge lumps of salt, the size of this table, and - so in depth, and you could buy a pennyworth, whatever you could afford. And milk used to come round - at your door, in a big iron - zinc can - can.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Churns were they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, cans. And there
'd be ladles, ladle - ladle it into your jug - jug, whichever you wanted, half pint or - I felling it used to be gill then. Gills and quarts and pints. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Baker coming round too was there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, we used to go to the dairy for the baker. Dairy -
 sell milk as well there of course and butter.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What about rag and bone men?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. That's right, and chairs to mend and knives to grind - and scissors. And what was the other one we used to have - I remember my first roundabout. And I had to just 
go in this room and it'd hold three - six children. And the man used to work it with a handle. And for a penny each - they would have about six rounds, then the cord would run out - when the - the rope would run out that was your end and you'd come off. S
ix.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was that at an amusement park or something?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, in the street. Yes, in the street.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 I've never heard of that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, I have never seen one since.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 How did he transport it, did it sort of wheel along?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 On a cart. On a cart. On
 the cart and then he'd sat it up in the street and - of course we all used to rush out, oh - the round about man, we used to say. 'Course I used to run gran. She'd give me a ha'penny for that. A ha'penny that was. And - but the catsmeat man used to tickl
e me, it was - he'd come round with a - huge I don't know whether you've seen the - baskets that the bakers would use, or - or the butchers.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Flattish baskets that you have over your arm do you mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right, big flattish baskets. Well the ca
tsmeat man'd have one of those on his arm, he'd wear a green - white and blue apron, butcher's apron, and a straw hat and he - and on the - in his basket he'd have about six slices of meat, horseflesh I suppose it was, on skewers. And it was penny - penny
 
a skewer. Well of course gran had always got a cat, and a dog, so of course I used to go down to get two. And the cats that used to follow. I remember one day - sticks in my mind now as old as I am, there was two dogs came out and wanted to join the queue
.
 There was big cats, little cats, all sorts of cats, all colours, and these dogs - of course the cats wouldn't have it and there was a real fight. And people were throwing buckets of water over them to stop them fighting. But - that's one I remember but t
h
e lavender lady too. The lavender lady. She'd got a basket and - can't - don't you see them in the picture. Long apron and - oh we used to get round her because - she'd give you a bit - if any - any of the heads used to fall off, which they used to often 
-
 little - little heads of lavender, she'd throw them out of the basket and us children used to gather them up, and make little lavender - little lavender bags with them. And sell them for a ha'penny. Oh yes, yes. I've done that, yes. And another thing we 
used to do - we used to go round to the pawnshop, you've heard of the pawnshop, and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 There still are a few.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes, I think so. Where the three balls hung up. And - we got - used to get fed up sometimes naturally, and we used to make our own amusem
ent those days, not like they are now. We used to go round to this - this pawnshop and as the people came out, you'd - they'd pick out the pins you see, the things were all bundled up, weren't tied up, they were - fastened with pins. And we'd gather these
 
pins up and put them on a bit of paper, then we'd go home - and make little windmills - and chalk on the corners of the windmills and make them all pretty colours and sell them for - some sweet money. Because we never used to get - pocket money those days
.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You didn't get any pocket money?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. Oh no, I didn't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What did you sell those little windmills for, do you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh ha'pennies and farthings. Oh yes. And - of course you could get a farthings worth of sweets then, we used to get
 about - six aniseed balls for a farthing. Yes. I can remember my - my brother coming home from the war - what was he in now - the - the - Ninth Hussars I think it was - had brass - oh wonderful brass braid on and - and - a plumed hat and sword, I've know
n him to come in home and he gave me sixpence. Oh, I thought I was - oh marvellous, to have a sixpence. Oh dear.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That would have been the first world war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
That's right, yes, he was in - he was in for - twenty-five years. He passed away last - yea
r. Yes. He was gassed two or three times and - and he was in the Cavalry. And - oh yes, it affected his health naturally and - of course I was quite proud going down the street - with my brother. Everybody was looking and - and - I can remember writing co
m
petitions at school too, when I left - when I left gran's we went to my aunt in Bishopsgate - fire station, had a - I expect you remember - it's there still now isn't it. Opposite the Liverpool Street Station. Ah yes. Opposite the railway station. And the
r
e was ten - taxi ranks all along those days, when they were just coming in the taxis and we thought oh wonderful to watch them. And - the horses used to be - there was no - no - what shall I say - engines - engines those days but all horses. And - for - w
h
en uncle was on duty in the watch room there'd be this big - switchboard, and - a bell used to ring and he'd put this switch down when there was a call for fire and that used to unhook the horses harness at the back in the stable, and of course the horse 
- horses used to come out then and go in their own places, so of course they were trained, naturally, came in their places and the - then the - whoever was - in charge of - would hook the harness onto the shafts and one thing and another. And I remember -

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you watch that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes. We were allowed to do it, we were allowed to play in the yard. And when we heard this bell go we knew there was a - fire. And there was a - a mark, us children were allowed not to come over that mark. But we could watc
h went on and I remember I was in the - engine room, as we used to call it, and I went to run out into the yard, to get onto my - our place where - safety - safety line they used to call it, and my dress got hooked up on the hooks where the - they have th
e
ir - helmets and coats and suchlike. And luckily it was an empty one. But there I hung - there I hung 'til the - men and the doors were all open and the men had gone. And uncle was in the watchroom luckily that day and he came and got me off. Took me off.
 These horses were passing me at a furious - furious - the bodies passing me as they were coming but they never bothered. Never hurt me mind you.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You must have been frightened?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 I was frightened, yes. But - of course I used - and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That was when you were staying with that aunt and uncle?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 My uncle - that's right, Uncle Arthur, he was the fireman you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was he an uncle by marriage or your own uncle?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, a real uncle. Oh yes, yes. And I remember coming down the - when I was li
ving with auntie - when uncle was off - off duty, he'd sleep upstairs in their own little flat - rooms, we had four rooms there, and - I was allowed - I used to sleep on the floor that - week, he would do a week alternate you see, week on and a week off. 
A
nd - when there was a fire - and they wanted extra - firemen, the bell - used to ring up on the - just above the door and a light used to go on. And if uncle didn't hear it. I used to have to go and wake him up. And he always had his boots - and jacket al
l
 ready, 'cos his helmet and - and - belt with his - the hatchet on was always downstairs. But I remember I used to have to clean his - boots, big boots they used to wear in these days, and all the brass button. I had six coats to do every night. Put the -
 button on a - proper - button - button - brace as well call it, clean them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Is that something that keeps the button away from the cloth?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes, it's a sort of a wooden - or - or you can get brass ones or you used to have the wood ones, and you jus
t slide the buttons on, the fixed buttons, and of course you could clean them without spoiling the - cloth, you see. And same with the number. You put - the numbers you put that under a - number and clean that, I had that to clean, those to clean and his 
boots. Every night. And if you went out, if it was his day off and you went out and wore his private shoes - I had those to do every night.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you get on well with your uncle?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh - no, not that uncle, I did with auntie, I had the best of attenti
on there. Had best of everything. Clothes and everything. Food -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 She was nice was she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes, food and - oh - always had fruit on the sideboard and everything which I didn't have at home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Fruit on the sideboard must have been rare at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh it was - always. It was rare, yes. I can remember a lemon always being on the sideboard. Uncle was very fond of lemon. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So he'd have quite a well paid job then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes, he was fire - he was an officer. You see. And - until he got 
hurt in a fire and then of course he had to come out. But I had the best of attention - best of - living there. Which was a direct contrast at home. You see, until father got out of work again, father couldn't afford to pay me - pay auntie. And home I had
 to go again. Yes. And then -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 He used to pay for your keep did he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes. When he could. When he could. And then - from there we went to - Plaistow. Ann Street, Plaistow, I don't know whether you know Plaistow. Yes. Yes. We used to live in James
 Street. Another aunt used to live in Balaam Street. Where the swimming baths used to be, I don't know whether they're still there. Uncle - that uncle was a wheelwright. Ah - a big church. Yes, we used to pass that. I can remember the - the - the baths - 
t
hat's right, I have swum in there. I don't know whether - it's still there is it? Oh and uncle lived up - opposite the - swimming baths. He was the wheelwright. That was Uncle Arthur. He was a wheelwright, whether they're still there or not I don't know, 
I'd love to go back and see it. And - oh yes. I see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You went there then when your father couldn't afford to pay your aunt any more?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
I had to go home again you see then. Yes, yes. Yes, and - stayed there and - pretty rough of course.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What was your father's job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Well he was a - he used to work for - first - on a pantechnicon, what they used to call a removal then, but they were called pantechnicons then, for Mr Neville. And then from there he went onto a brewers dray, you know the huge b
arrels with these horses, he had lovely horses.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Driving the dray and loading and unloading?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. Four horses. Oh yes. And we had a lot of - lots of brasses because on winter days us children used to - have them on the table in - and play hoop-ka
 with them. And another time - another game we used to play, we used to take the leaf off the table and play slides like the - have the slides today, we used to make our own slide with this - leaf of the table. But - to get back from - to Plaistow. That w
a
s another rough - place. Oh there used to be fights next door. People used to fight and - and I can remember nursing one - Mrs Lawrence - she used to let us have two rooms, father and - my brother and I. My other sisters had all left. Two of them had gone
 to an orphanage. And others had gone out, I don't know where they'd gone. They were in -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What about your crippled sister, was she in the orphanage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, she was taken away to - Whipps Cross, Leytonstone.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was that to a foster home or something?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No. To hospital. Because when I came home from school - everywhere was all sealed up. And I said to Mrs Lawrence, I said, where'd Dolly? So she said, oh she's been taken away, been taken away to hospital, she's got T.B. In those days they used to
 - I don't know what they used to call it - fumigate it sort of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Get rid of all the germs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
That's right. 'Cos everywhere was sealed up, the doors and everything, windows all sealed up. And - she never came home again. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you never see her again then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh I seen her - I saw her about - six years ago when she was in Denmark Street. There was a convalescent home there. And during the war they were sent down to - Kent. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So it was pretty rough in Plaistow was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes. Oh yes. Very - from there - my brother and I used to have one - we used to sleep upstairs and father used to sleep downstairs in the front room. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 There'd be just the two rooms then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 He was more or less out of work all the - on and 
off. And I can remember often we used to go to school without any meals. Without a breakfast. Until we got in touch with a - I don't know whether it was a mission or what it was. Or belonged to the Salvation Army. But we - we children used to line up and 
- go into a big hall and they'd give - there was wooden }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 forms}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
 and you'd all sit on these forms and - there'd be sheets, hymn sheets put up, and we'd sing hymns 'til the coffee - we used to have - cocoa, we used to have a mug of hot cocoa and a bun given us.
 And that was our breakfast. Otherwise we'd got to school with nothing.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And that was before school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Before school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Saturdays and Sundays too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes. No, not Sundays. No. We used to have nothing on Sunday. We had bread and dripp
ing, if there was any bread in the house we used to have bread and dripping. I used to run errands to get some dripping. I - yes, come home and get a basin and get some dripping. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You'd run errands for a neighbour?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes, anybody. And - or ru
n another errand for some bread. And run another errand and we used to - if - another day an - an errand - and we used to get - huge bags of broken biscuits, that was our dinner. That was our dinner.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Where did you get those from?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Any - any shop. Any shop.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you have to pay anything for them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Whatever we earnt - by - running errands.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That was your payment?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. I remember in flats there was an old lady, and my eldest sister looked after her in the - when she come ou
t of school at half past four, but when she couldn't do it I used to go down - and I'd only be about six I should imagine or seven, and - she'd always have the door open, she was always in bed, very old lady. Old to me naturally. She must have been bedrid
d
en anyway, she was always in bed, and no light. Only a candle. And we'd light the fire and then go - run any errands. And wait 'til her son used to come home. Then her son used to take over and I used to go upstairs and look after my crippled sister then.
 Until she was taken away of course. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Her son would give you something for your trouble would he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. The week - at the weekend, we used to do that every day, and then he'd give you about fourpence weekly, that was a lot of money then. Yes, I used to give it to my - eldest sister and she'd buy some food for the weekend them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was she the one that did the buying and planning?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. Oh she was still at school. Yes, she wasn't fourteen then. And then she used to go to laundry classes and she used to take our clothes to wash.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 She looked after all that did she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. Gran used to do the - sheets, and that. When we had sheets. Often we didn't have sheets, there was just - no blankets, we used to have coats. Those were the very poor times of course but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
But when you were in Plaistow you must have been a long way from your gran then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes. Oh yes. Yes. And I can remember - when I lived at gran's - she'd say - when I lived with Aunt Emily I mean in the fire station, an
d she'd say, now I'm going to take you to grandma's today. This was on a Wednesday. She'd take me one Wednesday and she'd point out different - different adverts and different - buildings, say, now you get to that building then you go to the next building
,
 and then the next week I'd have to go on my own. And take this little - basket of goodies to grandma. Tea and a little cake and such like and butter. And I used to walk all the way. All the way from - from Bishopgate to Blackfriars. Yes. But if it was ra
i
ning - I'd give a ha'penny on the bus. We used to have ha'penny - horse bus riding. And I used to love to go upstairs because I could just look over the bar, and watch the horses, so I wasn't very old, I could just look over that bar and see the horses, a
nd used to charge me a ha'penny and if it rained - used to have a little apron, little waterproof apron over your - knees then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 To keep you dry?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 It was open upstairs wasn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. No cover. And the trams were open as well too. Yes. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 How old were you when you were there do you think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh I'd be about - six or seven. All round about that age and - and father then - was - driving cabs, hansome cabs they used to call them then. Where the driver - sat right 
up top. And he'd open a little - a little - window like that and look at - at the fare, whoever was insider and say, where to madam? And he often used to say - come home and he had layers and layers of - paper - newspaper to keep in dry and warm in the wi
n
ter. But - I can remember a story he used to tell me, when he was on the brewers drays, and you know they used to get terrible fogs in London. And - one night he couldn't - he couldn't see where he was going, so he said, I let the reins go, and he said, h
ome to the horses, and the horses took him home, to the yard where - where they belonged. Let them go. Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What were you saying about the children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
The children - babies didn't used to have - dummies like they have today. They used to have a li
ttle - sugar - tied up in a - a liner - just in a piece of lines, and they used to such that. And the babies bottle were no - weren't the same as they are today, they were - sort of - do you remember the - soldier's bottles, water - drinking bottles?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 The curved shape?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
That's right. This - this way - pear shaped. And they'd have a - two - two tubes, glass tubes in them, and the long - rubber tube to the baby's mouth, and the mothers could put the bottle in the pram and leave the baby to feed itsel
f. I can remember those. Also the prams are not - weren't the same as they are today.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What were they like?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
They were - basket work. Basket - chair. You know like the - you know like the bedroom chairs - like that and they were back to back, the 
seats would be back to back. My sister one side and I the other, and then there was two long handles and two long iron legs. So that they didn't fall over. I've never seen one since.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What about wheels then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 There was two big wheels, just two big
 wheels. Two big wheels. And one little - one - bar at the - at the back and these two at the front, and then these two long handles. And I've never seen one since. And another thing I remember - they don't - didn't used to have ambulances like they do to
d
ay. There used to be - now what can I say - a place similar to a coalbunker, well there'd be a stretcher - in there, kept in that. Mind you it wasn't - it wasn't stone, it was wooden. We used to call it the stretcher hut. And for - different streets, so m
a
ny - one to so many streets. And then - if there was an accident or anybody taken ill in the street or whoever was on duty, policeman, would go and fetch this stretcher. And it had a hood on. Just at this end it had a hood on for the head part. And - they
 broke the - whoever - got the stretcher out had to pick this person up and run them to the hospital, there was no ambulance then. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you ever remember seeing drunk and disorderly people carried off?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. I was terrified. That was one - in
 the streets - there was one - often - that was very often, they would come down the street and I used to rush upstairs to gran.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was that the same with all the places you lived, there was a lot of that?

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Yes. Yes. I can remember gran - e
very - every evening she'd take her jug and go up to the Noah's Ark, I don't know whether you'd remember - you remember that, on Blackfriars Road. Noah's Ark, she used to go up with her jug and - and those days they used to give them clay pipes if they ha
d
 - regular customers, clay pipes, or they give them a piece of cheese, and often she'd bring that piece of cheese home for me, to put on a piece of bread and put it in the oven, of course they were open stoves, not like gas stoves or anything of these day
s, and I'd put that on a plate, enamel plate in the oven and then I'd do her hair. Play with her hair. 'Til it was ready. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What did she like to drink, would she have beer or something?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Ordinary beer, just dark - beer. I don't know whether it
 was stout or - it was dark beer because I know - she used to put it on the table and - I was - I was very naughty, I used to take - like vinegar, those days, which I shouldn't do, naturally and I thought, oh this is vinegar. But oh it - it was beer. She 
s
aid, that'll teach you - not to - not to steal. I can remember that. Oh the hop pickers, do you remember the - the - Londoners, that was their holiday. Main holiday, to go hop picking. And - yes, I was with Mrs Lawrence then. And she wanted me to go with 
h
er. But father wouldn't let me go. I don't know why but he - no, he says, you're not going. And - we used to like to watch them, we used to - all line up at the street us children who didn't go, and of course brakes used to take them then or carts, whiche
v
er you - they could manage. Whichever they were - rich enough to own. And - they'd have their bundles, not - not suitcases like today, they'd be bundles of clothes. With the babies and - and dogs and cats used to go with them, the birds. Everything used t
o
 be loaded onto these carts and - brakes. And they'd be singing away and - you know, half of them would be drunk before they started the journey. Yes, it was a yearly - yearly holiday for then. And of course nowadays they have - proper chalets and suchlik
e
, but they didn't those days. They had - made their own tents and - what have you. Anything, sleep on the floor, any - anything. So of course that's why father wouldn't let me go. But - oh dear. And when they came back, oh the noise. It used to be terrifi
c. Used to go on right 'til - oh three o'clock in the morning.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Would they be singing and that sort of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Singing and - and - coming home you see, the carts were rumbling along the roads. And there'd be no sleep that day, that - the weekend wh
en they come home. And then another thing I remember - if anybody was very ill in that street - they'd put straw down on the street. On - on the floor, so that the - the horses and carts didn't make a noise. Yes. I used to - I asked that, I said, why - wh
at are you putting the straw down for? Oh so and so's very ill, got to be quiet. So you see it was all cobblestones and - and the horses make a noise. But you don't see that now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you remember wreathes outside people's doors if they collected money f
or a wreath if anybody in the street had died?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, I don't remember that. No I don't remember that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Do you remember pictures of the Virgin Mary outside Catholic households at certain times of the year?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Ah there was in - now I - now you've
 - brought that to mind, in - my - our house was the - centre one in the street. Well that had a plaque - of people that were - that had passed away. Yes. And I can remember - saying - oh look, there's mother's name there. And - whether that's plaque's st
ill there or not, it wasn't a wreath or anything, or the Virgin Mary, it wasn't a - a grotto as we called it. No. Or a - a - image.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Just a plaque with names of people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Of those that had - and - and everybody used to collect. Everybody. And - peop
le used to stand still then as the funeral went passed. Nowadays they don't. And the gentlemen always took their hats off. And we always stood and waited 'til it had passed. And then they'd say, you can go now. And - we always had black bordered - when th
ere was a - postman used to come and there was a black bordered envelope, we used to say there was - somebody had died. And we used to have black bordered }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 
handkerchiefs}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430  too. They don't have that now do they? No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 When your mother died you wouldn't have gone to the funeral?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. I can remember being in the carriage. Yes. And sitting on somebody's - one of our auntie's laps, I don't know which one. And I said, what are you crying for? And they says, hush child, hush child, I can remember them saying 
that. And I can remember - standing at the graveside. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you go back to your home afterwards?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. And from there I suppose I must have gone to another aunt. But I don't remember much about that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you remember if there were a lot of people at the funeral?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes, the room was quite full, there was one from New Zealand, my Aunt Ada. She had little - Ronnie then. He had pink eyes and yellow hair.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Sort of Albino?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right. And - we used to say - used to say to 
him, haven't you got lovely hair - 'cos we were all very dark as children, very dark. And he was the only one - fair one in the family. But she - I know she came from - New Zealand. And my sister Ada - which is now, she's still alive, and she went out to 
N
ew Zealand to her. And she's still out in New Zealand. But she's a widow now of course. And her family's grown and gone away. But - let's see if I can remember something else. Oh, and the games. Different games to what they play these days. They had - tip
 - cat. Boys used to have tip-cat. The boys - you had a - a stick about so long, and - tapered off at each end, and then the boys had a big stick - I'd say about - so big. And then - about six inches.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And-the second one about two foot?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. A
ll depends on the height you were, if you had a tall boy you had a - a bigger one. And you'd hit - they'd hit this - one end and then it used to fly. And see who could hit - hit it the furthest. Whichever could make it go the furthest. And the girls used 
to have wooden hoops and the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 boys}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
 used to have iron ones. And the girls used to have wooden - handles to hit theirs this way, and the boys used to have wooden handles with a - wire hook, - and hook theirs onto the - hoop and run along with theirs. And I cou
ldn't make that out as a child, say - why do they have their - why can't we have the same as the boys.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What did they say to you when you said that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh you're a girl, you're a girl. They can't do it like we can. And then - French skipping. Girls 
used to do French skipping. That's a - a very long rope, and - you wind it round two girls, and you - this fashion - one - one hand and then the other hand, 'til you had two - two ropes going each - at the same time. One, one, and jumping each - jump over
 each - rope. It was very difficult 'til you got used to it. You got used to the rhythm, you see. We used to call that French skipping.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did boys skip too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Well very often, but not in the double - not in the French skipping, they had the single on
e but not the - not the - double. And then we used to play - fivestones. I don't know whether they still do that. Fivestones. You have a little ball about so big, and - fivestones, square stones, they were made in - made, you could buy them, set - in the 
s
hops. Fivestones you'd call them. And you'd - throw the ball up, and drop the ball - drop - drop the stones. And then you throw the ball up again and catch one, two, three, four. And then you'd catch them on your hand. One two, three, four, all the way al
ong, and then you'd - throw the ball up, one. Throw the ball up again and catch it. You see, until you - you stopped where you - you let the ball drop, that was - you're out. And the next one's turn.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you throw the ball up really high?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, oh 
no. No, on the floor, we used to play it on the floor. Throw about as high as this table. So that you - to give you time to catch up one - pick up one stone. And then throw the ball up again -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Get as many stones as you could until the ball came down again?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Came down - and you - if you missed the ball you were out, you see, and -

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You had to catch the ball as it came down?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes, each time you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And you'd only pick up one stone?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 At a time. And then the next time, if you h
ad picked them all up - and - without letting the ball drop. You started again and picked up two at a time. And then the next time you'd pick up three. And the next time you'd pick up the four, you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 There must have been quite a lot of skill in that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh it was very interesting because you all had to take your turn. Then -

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did a large group play?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes, six of us used to play in the road, we used to sit in a round ring on the floor.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 All having your turn?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right. Yes. Yes. Another -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you keep a score then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh no. Oh the eldest girl used to say - oh you're on number two, you're on number four or -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Somebody kept count?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right, yes. And another game we used to play was - swings. There was n
o going to the swing park or anything like that, those days - we had lamps. 'Cos the streets were lit lamp - by lamp. And you know the bar? Well there used to be a bar where the - man used to put his ladder, if anything went wrong, and - but this bar, we 
used to throw the rope over that, and we used to swing round the lamp post and on - that was our swing. And another game - the boys used to play - what's that other one? Statues. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 The sort of statues they play today at birthday parties and that kind of thing?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes, you all stand in a - and you - you - hold your hand and pull that person, and as you - as you are - left, you - so you stand, say you were thrown out and you were on hand then you've got to stand like that. And whoever posed the bes
t - gave the best - pose won the game. Then there's another one, learn the trade. You don't hear of that these days. They had - one girl stood one end, and the - you had stood - the others stood in a row. And these in the row'd say, please we've come to l
earn the trade, to this person at the other end. She'd say, what trade? We'd say, any trade. She said, set to work and do it. And we'd say - beforehand we'd say, well now what are we going to do this time. Be }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 shoe cleaners}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 . Then we'd all start shoe - shoe -
 imitating cleaning our shoes, and then she'd say - and if she - guessed it we'd all have to run back home. Whoever was caught had to go and stay with her. And then - so forth, 'til we were all caught. That was another game.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was that just girls?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, boys used to play it too. Yes. Yes. Boys, yes, boys used to play. And - what other games - let me see. Oh when I was with - with gran, we used to have a happy evening - Friday evenings, we used to go to - we used to call it the Institute, well it'd b
e like - well they have evenings out now like the Brownies do. Assembly room. And you'd play games and - there was somebody in charge naturally, and we used to get up little plays. And I was always picked for a Japanese or a - we had a - season play and I
 was Autumn, being dark, and I was a pansy. I remember that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you have lines to say or was it mainly mimed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh mimed. Except for one part, we - I was picked as a Japanese. And then we had to dance and a fan dance. And singing, and fan dancing and - and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Would you rehearse this and put it on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes. Yes. People used to come, I can remember people used to sit that end and we used to do - dressing up, National costumes. Lovely, and used to have our hair done and little roses each - each side and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 When you were at Blackfriars that was?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right, yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did your gran come and watch?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No. My sister. My eldest sister used to come - and watch that. She used to think it fine fun to think her sister was there. And
 - but for Christmas we used to have one - one - party, that was at school - when father was out of work. And I know one Christmas we didn't know it was Christmas. My brother and I, all the others had gone, there was just my little brother and I left, wit
h father. And all we knew was Christmas we used to pull - pull - t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 he}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
 the ends of the newspaper - and make our chains of that and - we - we - I lost - I know I lost the key, front door key one night - one day. And we had to wait 'til - oh - I think father ca
me in about eight o'clock. It was wintertime, cold. And we stood over a grating outside a - a - what do they call them - well it'd be a caf\'e9
 now, they call them cafes then, you could go in and buy - say fish and chips or you could buy a sausage and mash an
d - what did they used to call it, pease pudding and - faggots and all that sort of thing. And - we used to stand there to keep warm, then we'd go along - a little way further along the street and to a toy shop, and we'd say, now wouldn't I like one of th
ose, I'd like so and so, I'd like that lovely doll. And then when we got too cold we'd go back to this - to get warm again 'til father came home.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 How long were you waiting ther}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8995913\charrsid675430 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430  then do you think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh about two or three hours, we were home from s
chool - 'til father come home at eight o'clock.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And that was at Christmastime was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Christmastime, I can remember it was Christmas time because - often it used to be snowing. So it would be Christmastime and - all the toys were - you know, the streets were all lit up you see, for the - wke say - what will - would I like.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was there no where else you could have gone to wait?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Well we didn't know anybody.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 There wasn't a neighbour who kept an eye on you at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no. No. No. T
hat's a dreadful place that was, I'll tell you where that was. That's at Gibson Street, near Shadwell. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was it very rough then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes. There was - oh then we had - we had two rooms, but - the people - there was - there was only one toilet for the whole block of flats. And it was - dreadful, there was no bath or nothing, no hot water or nothing - nothing -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was there just a communal tap to share with the other people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. And there was fighting every Saturday night. And we used to 
put a - I remember we used to put - father's coats over the - letterbox so as they wouldn't - look in. Yes, screaming murder and - oh I used to be terrified.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Were you ever left alone there at night when your father was working?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Not at - during t
he night. Because - but we were there in the evenings 'til he come home. Oh yes, we used to go to bed, we used to - sit in the bed. And look out of the window.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Did you have to get yourself a meal then when you came in, or was there nothing to eat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Well nothing unless of course we went errands and got these biscuits and - apples, we used to have fruit. We used to buy fruit sometimes for a change.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 With the money you got from errands?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 From errands, yes. Then for - Sundays used to be love
ly, we used to think, oh, lovely, Sunday father - father used to come home sometimes with - a breast of mutton. He would send me out - to get threepennyworth of - mixed vegetables. Threepennyworth mind you, and it would be enough for us - three, for us. T
here was carrots and onions and - often turnip, they'd put a turnip in - turnip in for us. And - we used to think it wonderful to have this lovely dinner. You see it was wonderful to have a lovely - Sunday dinner. Often he'd come from }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 Billingsgate}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430  and bring
 fish, we'd have fish for Sunday. They were really hard times then. And often - often - I used to go to school in the mornings, and there was one little girl, Winnie Bunting her names was, and she had lovely long fair curls. And she must - her parents mus
t
 have been well off, because she used to play the piano for us and we used to do dancing at school, and I used to watch her - she used to have - six biscuits with butter in between. I used to watch her. Oh, I'd love one of your biscuits. And if they let m
e
 turn the - turn the rope for them she'd give me a biscuit. I'll give you one of my biscuits if you turn the rope. Oh yes, I'll - I'll turn the rope. And I said, can I save one for my brother? Yes, yes. And when my - my brother used to come out from schoo
l - and I used to give him one. They were really hard times they were, but nowadays children are well - don't know how well of they are - really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You remember actually being hungry quite often do you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Yes, very often. And - when father wa
s out of work - there used to be - vans around the street - with hot soup, I don't know whether they were the mission or who, Salvation Army or who they were, but often - we used to go and they'd give us a mug - with this hot soup. Oh it was wonderful, I 
u
sed to warm my hands with it. And - when I look back I can remember all those. Of course when I was with auntie I didn't - I was never hungry. Had the best of everything. And I can remember one Christmas - being at auntie's. We went to the Albert Hall. Th
e
 fireman, at that Bishopsgate fire station were the - first - fireman to arrive at this big toy shop, a huge toyshop in London, I don't know where it was. The main shop. And they saved such a lot of property, toys and suchlike, that our men - the children
 
belonging to our men were given a - lovely party at the Albert Hall. And I can remember it was this Christmas I went. And I can remember this huge hall, and I thought of it on Saturday when we - when they had the Remembrance Service. To think I'd been the
r
e, to this party. And the Christmas tree was huge. And I came back with a drawing slate which you don't see now - it was a wooden frame and - it - wood - it had a wooden back with a piece of wood, you turn - take - turn that piece of wood and the back'd c
o
me off, and there'd be two or three pictures like that side. The different - and with a - with a - and with a slate this side. And you could trace - the different pictures. I had no end of pictures in - in that, used to like that, spent no end of that - w
i
th that, amusement with that. And then I had the skipping rope and that had bells on. You could unscrew - unscrew and put fresh bells in, if you lost a bell you could - put the bell - put another bell in. Oh I had some wonderful things, wonderful things t
his. That was the best Christmas I'd ever had when - as a child.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was it just you who went?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, oh all the - all the firemen's children went.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 I mean in your family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no. Oh no. 'Cos I was -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 There was only you with your aunt?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
With Aunt Emily, yes. With them. Yes. And - oh something else I was going to tell you. No. Gone. No, we didn't used to have many toys. Only what we used to make ourselves. Used to make our own - with shoeboxes we'd make - little theatres. One thing and 
another. And the first doll I ever had was made out of a peg. Clothes peg. Grandma made me that. It was just a little head, the head part of it was made - the wooden pegs. Not like they are today.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You mean like the gypsies sell in some parts, just two bits of wood?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh no, no, not made. No, these were just the wood - the gypsies put - no, but these weren't. It was just wood and - just wood, with a round knob on the top. And this head - this knob used to be the head. And Grandma used to - put a pie
ce of wood - like that, for the arms, that'd come out for the arms, and this round piece at the top be the head. She'd draw the face and - and dress it up and it was wonderful.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was your grandmother a widow?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Oh yes. 'Cos Uncle was in the Boe
r War. And I can remember her having a - a - a piece of shell made into a - a brass - it was all made shiny, into a - a top hat. And that was my money box. She gave me that as a money box.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That was an uncle who was in the Boer War?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Boer War then, yes. Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was that her son?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Must have been, yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Was the aunt who was living with your gran when you were there, was she unmarried?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Unmarried then, but she married - Uncle Arthur and went into the fire station with him you see
. That was the same one. You see I lived with grandma 'til - I suppose 'til she was married. 'Cos I can remember - auntie when she used to come home from - the - hotel, she'd bring a lot of food, we'd have a lovely feed, you know, a lovely meal. And - she
 
used to make all her own clothes and make my clothes too. And - and she used to make those mutton - leg o'mutton sleeves. I remember her - her fitting this on this model that they used to have, and - and she used to let me put those big - stiffeners in th
e
 neck, used to wear the high necks didn't they then. And often, I remember once - I took them all out, she was going to a party - a dance or something, and I took all these - things out, oh I got a good hiding for that. And - another thing I - when I was 
w
ith auntie, she used to go up to - Hampstead Heath do you remember Hampstead Heath, you know Hampstead Heath? Well that was another aunt of mine, Aunt Mary Ann, they used to - their name was Cox. And they used to own the roundabout and swings on Hampstead
 
Heath, and this aunt I lived with used to go and help them at holiday times. Easter - August - Whitsun. Three times. And she used to take me with her and - I could go on anything, the roundabout, swings and anything and this aunt I remember - she used to 
h
ave a caravan up - up on - up on - above ground, and then you'd go down some steps, and there was like an underneath - underground flat. And there'd be storerooms - underneath - where she used to live. And - I remember going into this caravan that was on 
-
 above ground. And - I should - I was not allowed really to go in there but I did go in there, and - they were counting out the money. And you know these - the boxes - the tin boxes the soldiers had to put their - ammunition in? There was two of those. An
d
 they were all full of sovereigns. I often think of that - all that money. I think to myself, I wonder what they did with all that money. And she wanted me to stay with her. Then. Yes. But I wouldn't, I wouldn't, no, I wanted to stay with Aunt Emily. I co
u
ld have been well off I reckon if I'd have stayed with her. And - the only thing that I regretted, I - I'm very fond of music. And I always wanted to know how to play the piano. Always, that's been - right - even now. If I won a lot of money - that's what
 I'd do, buy a piano, and get someone to - to teach me, as old as I am. I love music. That's why I bought that - organ. Mind you I only just play by ear now but - I can sit and watch anybody play the - piano, for hours. I love music. Any music.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Could you have learnt if you'd gone there do you think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. Yes, if I'd have stayed with her. I could have had a piano and - she said, see what you've missed, because I went to see her when - I was about eighteen. Just before the war - the 1918 war finishe
d. And she said - she'd got a piano then. She said, see what you missed, if you'd have stayed with me you could have played like that. She had daughters of her own then. She said, see what you've missed. And of course I started crying. Naturally. But stil
l, never mind.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did Aunt Emily have a piano?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But you didn't learn?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No. I didn't. The only two - when her children arrived. They did. Oh I - often regret - oh if only I - I could have played. Even now I love to watch. I think 
if you can sit down and play - that'd be the - one wish of my life. To know how to play, sit down and play.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did your grandmother have a piano in her home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, oh no. No, nothing like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did any of your homes have any other musical instruments at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Well Aunt Lucy, she had a piano, and she had two daughters, my cousins, and she put them to music. And often when I - used to go there - I didn't used to stay with her. But when I used to go and see her - I used to love to get into the 
front room and play the piano.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Which one was Aunt Lucy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
My real auntie. My mother's sister. The one that was wheel - wheelwright, that lived opposite the - Balaam Street baths. That one there. Oh - I loved to feel the keys. The feel of the keys, under my hands. I }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 do now}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 . It's silly really, but there - funny. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you ever go to concerts or hear any music played?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
When I was with Aunt Emily I did. She took me to the theatre once. And - I don't know what play it was but I was watchin
g the orchestra. I was watching the orchestra. She said, what are you looking down there for? I said, they're playing the piano down there. I don't know what the - what the play was about but I remember the orchestra.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was your father musical, do you think he had an interest in music?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Well I couldn't tell you, I don't know. No, mother died very - young, she was only about - thirty-nine I think she was and she had eight children. Yes. One after the other you see and that's what - killed her I think
. And they - I can remember my auntie saying, if only you'd have been - Dolly we could have spared her better than we could mother, 'cos Dolly was a cripple.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was she the youngest?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, she was next to me, she was only thirteen years - thirteen m
onths - older than I, I was the youngest girl, you see. And I think mother - often think now that could have been me. And I remember when she - father couldn't - finish paying for her, she - he used to play - pay for her when she was in - Whipps Cross. An
d
 she was sent home, and I remember her being in a long - long box, strapped in this box, with two legs, her legs were strapped and her body was strapped, and we used to stand her up against the wall us children, and gradually - used to undo one strap and 
w
e'd get one leg and we'd work it. And we'd work it 'til she - got on her knees and she used - to crawl on a chair - round the table, and she gradually got so she walked. She could walk, holding onto things. And - and by the time she left - she was taken a
way again she could walk. Mind you, she was deformed. Mind it was the back that was gone, T.B. in the back. But she could walk. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
When she came from Whipps Cross do you think she'd been kept mainly lying down while she was there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Becau
se I remember father taking me on the tram to see her. And I was awfully ill - on the tram. They used to say you see so. And I was always a bad traveller then, as a child, and - but I can remember seeing her in this - and do you know I had the thought she
 
was in the coffin, in a coffin. To me as a child it did. I'd seen mother's coffin, and seeing her like that. I used - I said to father, is she in a coffin? I said, but she's talking. I said, she's talking. And of course father was - out of work I suppose 
and she had to come home again. See?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No National Health Service then of course?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No - no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did Dolly manage to do anything to help in the house at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh no, she couldn't. She couldn't. No. When we got her walking, as I tell you, th
e cripple carriage used to come for her. And I used to help her - I used to have to - one of us had to be with her because if she fell down she couldn't get up again you see. And I remember fighting with a boy that - hit her. Whether he'd hit her or not, 
b
ut anyway she was knocked down by him, and I remember fighting this boy. Because he hit my sister. But anyway, this - this - carriage used to take them to - Nelson Square, to a big house there. 'Cos I went with her one day. And they used to teach them to 
do - sewing, embroidery and suchlike. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Hoping that they could earn their living and be self-supporting?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
That's right, yes. Yes. Take a trade you see, take on a trade. But she - she - her - hers was sewing. It used to take her a long while bu
t she managed it. But - but of course she was taken away again you see because - I suppose it wasn't fit for her to be with us, you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Because of the T.B?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did any other rest of you contract it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Well no - when I was twe
lve - I was twelve, that'd be 19 - 1913, that's right, I was - my two eldest sisters were at the orphanage then in Leicester. And they went out to service and there was a vacancy. And Aunt Lucy, the one that lived at Balaam Street opposite the baths, she 
got me - into - one of their places, you see, and that was a very strict church - orphanage, there were only twenty-five children. Never see a ragged child, or a child without shoes like I used to do.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You used to see that often did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You say a vacancy became available at the orphanage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes? At Leicester that was. And I went to this orphanage, and then - that was very strict. We had navy blue and white uniform. And for breakfast - in the wintertime we just had - a little porri
dge and some bread and dripping and a cup of tea. That was breakfast. And for dinner - well used to have - cold meat Mondays. And mince Tuesday, and - never had any treats. The best - the best treat we had was - was the school, used to be the Wiggeston Gi
r
ls School, that was the High School for Girls, and each girl was given a child's name from the orphanage, and that girl made up a parcel, a Christmas parcel. There'd be a toy, there'd be something useful like a - a shoe - cleaning outfit or writing pad, a
nd then a game. And we used to watch for that hamper to come Christmas. We'd say, here the hampers come. And we used to think wonderful, that was our - that was our Christmas treat that was. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 How long were you there at that place?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh I was - four years. Yes. 'Til I was sixteen. Sixteen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You went when you were about twelve?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
That's right. Yes. And I had one year during the war years. I can remember - being in church one Sunday evening and all the lights went out and we had to come ho
me. And the - another evening, I didn't go to Sunday - didn't go to church that evening, I don't know why but I didn't, and I used to have to look after the little ones, and - the policeman knocked on the door and we were all lined up outside. No, we'd go
n
e to bed, that's right, we'd gone to bed. It was eight o'clock. And we were all taken downstairs and - we picked up our little treasures that we thought were our treasures, and stood outside the door. And the - the policeman would say and the Matron would
 say - he'd say to the Matron, I'll - I'll tell you when it's safe to take them in. And next to - because next door to - the orphanage was a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 munitions}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430  factory, so I suppose they took us out to be on the safe side. If anything was dropped. And -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was there much bombing then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, not in Leicester, we didn't used to get the bombs there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Were there any zeppelins there or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh there was some zeppelins went over but we were lucky, they went over. They didn't do any damage, n
ot in Leicester. And - when it was all quiet he used to say, you can get them back again now. But it was a very strict Church of England - orphanage, and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 All girls?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 All girls, oh no, no boys. No, we weren't allowed to speak to any boys. No. Oh
 no, my word, if we spoke to - seen talking to anybody or any stranger - we were reported, we were reported and we'd have - bread for tea and a cup of tea and go straight to bed after - out of school. And we'd have that for a week.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Just for teatime, not the other meals as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. Oh no, no, we'd have our breakfast and meal - and midday meal but tea, we just had dry bread, cup of tea and straight to bed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That would be quite early I suppose?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Yes. Straight from school. Just after tea. About five o'clock.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Just dry bread would it be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Dry bread, yes, and a cup of tea. That was our punishment.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you ever get any other punishment there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 There?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did they ever hit the children?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Well I remember once, I
 was only in the middle class there - middle girls, there was the children - the younger ones, and I was in the middle section then, being twelve year old, and - the big girls had the big room to themselves. There was seven in there. And - at church, they
 used to look at the choirboys, naturally, we were - we were taught - to sing the - psalms, and the hymns, exactly as the choir sang them, because we were next to the organ and we had the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 proper Psalters}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 , you see, and we had to know - know the psalms for ea
ch day. And sometimes the Matron used to say when we were having prayers, you two sing the next verse. And if we made a mistake and didn't do stops where there should be - stop. And used to have to - start again. And - we'd have to know what }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 psalms}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430  were fo
r the day, what Saints day it was, all the chapters of the Bible. I can tell you }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8995913\charrsid675430 no}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 w, mind you, but I get so far and - I'm finished. And - and we used to have to go church in the morning. Say eleven o'clock, or those that were confirmed would have to go ei
ther six, seven or eight o'clock service, then you'd go at eleven, Matins. You'd go to Sunday school in the afternoon. And-then again in the evening at half past six. And then during Lent we'd go twice a week up to any church, I remember walking right up 
t
o Weston Park which is two mile - a good two mile, for a Lenten service, this is during the week. And - oh we got a real religious teaching there. Yes, that's where I learnt - you know, took to religion there. Yes. And - I was confirmed in fact from there
.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Were all the girls confirmed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Yes, you were bound to be confirmed, that was the law.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But did you want to be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh no, you were bound to do. That was the law then. You were - you were confirmed and - and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 After that did you take Communion every Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, not every Sunday. We did it at least once a - once a month. We could go every week if we wanted to. But I didn't stay all the service, it was too long a service, it was a - sometimes it'd be a long - almost like Mas
s. It'd be a long service, High Church you see, and I couldn't stand it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And you had nothing to eat beforehand?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Even those who weren't taking }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 Communion}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430  had nothing to eat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Nothing to eat. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you have to walk to the church?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Even in winter?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes, in the winter. And - what else was I going to say? I was going to say something else just now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Something about the church services, or food or punishments?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh, the punishments -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
You were telling me about how you had to start again if you got anything wrong in the psalms?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh we learnt - we learnt four - four songs and a carol for the Christmas. And the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 committee'd}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430  come down - belonging to the orphanage, and - they
'd - we'd have to sit - he in our best - uniform. We used to have three dresses. One for work, one for school, and one for Sundays. And we'd all be in our - in our Sunday best and then the committee'd be there in this big hall and - they'd read out the na
m
es, so and so, first prize for best - good behaviour, we didn't know it, but - the Matron used to take notes of who was good and who was bad and who was corrected and how many times you were punished and suchlike. Well one year I was - I came top. I didn'
t
 know, I didn't know that. And - we all sat down, and no - stood there and sang our songs, and then the prize giving and gifts were given out, from the Wiggeston Girls School. My name was read out. Me? No, it's not me. It is you. And of course we didn't k
n
ow the - the - 'cos the Matron used to put names - marks down against our names you see unknown to us. And - oh I was telling you, the - the big girls, in church - used to look at the choirboys. And - that's it - and - I was in the middle - middle bedroom
 
then, and it was a stone floor mind you, this bedroom, stone floor. And - there was such a - we were all called down into the Matron's sitting room. That's in - the middle room. And - she said, do you - have you anything to do with this - I said, what - w
h
at do you mean, I said, what are you talking about? Have you been taking letters to school? It seems the big girls had had been giving some of the girls in my - my section, letters to take to the choirboys at school, because some of the choirboys were in 
o
ur class at school you see, unbeknown. And - one evening - the under matron, Miss Wilcock, she was going out and one - the girls were at the front of the hall - front of the orphanage their bedrooms was at the front. And they were letting these - letters 
d
own, on string, to the choirboys. They were hiding round the corner. And when they saw this - giving these letters you see. That's how they were passed. And there was four girls in my section that were doing this at school, some were taking them to school
 
and giving them to the boys you see. But I didn't know anything about this. 'Til - I don't - I - we were all called down, us - us six of us in this - middle bedroom. Have you - do you know anything about - no, no, I hadn't - of course I didn't know anythi
n
g. Luckily I got away with that, there was nothing - I didn't - I wasn't punished for that. But the big girls were punished. They had to come into a - the little girls bedrooms and us - the little ones as we called them, and - and the middle ones, went in
to the big room. Oh it was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 marvellous}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
 to be in the big room. That was their punishment. And when we went to church, the big ones - girls naturally would sit in the front. But after that, they were - had to sit at the back. And they used to have bread teas f
or a long long while they had bread teas for that. Yes, one girl was expelled. Yes. Mary Kershaw, now where did she come from, somewhere near - somewhere down South anyway. She was - I said, well where is she? Oh and Rosina. I said, where's Rosina, 'cos t
h
ey were big girls. Well when you left school, the - for - in the orphanage, you left school at fourteen then, and you went into the laundry, in the wash house. And you wore clogs, and rubber aprons and you were all - stood at these wash tubs, and you were
 
washing all day long and dollying. Dollying tubs, not - the machines. There was no - they were dolly tubs. We used to take in washing - to keep the orphanage going you see. And - two days solid washing, nothing else but washing and dollying and pegging ou
t
 clothes, for two days, and the place used to get full of steam, there was two big coppers. One on each side of the place. And the - heated by fire. Coal. And suchlike. One girl'd be stoker as we called her. She'd have to keep these fires going to keep th
e
 things boiling, and there was hampers and hampers of washing. And I know when I first left school - there was - hundred and fifty surplices from churches, different churches we used to - wash. Blankets - sheets, curtains, table linen. Beautiful table lin
e
n, Irish - Irish linen. And that was two days solid washing. And then the rest of the week - Wednesday, Thursday and Friday was up in the laundry. And you'd - have all this ironing to do. There was babies washing, baby's clothes. And there was big hampers
 
- as big as that table, full of nothing else but - vests and pyjamas - vests, pants and socks, and they all had to be brushed - ironed and folded properly. Brushed. Yes. The socks were brushed. Brushed, yes. The pile - the pile they used to call it. The s
ocks used to have to be brushed. Both sides, and then folded properly and ironed and each one put in their proper - place, and when you first went into the laundry you started on the girls clothes, the - the orphanage }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 children's}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 ' clothes. Started on the apr
ons, children used to wear pinafores and girls when you leave - left school, well you went into aprons. And - you started on that and handkerchiefs, and then you went - moved up to higher on the table and you did - the maids' things that come with the lau
n
dry. The maids' things from houses like the big houses. You did the maids things. And then you went on to surplices - then the table clothes, and then the baby linen and the head one, the - Miss Woolcock, she used to do the collars - and the cuffs. And so
m
e of the pillowcases, the baby's pillowcases for the prams and suchlike, it had - a frill to iron - and crimp, do you now how - crimping? And then - there'd be - one round of it would be crimped, and then the - on the other side, the - on the - next to it
 
there'd be a lace frill and that'd have to be go offered. Yes. Oh yes, special iron for crimping and go offering as well. And the collars used to have a different iron. A little iron like - quite - so big, and it was round. Bottom surface was round so as 
t
o get the collars - make the collars round. And they were fitted into a - a - what did they call it - a brass band, so as to keep them round, and polished. But - that - the head one used to do that, we were not allowed to do that. But surplices, oh dear. 
A
nd there was alter clothes. Purificators that they wiped the chalices with. They had to be perfect. One little smudge - and she'd throw it back into the - into a bowl of water and you had to do it all over again. And blouses. Blouses. And the - in those d
ays the ladies used-to wear - what they called pique skirts for tennis. And the - and men white flannels. And only the - high girls used to do that, you know, the ones that were - experienced girls used to do that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was that more like dry cleaning to do the flannels?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, ironing. Washed and ironing. Oh yes, and pressed. And I remember once when I was on the - linen table. There'd be - four girls - two or three girls that side. And two or three girls that side. We used to have long - huge linen she
ets. And - we'd iron each way and - and if your irons met - clicked it would cut the - cut the - whichever you were doing, sheets or tablecloths. And I can remember doing that once. Only a little tiny - cut. But oh dear, dear, dear, I was punished for tha
t. Two of us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What did they do to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Just have dry bread for tea. And go to bed with the little ones.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 For a whole week?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. Yes. And upstairs - once you got upstairs there was not a word spoken. Never.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Not on any occasion?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No. The monitor - one girl used to - be chosen monitor, for the year, I was chosen once - for monitor. And - you have to report anybody that was - even - motioning - miming, that wanted anything. And I can remember in the wintertime we used to have to st
rip, get down to our nightdresses, vests off, we used to tie our nightdresses round with our - selves, and we'd wash in cold water. And we often used to break the ice, on the buckets of water underneath the - the - the washing - the - dressing table, the 
- the wash stands rather, enamel bowls, and we'd have to break the ice in winter when it was very cold, to wash with. Always wash in cold water, winter and summer. I used to dread it. Yes. I used to lay in bed and shiver 'til I went to sleep.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Were you ever able to have a warm bath?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes, we had to be bathed every night - every - every week. Once a week. Oh yes. But - that - we used to have to carry the water up from the bath - from the wash house. There was four big girls - used to carry four bu
ckets of hot water to the bathroom, right through the laundry, right up there at the end of the place. Right at the end, the coldest part of the place. And there used to be four girls to each bath - of water. Four girls.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So the last one wouldn't be very nice?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh we used to have - four girls to each bath of water. So every four - fourth girl there'd be a fresh lot of water. See what I mean.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Three girls had to share the water you mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Yes. And - you see, and then there was - they'
d say, another lot of water, you go - you go, you go, and each take a bucket of hot water up. Mind you not the little ones. And I remember when - the war started, the 1914 war started, and the big girls who all had - went out to service. Left us little on
e
s as we used to call it then, we were little then, and we couldn't carry on the laundry. We weren't big enough to do it. You see, it was too much. And us little ones used to come in at five and six year old then. And they were too - in fact we used to hav
e the girls sitting room, that was a stone floor, but we had - used to have a bath in front of a - a stove - like the Army - stoves the Army used to - used to have, they still have in the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 barracks}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 . The round ones with the - pipes going through the wall. The
n we'd have the - bath, little bath in - in front of that to bath the little ones. So you can tell - so of course the laundry went down and - and I remember when I left they - the Matorn collapsed and died and the - the home went then. That was after I le
ft, because - soon after I left, because - it was - it joined onto the Technical school. The Leicester Technical school, High School, and they took over that - plot of land and joined it onto their - their - the school, the Technical - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 Technical}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430  college you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So all the girls had to leave then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
The big ones left and - just left us little ones so of course they - couldn't carry on. So gradually the little ones were sent to different homes and - then it was disbanded, you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 How many adults were in charge there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 There was only two, the Matron and the Under Matron.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What were they like as people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh the Matron was sweet. Really nice. She was a - a Catholic, she come from Canterbury. She really was nice. And - I can remember -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was that Anglican Catholic or Roman Catholic?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, she was Roman Catholic. Roman Catholic because she used to go to Canterbury Cathedral. And her }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 niece}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430  was - organist there. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But really it was Church of England?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. The orphana
ge itself was Church of England. And - she was really sweet, but the - the Under Matron, she was a very strict, at least I used to think she was because if you - left a little dry patch in - on a - on the - on your ironing, she'd throw it back into the wa
t
er and you had to do it all over - which I thought was very cruel. But anyway - I suppose it was good teaching. But each girl had to go out into service - from there. We were not allowed to do - say if you wanted to - say you were musical or anything like
 that, you weren't given music lessons or anything like that, you'd got to go into domestic service, you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you get any money in the laundry for what you did?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh no, no, we never got any money. Oh no, the only money I used to get was - my t
wo sisters, as I told you, they were - they would be gone out to service in front of me, they used to come and see me on their half days, and they'd leave - give me some pennies, you see. But - at - between - Lent to Easter, we'd have no sweets at all. An
d what money that we would have spent on sweets - had to go into the church box, what they called the church - church box.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That was your Lenten sacrifice?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
That's right, yes. Church finance. And we - and in the winter we used - we - we'd wear - bl
ack straw hats. And in the summer we'd wear white straw hats. Yes. Yes. And clogs to - in the wash house. Clogs. I can remember going to this cupboard where they kept all the clogs, and there used to be huge black beetles. Oh. Oh I used to pick them up an
d throw them on the floor to see if there was any beetles in them. Before I put them on. Dear oh dear.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did your father ever come and visit you while you were there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh no. No. No. No, I don't know what became of him, he was always in lodgings after that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you lose track of him then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. Yes. Until I was about eighteen. And then I went to see him, in - where was he now - at Plaistow. 'Cos I went to Aunt Lucy's, to see her to have a holiday when I was eighteen, and I went to see my fa
ther. He was in rooms then. And - I knocked on the door, and he was sitting in - a chair, similar to that, and he clutched the arms of the chair and he said, oh, you're your mother come back again. And he went as white as a sheet. And I never would see hi
m again, it upset me so to see him upset. I wouldn't go to see him again. Silly really but - there -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You must have looked very like your mother then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
I was more like mother then, very much like mother. Oh and another thing I must tell you. I reme
mber the Lord Mayor's shows in London. I was only little then, because I remember being on the Embankment and I couldn't see, I could hear them, and see the horses hooves. And I said, I can't see. And - I don't know what man it was but he picked me up and
 put me on his shoulder, and I saw everything beautifully. There was the carriages and the - the - floats, the - decorated floats and the - sailors and firemen, everything. And guns. Beautiful.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That was a real treat was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh it was lovely.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you see that every year or just once?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No - I only saw it once. Yes. And - then we had - I believe it was a Coronation. My second - Christian name was Alexandra. And I wonder if it was Queen Alexandra's Coronation, because I remember having meda
ls - and a mug. Every child had one. And I have an idea that was - for that Coronation. But what became of them I don't know. But - and then - then when I was with Aunt Emily - I don't know whether you remember hearing of Petticoat Lane. Do they still hav
e
 it? Well I was always forbidden to go down there, when I was with auntie because she said, you'll get - you'll get taken away if you do. Anyway I was allowed to go down with her. And it was a wonderful treat to see all these men - that had carpets on the
i
r backs and - oh they'd be talking all - foreign languages. It used to amuse me to hear them talking. But you - you know - they - used to say - you can have your watch one end of the market and you get to the bottom and you - it was missing, somebody had 
taken it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did she buy things there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes, she used to buy - lots of things there. And the stalls weren't lit - by lamps, they were flares. Yes, you - you've seen pictures in olden days - of the soldiers - Roman soldiers with flares. Well those 
sort of - all - gasoline - no, not gasoline, what would it be.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you think it would have been oil?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Naptha or some}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
such thing as that. Used to flare anyway and used to think - if only the - if these stalls caught alight what would he do.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So there was a lot of interesting things to see and a lot of variety in a way?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes. Yes. And I can remember another thing, when I used to go - from Aunt Emily's - when I - when she used to send me over to see grandma to take these things to grandma 
- when I got over to Blackfriars Bridge, there was a - a telephone box sort of thing. There'd be - a sort of thing like the telephone but of course it wouldn't be a telephone box, but it'd be a - a case like that, and there was always a diver - a diver's 
uniform in that box. And I used to think - oh there's my diver. I'm nearly there. Used to think, well nearly there. And I can see that now. I wonder if it - often wonder if it's still there. Yes. But oh -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You said you got twelve pounds a year?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Twelve pound a year. And I was paid - one pound a month.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 When you had the incident with the bathroom who was it that reprimanded you?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh that's the parlourmaid.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was she over you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Oh yes, yes, and - it was her that told me what 
to do you see - in the mornings I used to work with the cook 'til about eleven o'clock. But then after that I was the parlourmaids - helper you see. And - of course being wartime we were - rationed. Food was rationed. Miss Ellis used to have a - lady comp
a
nion. And it was her duty to come and - and - allow - allot all the - provisions to us. There was tea, sugar - margarine, not butter, margarine. What else was it she - oh and cheese. All things. You see, and I didn't take sugar and I didn't like cheese th
ose days. So of course I used to take them to my sister that was married. Then. You see? Oh and Miss Ellis always wanted to know what you did on your days out. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 How would she ask you, would she summon you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 She'd say, well where did you - o
h yes, in the - Monday morning - where did you go yesterday when you were out? Did you go to church? I said, yes, I did, I went to this - with Jessie. So she said to me, what did they - what was the sermon? Often she'd ask me what the text was of the serm
on. Sometimes I would remember and sometimes not. But - you had to make - had to make sure that you were going to church. And then - the following Sunday, the following fortnight rather when it was my Sunday off - I'd go to my sister's.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You'd get a whole day once a fortnight?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no, not a whole day.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You mean still that six to eight period?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Just - that's right, yes. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 How long did it take you to get to your sister?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh it took me about - twenty minutes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So you didn't have very long with her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No. No, no, oh no. And - I can remember the war finishing, because it was my evening off, I believe it was on a Tuesday when it finished. And I wouldn't go because there was fires and people were absolutely going mad. It wa
s terrible, the - they were pulling everything down, the wire - the wooden fences and burning them, making }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 bonfires}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430  everywhere. And there was terrific noise.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That was in Leicester was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh that was in Leicester, yes. From there I went - oh yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was she an elderly lady?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes, she was - seventy. Seventy then. And - the way she used to dress, she used to have the crinoline dresses on and her hair - snow white hair, and she'd have it done up in a - knob at the top. Then she'd have
 two roses in her hair in the summer when she used to entertain the - wounded soldiers. The wounded soldiers used to have a - a blue uniform like this, that come from the hospital, and she'd have them in the garden for - afternoon tea and suchlike. And of
 course when - the parlourmaid was out it was my duty to wait on them. I used to be terrified. I wouldn't now mind you but I was - I hadn't got a young man then and - was terrified - every - awfully nervous. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 If you had had a young man would she h
ave allowed you to go out with him do you think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Well I suppose so. She'd have asked me of course. I should have to ask her permission. Because when my brother came home on leave - the cook - told me, there's a - young man asking for you, he says he'
s your brother. So of course I told Jessie the house - the parlourmaid and - I said, I'd like to go out with him. Well, she said, you'd better go up and ask the mistress then. So of course you'd go to go upstairs and - knock on the mistress' door and say,
 may I come in? She said, what is it? And you'd tell her. And - she let me go out with him. But I'd got to be home at a certain - at - now what was the time - nine o'clock. Nine o'clock.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You got an extension?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right, nine o'clock. Be home a
t nine o'clock. She asked to see him of course. She surprised me very much. Oh yes. She was in - came down into the drawing room. She was resting. And - I took him into the drawing room and she - asked me where he come from and where he'd been. He was in 
t
he North Irish Horse then, and - of course I went out with him. It was very nice. But - when I was out with him he says, you're not stopping there, he says. He says, you're go silly if you stop there with those two elderly people to live with all the whil
e. Because I used to have to share a bedroom with Jessie the parlourmaid.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 How old was Jessie then?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh well she was turned - over fifty. And the other one was sixty - odd. So I was only just like sixteen between the two. You see. And I used to sh
are a bedroom with - Jessie. And why I left there - I'll tell you the truth why I did leave there. Jessie had a letter one morning, and she used to - letters were on the breakfast table in the kitchen naturally. And - she went - used to go upstairs and re
a
d her letters in the bedroom. Which I never used to do, if I had a letter, which wasn't very often, but I did, I'd open it straight away to see who it was from. But I never took any notice, well then - one day she accused me of going to her - we had one c
h
est of drawers between us, and we had one little drawer each and the other three between us. And she accused me of going - going to this drawer and reading a letter. I said, I don't read your letter. I said, they're no use to me. I said, your letters don'
t
 interest me. Something she said, and I said, no I don't remember. She said, oh you read my letters. I said, I don't. That's a thing I would never do, read any body elses' letter, 'cos they're of no interest to me, not at her age. But anyway I said - don'
t
 you believe me? She said, no. Well, I said, well I'm going to see the mistress then. Because, I said, I came here with a clean character and I'm going away with a clean character. So I went to the mistress. She says, what is it? So I said, I've been accu
s
ed of reading Jessie's letters, which I - honestly did not do. So I said, do you believe me? She said, oh that's not - not my prerogative, she said, you - settle your own quarrels. I said, oh no. I said, I'm not stopping here if I can't be believed. Oh no
, I said, I've always had a clean character, I said, I came here with a clean character and I want a clean one going home - going away. And then I left. She wouldn't believe me. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What sort of a character did she give you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh she gave me a 
very good character because when I left - the day I left - she wanted the charriage and - it was hansome cab then, and saw my - boxes onto the carriage, paid for the carriage to take me to my sister. She couldn't have been nicer. But she would not take - 
the responsibility of sorting that quarrel out, and seeing fair play.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That seems out of character from what you've told me about her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 It wasn't right. Oh. More thought, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you think she was frightened of the parlourmaid?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Well I th
ink so because she'd been there so long you see, and she knew her ways. You see?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 I suppose she felt it was either her or you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. And she'd take her word before - and me being so young I suppose she thought - well I must have done you see. Well I mean, what - what was her letter to me at that age?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What was it about?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 I don't know. I couldn't tell you what was in the letter.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You never found out what it was all about?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 It must have been something she wanted to hide did you think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No. I used to think all sorts of things. I thought, well if - if they don't believe me what's the good of me stopping here, if they can't trust me, because I've got to share a bedroom with her you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So you just had this one room,
 did you have separate beds or did you have to share a bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 It had two beds - oh no, our own beds. Big beds.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And just the one chest of drawers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you have a cupboard to hang up your things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Yes. Yes. We had that. 
But it used to amuse me the way she was dressed. She used to dress. She - saw me watching her one day, she said, what are you looking at, she said, you go to sleep. And - she - she had long chemise on, they used to call them chemises then, they were made 
o
f linen. And then she put her corsets on - oh ever so stiff they were. Of course I only had a - a liberty bodice on sort of affair. But she had these stiff - and - bones down the front, and then she'd have long bloomers on. On - on top of this - these cor
s
ets, long - right down to her ankles with lace at the edges. Yes. I said, what do you wear those long things for? She says, it's nothing to do with you. I was awfully rude I suppose, but still the - curious. And then she'd wear another - long petticoat on
 top of that, two petticoats she used to wear, and then her frock. Oh I thought to myself, oh, fancy having all that lot on. Of course now I'm cold now but still - I was only young then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And her dress was long was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Yes. Used to swish o
n the floor. Miss Ellis expected me to wear the same you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
When she told you Jessie must put an addition to your dress to make it longer did Jessie do that?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes, undid the - undid the hem, and of course when I got to my sister's she says,
 you're not going about like that, she said, and she undid it and did it up again. And of course Miss Ellis saw it the next day I went out you see. Oh yes, without thinking you know I - I put it on and naturally went out and she had - must have been looki
ng out of the bedroom window.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What did she do then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh I had to take it up again.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did Jessie do it again then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, my sister did. Jessie wouldn't do it, she said, I've done it once, I'm not doing it again for you. And she said, well, s
he said - it was her too, she says, oh you mustn't stop there, she said, you can't go on like that, you're only a youngster yet. She expects you to be the same as them. 'Cos she had - but in that room - we used to - and we used to think it was wonderful -
 the - the wonderful - oh it must have been - thousands of pounds worth of - ornaments and silver in that drawing room. And every evening - it was the parlourmaid's duty to put this - silver - the best silver, onto a tray - on a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 baize}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430  green tray, and take i
t up to the mistress' bedroom every night. Even that in the sideboard. The little - salt - condiment sets, all that had to go up on - on this - two trays in fact, two trays upstairs into the bedroom, every night.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Why was that, do you know?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 In ca
se of burglary. She was so afraid someone - was going to - even - and yet - yet the dining - the - panty - the cupboards were full of silver. The silver tureens and the silver - dishes, vegetable dishes with the covers on. And - what else - the - cake - s
t
ands, silver cake stands, and the tea - teapot sets, everything. All in there, there was no end of them in there, but - of course - that was always double locked. The doors were - locked top and bottom. And - and key as well. Jessie used to have the bunch
 of keys on a - in her pocket. Hip pocket. Always.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But the stuff that couldn't be locked up had to be taken up to her bedroom?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Every night. Yes. Up to the mistress' bedroom.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did she have family prayers at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, she didn't. No, she d
idn't but - another situation I had - was - now she wasn't a Quakeress, she was a - chapel person. Miss - Mrs Tyler. She was married. She was very nice. And they used to have daily prayers - always. There was only me there too. I was the - the one general
 maid there.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Miss Ellis had a groom you said who left?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 He left, and - when I went there was a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 gardener}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
 and a houseboy. And then Jessie and - Fanny, the cook. Peculiar name. But - and Miss Ellis would - as I told, you, always had this water filte
red and - she'd have a little glass - dish on her - tray that we took up for breakfast. Then she'd - and I used - my job to - used the butter pats and make little tiny fancy - patterns of butter. Six in this little glass - glass dish, and put a tiny bit o
f - parsley in, for decoration - every morning regular. It - she was - don't matter - if she was on her own or whatever she had for breakfast that - butter dish was got to be just so. Whether she used the butter or not.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What else did she have for breakfast, do you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Let me see. Egg mostly. And - or grapefruit. Toast and marmalade. Oh yes, toast and marmalade every morning.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did she always have it in her room?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 In the wintertime. Yes. Well - I should think every - yes, it was every
 time, every - every morning because - she didn't used to get up 'til about dinnertime. Lunch. Midday you see - in the summer.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Then she'd come down would she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right, in the afternoon. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What time did they have lunch there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 I
 think usually one o'clock, unless there were visitors. All depends who - if there was visitors we'd have it early or later whichever they -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What sort of things would she have at lunchtime?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 She'd have soup every day in winter. Not always in the 
summer. But - when I was there helping Jessie, always. There'd be fish. She'd have - fish if she was on her own. In midday. And - just a sweet. And then she'd have a full course in the evening you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 How many courses did she have in the evening?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
In the evening - when she was on her own, she used to have six. When she was downstairs. But up in her bedroom she'd have two.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 She sometimes even had her evening meal in her bedroom?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. In the bedroom in the wintertime. Yes. She sort of
 lived in her bedroom all the winter. And of course she had this - companion with her all the while.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was she sort of separate from the servants?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes. Yes. Oh yes. She never - didn't interfere with us at all. Only gave us our rations out when the rations - came along. And she had her own room.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What was her name?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Miss Sneath. Miss Sneath, she was always - maiden lady of course. But - she was very nice.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What did you call the cook there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Fanny.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 She wasn't called Mrs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh no. No. No. No. And Miss Sneath, the companion, I would call her Miss Sneath. And Miss Ellis used to go to - Harrogate once a year, she used to stay with a month - a month with Lord and Lady Reckitt. The Reckitts Blue people if you remember. She stay
ed always - or was it the mustard people. No - Reckitts Blue that's right. Because she had - used to take the - waters. The spa waters. And she was there a month and of course we used to have to spring clean the house through. And there was carpet beating
 on the lawn and suchlike and these wooden carpet beaters we used to have then, and I know - know one afternoon we were clean - we were cleaning out the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 box room}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430  as we called it. A little room half this size. And - I said, what are all these trunks? And it was absolutely full of trunks - and cases, suitcases, and }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 whickers}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
 baskets. Because there was not many suitcases those days, it was all wicker baskets. And - all these huge trunks. And - I opened one one day, and there was these little - Quaker bonnets, th
e crinoline frocks - of course - oh I was awful I suppose but I went and put this bonnet on once. Jessie went downstairs for something or other, I don't know what it was, but anyway - don't I look nice? Oh dear, she did tell me off. Oh dear, she said, wha
t would Miss Ellis say if you - if she saw you? Put that away. She wouldn't touch a thing. I said, I'm only trying it on to see what I look like. I suppose I was - young like. Naturally.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did Quakers were different sort of clothes at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 We
ll she did, she used to wear - crinoline and in the - from the hall was this beautiful white staircase. Oak }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 panelled}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430  staircase, beautiful, and she'd take practically the whole of this - this width of the - staircase with her frocks. Used to - mind you she 
used to look nice. Lovely. Very nice, these things. Lovely, she used to come downstairs and her frocks used to - flap.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Who used to look after her clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh this Miss Sneath did. Her companion.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 She was like her personal maid?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes
. Oh yes. Yes. She used to do her hair and - and fasten her - hooks and suchlike.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 She was almost like a lady's maid?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right. Yes. And sewing and everything she used to do. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Who did things like mending the linen, did Miss Sneath do that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh - she did partly and Jessie. I didn't. No, I didn't do that, no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What about the washing, how was that done?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh that was sent to the laundry. Oh yes, yes. Even our clothes went to the laundry. Except during the war, and the
n we used to wash our own handkerchiefs. Our handkerchiefs, yes. And I used to wash my own stockings always. 'Course they were thick stockings them days. Black ones naturally.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You were a bit frightened of waiting at table were you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh very nervo
us, yes, until I got used to it and then I didn't mind it, but - the only thing I didn't - was - I was more nervous of - is waiting on these - wounded soldiers. I didn't like the soldiers. Silly - like. But of course - she used to do a lot of good rather 
and - mind you she used to have them - oh I should say twice a week. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Had you ever met any person like her before?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No. No, I'd come straight from the orphanage you see, that was my first situation.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 There must have been people of her clas
s who were interested in the orphanage though weren't there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Ah, she was on the committee.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But you never met them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No - oh yes, I did meet the ladies. Yes. Yes, there was Miss Emrod and there was Miss Gelly, and Miss Ellis of course. Mrs B
lunt. Mrs Cora. Oh there was about a dozen on the committee, but of course the orphanage was run through them. They - it was voluntary for them, and it was also kept up by the laundry work that was done by the - the older girls you see. Yes, if it wasn't 
f
or them the - that's why the - the - place - orphanage was - disbanded because you see the big girls - big girls, when the war broke out, some went on the land - those that were old enough. And of course the little ones - we could not do it, we were at sc
hool you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So there was no revenue coming in from the laundry?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, you see gradually it went down and down.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you ever meet Miss Ellis and these other ladies while you were there?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes, at the orphanage, yes, there used to be a
 - committee meeting once a month. And any girl that was - anything wrong or - or done anything wrong or - or they wanted to know anything about - the girl. I remember they - in the orphanage when I - I think I mentioned it to you, I was made monitor one 
year. I'd just left school then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You had to stop the girls from talking upstairs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
That's right. And - the bell rang and this - we were in the laundry this day - and they said, Helen, used to call me Helen there because there was another Nelliw, y
ou see, so I was called Helen. And - you're wanted in the committee room. I thought, what have I done wrong now? So I had to put a - when you leave school, instead of wearing pinafores you wore - wore white aprons. So of course I had to put a clean apron 
o
n and do my hair. And - put my best ribbon on. Oh no, when we left school we had - had to do our hair up in a bun, that's right, we had to do our hair up in a bun. Anyway I went up to the committee room, knocked on the door, come in. And they said, now we
'
ve had a very good report - from Matron about you. You've been trustworthy, you've worked very hard for the - for the last year and you're one of the elder ones, I was the third eldest then - we - we've decided to make you monitor for the year. Will you o
b
ey these rules? And of course they put out the rules what I was to keep - silence in the bedroom, take charge when - Matron or other under Matron was out of the room, and - as soon as the bell went in the morning, Matron rang her bell at half past six, I 
w
as to get up, make tea, and take tea to Matron and the Under Matron, and hot water. And then see to the girls all did their work. Even the children that went to school, that's - the children that went to school always had their work to do before breakfast
.
 The youngest was allowed to - she had to - dust down the bedroom - the stairs leading to the bedroom. The next youngest was - duster girl, she had to dust all the chairs in the girls sitting room. And - we each had our own jobs to do. And before I left s
c
hool I remember - there was there of us. We had to do the mangling. - Mangling in those days, and the girls washing. I suppose we were chattering, not taking - a look at what we were doing, and my finger went through the mangle. With the clothes, I was - 
getting a - a - the corners, and naturally it want up. I remember that. I was off - off school for - oh - about three weeks - but -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you go to hospital?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No. No, there was no hospital then, we went to the doctor, I passed out several times and I remember them taking me to the doctor. And - I was off - I had my arm in a sling. And - I used to do things left handed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You are left handed are you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You had to do things left handed then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Then. Yes. But every girl had 
a job to do. Now - on a Sunday morning - the Matron'd say, stand, and we'd all stand at the table from breakfast, we'd stand up. Wh}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8995913\charrsid675430 o}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430  is bedroom girl this week? We each used to take it in rotation. One week you'd be bedroom girl, another one sitting room gi
rl. Another - housemaid. Laundrymaid. Wash girl, the wash room, the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 wash hours}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 . Cook. And parlourmaid. You see, each had to take a - each week we took it in rotation.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 This was the older girls?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right, who were left school you see. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So one girl did all the cooking aided by somebody?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Well if there was a girl off school ill or anything like that she'd go in and help cook.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Otherwise it one girl doing the cooking on her own?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 One girl. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 For twenty-five girls?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes, yes. Oh the Matron used to - the Undermatron used to help her. And say we'll have so and so for today and - get everything ready for her and she used to do the - make the pastry, the cook, the Undermatron. She'd make - make pastry, but the girl w
ould have to do the potatoes and watch them - cook and everything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Quite a lot for the amount of people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes. And Sunday was a very busy day, least I should call it busy day because - we did - spent most of the day }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 changing}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430  our frocks. Everyt
hing was done on Saturday that could be done, and then of course there'd be the six o'clock - Communion service you have to put your best clothes - if you went, six, seven or eight. Then there's the eleven o'clock, you have to take your things off the min
ute you come back, take your best things off and put your second best on. Then if you went at eleven o'clock you used to have to change again, and then change when you come home again. Then if you went in three o'clock we'd change again, you know, }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 Catechism}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 . Change again in the evening. Sunday was all -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You could easily change your clothes four times on a Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Oh quite. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You had three grades of clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right. School -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was that from your ordinary clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh no, no, we used to have navy and white - uniform, you see, and then we'd have - one one lot - a frock for - for school. And used to have a frock for - at home. Playing in, as they call it, play frock. Then you'd have one for best.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So it was from your best into your play clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
That's right. Yes. Everyday frock they used to call it. And of course my - initials, I was called Helen then, I took over my sisters things. Hattie - Hettie. You see, H.K. Well I took her things and luckily her clot
hes fitted me. And I had her bedroom, her bed rather. And - even the nightdress cases had got H.K. on. Had nightdress cases then. But - what I - used to - used to worry me, in the winter - we only used to have this - two blankets at the most, and we had t
o take our - fold our - our counterpaines up every night, winter and summer, and put them on the end of the bed. And it used to be dreadfully cold. I used to hate the winter there you see, so 1 cold. Just the two blankets, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You couldn't have a hot water bottle or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no, nothing like that, oh no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you have bedsocks or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, nothing. No nothing. Just a nightdress. Even our best we used to have to take off, even in the wintertime.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Were the nightdresses long with long sleeves?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Oh yes, square yokes and - just plain flannelette.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was everything regulation?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did everybody have the same?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes, you had your own clothes. And you had to mend your own clothes too.-

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did they give you the clothes when you got there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You didn't have any of your own clothes from previously?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No. No. Because you had to go into the uniform, what clothes you went in were - I don't know what become of those. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 You never saw}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430  them again?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No. No. 'Cos I had a - I can remember I went into a - a - what they call a princess - slip when I went, gym suit - gym - gym frock you know with the - box -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Pleats?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right, and a blouse underneath. But that -
 I never saw that again. You see. And in the winter we used to wear boots and in the summer shoes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you have special shoes for Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh no. No, no. No. And often we used to - in the winter - in the summertime we'd go for walks. Of course - 
crocodile fashion. School fashion. And - we'd go up one road, Hickley Road, come through the cemetery and home again, down Regent Road and home again. That's the outing. And - until you left school, and then went into the laundry as I said - well then wee
k
ends - there used to be a - a - a young chap about - I'd say about twenty - years old, used to bring - bring a wheelbarrow, at the back of - to the back gates, and he used to take the washing in the hampers back to the places where they - come from. The d
ifferent people we used to do the washing for. But - 'til the war broke out, and of course he was called up, so then us - us girls that had left school, we used to have to find the places and take the hampers out. Hampers then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you wheel them on a sort of trolley?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no, used to have to carry them. Carry them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 They must have been very heavy weren't they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
The big ones, I don't know what come - happened to the big ones. The very large hampers. They must have gone somewhere, bigger girls must have taken them or something, but anyway we didn't. We could manage the - smaller ones.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you share the weight between two of you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Yes. One had one handle.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 A whicker basket would be an awkward thing to carry wouldn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Well no, not if there was two of you - all - more or less the same height. As if - unless went with a bigger girl and then of course it was awkward then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you have to go quite long distances, about a mile or two?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes, yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 On foot?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Or could you go by tram?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no, no - no trams.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Were there trams?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh there were trams, oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But they wouldn't give you the money for it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did they let you talk to people who came to the orphanage at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh well my sisters used to come and see me, of course I could - talk to them, they used to come into the girls sitting room and talk to us. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was that a regulation time of day they could come?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no, it was when
 their half day - half day used to be, they used to come and see me when I - on their half days you see. Used to come and take me out sometimes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That was quite all right was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. But the only time we had - anything different from bread and m
argarines and - a cup of tea for breakfast was Easter morning. And we used to have an egg then. We thought that was wonderful. Only time. And at Christmas. Christmas morning we'd have a - pork pie. And we thought that was wonderful.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 A pork pie for breakfast?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. Yes. And then - sometimes in the summertime there'd be - one of the committee would send a hamper of apples. Oh we thought it wonderful to have an apple for - after our dinner. Oh wonderful. And - the committee used to give each girl on
 - Easter morning, a little - chocolate Easter egg. About the size - about the size of a hens egg. Of course I was lucky because I had two sisters out - at service and they used to bring me another one. But of course we'd have to share. Anybody that didn'
t have anything you know, or just that one - from the committee, we used to have to share. Our friends of course.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You mean any gifts coming in had to be shared?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was that supervised, how would they get you to share?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. You
 had - each had your own drawer in the girls sitting room, and then she'd say, you give so and so some of that because she hasn't got any. Oh but in a nice way. You see, naturally you didn't mind. And I remember there was two little - three little girls u
s
ed - came to the orphanage, Tyrell their name was, three sisters. And their uncle and auntie used to have a - well I suppose a general store you'd call it and - they used to go - out - for a half day with these three little girls and they used to back and
 
often they'd bring a jar of jam or - or paste, meat paste. And they'd pass it round, any I pass it round? Used to have to ask first, may I pass it round, and - oh - when the jam come to you sometimes it was all gone. But anyway we used to watch this go - 
round and - oh - everybody -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you have jam every day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh no. No. Sometimes one of the big girls'd say - may we have some jam today please? And - otherwise we didn't used to - have it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Really you had two meals - your breakfast and tea were mainly bread?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. Yes, that was the menu. Yes. But sometimes on a Sunday we'd have a - a piece of cake, but not very often. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you remember ever feeling really hungry while you were there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no. Not hungry, but very - very - what sh
all I say - times when I used to think, oh it only I could talk to someone. And often I used to cry myself to sleep, and I know I wasn't the only one. But we daren't speak. You could hear the girl sobbing often.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You daren't speak because you were upstairs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
We're not - allowed to you see upstairs. But - I remember when I left school and I was monitor. In the bedroom I used to - we used to have to go and see that the - blackout curtains were up as I told you, and - I remember getting in - the Matr
on's bedroom and - I was a monitor then, and she said, I'll wonder what they'll do when I - I leave, or when I go. This was the Matron. Well, I said, they'll never do - get anybody to do what you've done. And I said, why is it we don't have to speak when 
w
e get upstairs? Well, she said, Helen, that's not my rule. She said, that was given my - that was one of the rules when I took over this job as Matron, that was one rule that I was - made to - see that was kept. She said, I wouldn't have - I wouldn't allo
w it really. I don't hold with it, but, she said, that's the rule and I must keep it. So she said, that's one rule that you must keep.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Did you ever talk to her about wanting someone to talk to and feeling a bit lonely?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, well, no, no, we daren't. We daren't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 There was a distance kept between you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
That's right, yes, you were - you were always kept as a group. Couldn't get - go individual and say, oh, I'm sorry, I've done so and so and - or can you tell me anything, you know. Some body to talk to and ask - ask about things.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you have to get that from each other?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
That's right. When I first went into the orphanage naturally - I hadn't a hairbrush I'd got a comb but no hairbrush. And I got upstairs and - undressed. Oh, I said,
 I've got - I haven't got a hairbrush, Annie, can you give me one? Sh, you mustn't talk. Why, I said. I couldn't make it out, not talking. I know one year we had - influenza went through the orphanage. And - well of course one after the other went down wi
t
h it. I had to sleep on the landing. My bed was on the landing. And - I was so lonely, I said, oh I don't like it up here, can I come in your room? Sh, you mustn't talk, and she reported me. I wasn't punished because I was on the landing, and I wasn't - I
 was new. Don't do it again - so -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So you never used to talk in your bedrooms?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh no. No. No. And we were always timed - our bathing was always timed. So many girls to so many - so long. And if we were any longer - Matron used to time us. The bel
l'd ring - and monitor would have to come up and see - who was in the bathroom how long you'd been here and who's next and who's next. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And you had to share the water?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes, three girls to one - bath full of water. I thought that was dreadf
ul. Couldn't have a bath you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
When you went to service that was? And you say she didn't use that bathroom herself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No. Nobody used - nobody, not even the maid - not even the parlourmaid or any of them used to use it. I said, fancy having a bathroom and can't use it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So what you had to bath with there was just a footbath was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Is it like a washing up bowl type of size?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes. You could just get your two feet in. It was a tin bath - with two handles one at each -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 The big bath was only for Miss Ellis?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes, yes. That was always washed out every night.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So really you could only ever have a wash down?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You never had anything like a bath?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. You kneel on - on the mat and jus
t wash yourself down. I used to be so cold in the wintertime. I should never be clean, I never felt I was clean.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was there any fire in that bedroom you shared with Jessie?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no. No, no fire. Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was it at the top of the house too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Was two storey - two storey house that one. Big square Georgian house that was, lovely house mind you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did the cook sleep in the house too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes, the cook had a little room on her own - in the back - of the house.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What did you have to call Miss Ellis?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Ma'am. Ma'am. Oh yes, ma'am. And you had to bob a curtsey when you - say, good morning madam. I often laugh at these things now, but - of course it would be so - serious at the time but -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Had you learnt to curtsey before you went there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes. Because you had to curtsey to the committee. You see, on Christmas, as I told you, we were given a Bible - if we were good, if we had so many marks. I know this Christmas - I was given a Bible. That's the year I was - monitor. And - g
ood conduct that was for. And - as they gave you - each girl was given something useful, either a writing case - or a shoe - outfit, cleaning outfit, and a - sewing basket. Something very useful that you had to use. And as they gave it to you, }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 thank you}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430  ma
'am, and you have to bob a curtsey. Oh dear. Another day's washing in my life. Oh. I shall never do another day's washing in my life. And I never have liked washing since. Ironing I did not mind, I liked that. But washing, no. I used to be so tired - with
 standing -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Kneeling down a lot too I suppose?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, I wasn't very - I wasn't very tall you see and they were - they - they were about this size - up to this height you see. And we were standing in these - clogs and this apron. Used to have mackintosh apron and then this }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 Hessian}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
 one - on the top, standing in all this steam for two days, Monday and Tuesday. And then this dolly tub you see, you - dollying all the while. You used to have to take turns dollying.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That dollying must have been tiring?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Have you ever heard it called ponching?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, that's a different thing altogether. You know the - where the sinks blocked up you have a - plunger? A sort of thing like that. Am - a - a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 poncher was. But you see -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you have that as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. No, we just had dolly pegs. Called dolly pegs.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Is ponching an alternative to dollying?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
That's right, that's the next thing to that, you see. And I know on Saturdays - the whole of the morning was spent cleaning the whole pl
ace from top to toe. From one room right down to the very cellar. Every girl had her own work to do. Bedrooms, the landing, the sitting room, the girls sitting room, the kitchens, the - wash houses, the yards. And then the - laundry. There was little laun
dry and a big laundry. Everything had to scrub - be scrubbed and polished. And do you know, that was the hardest day's work. And yet we used to have the break - well - the dinner was bread and cheese - and hasty pudding.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What was hasty pudding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Well I don't know whether I can explain it to you, more like a - you know you make a white paste with flour and water? Well this was made with - flour and milk. It was like a -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Sort of like glue?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Yes, I can't explain it, it was just like a 
paste. Then we used to have treacle with it. And used to - so hungry after you'd done all this scrubbing and cleaning. The day you wanted more you had less. I suppose they didn't have the time to do it you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Could you have as much bread and cheese as you liked?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh no, it was put on the table - on a plate. On your plate, yes. And the margarine was put in a little square on your plate - each put - the Undermatron used to give that out.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was that always the same at other meals too, there wasn
't as much bread as you liked?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh no, just - the breakfast we'd have two pieces. That'd be equivalent to one slice now. We'd have to - that - that was for the younger ones, what the bigger ones - I don't remember what the bigger ones used to have. Bu
t we were all at the one table but theirs was up that end and us children down this end you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 The twenty-five of you all sat at one table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes. Yes. And the Matron used to have her own little table, the two Matrons. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Who sat at the head of your table then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 The monitor. The monitor. The girl who was monitor take that place.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So you did that for a while?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
For a little while but I - didn't like it because we were right in the dark, right in the draught of two doors. From the - yards to the girls sitting room you see, we were right in the middle of them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was it the job of anybody to supervise the manners at the table?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh we weren't allowed to talk unless we asked, we asked whether we may talk now. Yes, you can talk now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 At what stage were you allowed to talk?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 When we'd finished - our meal. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Otherwise you ate in silence?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Yes. We had to say grace of course.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 How was grace said?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 All stand.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you all say it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, we all stand and - the Matron'd say that. Except on the - Christmas, then the vicar used to say it. 'Cos he used to come and have tea with Matron.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you have grace before and after the meal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Always. And prayers of course - night and morning.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
At the meal was there anything you could ask for, could you speak to ask somebody to pass the salt?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes. Oh yes. Oh yes, if the jam was at that end and you wanted it, would you pass the jam please? And - she'd say - well there's n
o need to shout. It'll come on your end in a minute. You know, sometimes we used to get impatient and say, hurry up. Naturally. And all the water - for the washing - for - to go into the wash house was always used - a pump was always used for the water. W
asn't a tap. For the washing. Used to have pump this - pump the water.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 There was a tap for drinking water?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 At a meal could you ask for a second helping?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Some of the big girls used to, not us little ones. Weren't allow
ed. But if there was - wasn't enough - one of the girls'd say - we've run out of bread Matron, could we have some more please? You see, sometimes there - there wouldn't be enough. Whoever was cook didn't - cut enough.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Suppose it was something you'd enjoyed, could you ask for some more?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes - for dinnertime - midday meal - I can remember the Matron used to cook the pastry, a slab of pastry in the meat tins, be big meat tins. And if there was any over she'd say, would any of you like any more? 
To clean it up. You see, and then whoever was up there first got the - until it was all gone and those - when it's gone you have to go back again to your seat.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 The governors sent fruit sometimes, was that the only time you had fruit?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Fruit, yes,
 yes. Fruit or custard or anything like that, not fruit and custard like we - do have tea here - these days. That was a luxury you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But you did have a pudding at midday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Yes, pastry or - milk pudding.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But not a fruit pudding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh no, no. Oh I say - no, I'm telling a lie. We did. One summertime I remember we had a - what they call a summer pudding. That was - a bazin - lined with bread, with the crusts all cut off. The fruit juice put in the bottom and then all kinds of summe
r fruit such as blackberries and - plums, all that, and there was three of those. For the twenty-five girls, mind you they weren't very big ones but there'd be three of those. And that was a real luxury, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you have cream too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no, we di
dn't used to have cream. No. No. And with - on our porridge in the winger - we used to have treacle. Black treacle. Black treacle, not - in - during the war that was, black treacle. Not sugar.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You were twelve when you went there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Before you went did anybody consult you as to whether you'd like to go?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh auntie did. Oh yes. She said - oh -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Your aunt Emily?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, my Aunt Lucy. Aunt Lucy that lived in Balaam Street. And - she said, you're going to a school. Naturally - 
you're going to a school with a lot more little girl and you'll be ever so happy and it's in the country. You'll se the trees growing, you'll see apple trees growing, which I hadn't seen, and I can remember my first holiday from the orphanage. Each child 
w
as a - allowed a week - out in to the country, and - she'd pick - one, two, three - three different places, little village and find different ladies that'd take us, say two at a time. And I remember going to Kirkby Muckslow and there was one of the commit
t
ee - Mr Rippon, that's right, and his wife was on the committee, and he - he - she used to invite us two - the two girls were in - that were at Kirkby Maxloe for tea one afternoon, afternoon tea. I can remember him coming home at half past five, and he to
o
k us down the orchard, and do you know that was the first time I'd seen an apple growing on a tree? I'd seen them in the shops but never on a tree. And I was twelve year old. And I remember he picked the biggest apple he could find - and I said, I shall n
e
ver eat all this, I couldn't manage it all - not before tea, but it was - oh I thought it wonderful to see apple growing. I simply stood in amazement - at these apples, see these apples growing. When I look - think back I think to myself, children now, if
 you told them that they wouldn't believe you. Well I'd never been out of London you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Not even for a day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh I went - when I was with Aunt Emily we went down to - Ramsgate for a holiday. Went by steamer. Along the Thames. And I know they were all seasick but I wasn't. And they all vanished downstairs and I was on the top.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you stay in Ramsgate in a boarding house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes. Yes. I slept on the floor. Yes, I slept on the floor then. And - my aunt had the bedroom, had the bed, and - I slept on the floor.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did your uncle go too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, uncle was in the fire station. He was on duty.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 It was your Aunt Emily and another aunt?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Another aunt. Two aunts.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Your Aunt Lucy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. Aunt - oh - Elsie. Elsie. But whether sh
e was my real aunt I don't know but Aunt Emily was. But I used to call her Auntie Elsie, that's right, and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You all had the one room there did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Aunt Elsie and Aunt Emily slept in one - in the big bed, I slept on the floor and gran had a room on her own.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Gran went too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes, gran was there. Yes, because I kept with - I used to stay with gran, you know, I - gran was my companion. Aunties used to be - they were young I suppose and wanted go out in the evenings on their own. And - a
nd on the journey I remember - they all vanished. First Aunt Emily went, then Aunt Elsie went. Then grannie went I thought, where are they going? I learnt afterwards they were all seasick you see. And I was left on the top.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What did you do while you 
were at Ramsgate, do you remember anything about that holiday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh I remember going on the sands. And punch and Judy was there. Which - I didn't like. Most children like Punch and Judy, but I - I used to be frightened, I used to - they used to be figh
ting. So - he was - I said, no, he's cruel, I don't like him. Oh I had some funny ideas when I was a child. I don't now, I don't like watching boxing or wrestling or anything like that or - or - rugby. Oh no, I didn't - gran used to - couldn't understand 
me, she said, you're a funny child, you - don't like Punch and Judy. And of course that was the done thing then for a child to see Punch and Judy.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Were there any things like pierots?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Yes, the - pierrettes and - the - banjos and such like 
with their straw hats and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did they have blackened faces and that tupe of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes, yes. Yes. And dance round you see, and the striped trousers and - coats, I can remember that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Were there the usual kind of thing they have on the pier
 now, round abouts and all that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh I don't know, I don't remember that. No, I was never out long enough for that I don't think. I couldn't tell you. I couldn't tell you, the - I remember these pierrettes on the - on the pier, I remember seeing this 
- stage with these - sort of theatre, outside theatre.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 When you were on the sands who would be with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Gran. More or less gran.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 She'd stay with you most of the time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Gran, 'cos auntie - Aunt Emily and Aunt Elsie used to go up into t
he town and one thing and another. And - in the evenings gran used to stay with me, I should go to bed. And - the young ones used to go out naturally.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You say you slept on the floor, did you have anything under you?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 A mattress. Oh yes, I had th
e mattress. Oh yes, and blankets, sheets and blankets. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
When you were staying with your Aunt Emily you were also on the floor weren't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Ah, when - when uncle was off duty. He slept with auntie in the bedroom, you see. And I used to have my bedroom - bed in - in the living room, on the floor you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 When he was on duty did you sleep with your aunt?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. I slept with her then, oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did they have children of their own?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 They - they did towards the end, she had -
 one little girl then. Well that's why I left because uncle used to blame - anything was wrong it was my fault. Yes. Auntie was - I used to love auntie, she used to do everything for me you know and - very kind, give me anything. But uncle - uncle was - I
 
don't know, he'd got a violent temper, and I know when I used to go to school - he'd give me some money to buy a - a paper - on my way, used to go through - Liverpool Street station, railway station, to school. And on my way through the station I used to 
h
ave to buy this paper. Newspaper. And if he'd lost on the horses - used to do a lot of betting I suppose - and I know one day I came home from school and I couldn't find auntie. Went into the bedroom-and she was crying bitterly. Of course I flew to her. W
h
at - ever is wrong, what's wrong auntie? Of course uncle had lost on the horses. And he'd come home in - upstairs in a temper and thrown her dinner at her. Oh, I said, he is a brute. Oh, I said, he is a brute. I said, I don't like him. And I never did lik
e him from that day to this. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 After that incident you mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Yes, that stuck in my mind as a child, to think he'd - make auntie cry.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 How had you }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 felt}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430  about him before that incident?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh quite all right, he used to - be all righ
t, and then when the baby arrived - naturally - he thought the world of the baby. And anything wrong - it was my fault. I did it. He says, you've done that haven't you? You know, he used to fly in a temper at me. And I couldn't bear anybody to fly in a te
mper and I hadn't done anything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 How much older were you than the baby then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh - I'd be about I should say. Yes. Very sensitive, I was too sensitive really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You'd had a lot of hard knocks really hadn't you?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 I don't know but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But children hate that sort of thing don't they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes, I don't like to be snubbed. Especially, I used to love auntie, think he was cruel to her, oh that was dreadful.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What sort of particular things would he blame you for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 He'd say - if the
re was - I remember particularly one Sunday morning, the milkman had been. And he came upstairs, and he said - you spilt that }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 milks on}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430  the - on the step again. I said, me? I said, no, I didn't. He says, you have, don't answer me back. He blamed onto me, it
 wasn't me. It was either the ladle or the milkman had spilt it, you know - you see, but it wasn't me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 The milkman would pour it into churns wouldn't he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right - from the churn into the jug you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And the jug would be left on the doorstep would it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And a few drops were easily spilt I suppose?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
That's right. And he used to blame me for little things like that that I - and if I didn't clean the buttons right, his buttons on his coat, mind you I was never allo
wed to touch his helmet. Used to wear brass helmets those days. The - only man that used to wear the black helmets was the men - called the salvage corps. Well they were allowed - they were supposed to - save all the furniture. Not the people. They saved 
t
he furniture, the salvage men, those in the black helmets. Those with the brass helmets used to - smash their way in to save the people. And put the fir out, you see. And - but he would never let me - I'd clean his buttons and his boots. But never let me 
touch that helmet, because the least scratch - because they used to be beautiful - brass. Wouldn't have a scratch on it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Who cleaned it then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
He did. Oh yes. I wasn't allowed to touch that. Because you see there'd be the coat of arms of the - hel
met. Used to look lovely when they were - all on the engine and see all these glittering - helmets you see. But nowadays they don't wear them do they? That's right, yes. That's right, yes, yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That time when he told you off about spilling the mi
lk is that the time when you left?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Went away. Yes, I went. In the evening they went out in the - uncle was on duty and auntie went out, and I was - I was told to put the baby to bed. Feed the baby and put it to bed. I fed the baby, undressed her, pu
t her to bed, in her cot, put the cot up. And put all my best clothes on. 'Cos I used to have some nice - lovely clothes there. Got them all out of the cupboard - drawers and one thing and another, and - put all the best things on. Went down - because - i
n the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 watch room}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
 there was glass, halfway you see. And I bent down so as uncle wouldn't see me, because I knew he was on duty, and it was raining when I got out there. Got outside. But I didn't care, I thought, no, I'm not stopping here. He's blaming me for
 everything. Of course I ran all the way home. From Blackfriars - from - Bishopsgate over to Blackfriars. To father's. And I can remember - just coming round - I must have collapsed when I got there because - father was sitting beside the couch. And he sa
i
d, are you better now? He said, what's the matter? And I said, oh I don't like uncle any more, I said, he's cruel. I said, he's cruel to auntie, I said, and he blames me for everything. He said, you're not going back there. And I didn't go back again. And
 of course the firemen were all out and the police were out looking for me. I was missing you see. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And the baby left all alone?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. When auntie come home of course the baby - she was all right mind you.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 She was understanding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Ye
s. Oh yes. But I remember on the - I'd been home - a fortnight, and on the Wednesday - for some reason or other I went around to gran's which - as I told you, gran lived in the next street, in - Peabody Buildings. And auntie was there. And of course she b
u
rst out crying, she said, oh there you are, she says, what did you leave me for? And she wanted me to go back again, but I wouldn't. No. I wouldn't go back again. I said, no. She said, why not? I said, well I love you, but I don't love uncle. And she brou
ght all my clothes the next time she came to see gran, she brought all my clothes with - with her.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
So that wasn't the same time that you couldn't stay there because your father couldn't keep up the payments?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, that was afterwards. That was the - no - that was the first time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
The first time you had to leave because your auntie couldn't afford to go on keeping you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, the first time I left was - 'cos - when I left.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 The time you've just told me about?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right. It was the
 second time - when - the baby was - arrived then. And I left gran's and went to auntie's and - auntie said, oh you'll have to go - this was uncle, he says, you'll have to go, he said, we can't keep you for nothing. So I remember him saying that. Can't ke
ep her for nothing.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Do you think in fact they could actually have afforded it but he didn't want to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Who, my father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Your uncle?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes, yes, he was earning good wages then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 It wasn't that they really couldn't afford it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 It was more that he just didn't want to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Didn't want me. I felt he didn't want me because they'd got the baby - you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did your auntie say anything to you about it then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no, auntie didn't. Oh no. No, she was sorry I left. S
he wanted me to go back again. Oh yes. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But then after that second time you went back home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
I stayed - at home. Stayed home then. From there we went to - I told you we went to - Vincent Street and from there we went to Anne Street, back again to Plaistow. And from there I went to the orphanage.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Having spent a little time with your Aunt Lucy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
That's right, before I went to the orphanage. Well that's the same with my brother, he stayed with Auntie Lucy for a little while.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Have 
you any idea roughly how many months or years you were with Aunt Emily in those two stretches of time you were with her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 I should say about - two years, say a year in - in each - section. Yes. Yes.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 How long were you actually living with your gran?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh not very long, only about six months - in between. In between. Yes, that's right, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Except for those two spells with your auntie you were mainly with your father?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Yes. 'Til I went to the orphanage.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was he inclined to blame you for things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Who, my father? Oh no, my father, no, he thought the world of us. Oh yes. Oh yes, he - and we often say now - we've often said when we've - since we've grown up, I wonder why he never married again, having all those children. M
any men would have done. But of course there weren't many women to take on a whole family like that, and a crippled child in the bargain. You see?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did he even keep Ernie with him after your mother died?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, Ernie went with a - a Mrs Fieldhouse. 
Have I told you when - when I - I was in Guy's hospital? When I - that was be - after mother died. Or was it before mother died? That I couldn't tell you. I remember my brother - eldest brother, coming to fetch me home - from Guy's hospital, and I had a g
reen shade over my eyes. I couldn't see, I couldn't lift it in daylight or candle light.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Why was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
I don't know what was wrong. But it took a long long while to get better. And I - and - that's why I'm such a duffer I think, at school. My bro
ther - you know Balaam Street don't you? Well along - towards Forest Gate there's a hospital in between there, and they - where auntie used to live. And - dinnertimes - my brother was younger than I - should be - three to four years younger than I but - a
n
yway he used to go with me to this hospital and I used to have drops and ointment to put in my eyes, and of course he used to see me back to school. And of course I couldn't do the sewing, I couldn't do reading, I remember giving cottons out at - on the -
 sewing class, pink in one hand and blue in the other. And - they gradually got right again but - oh I was a long time before I could - do without this green shade over my eyes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Had you got rid of it by the time you went to the orphanage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes.
 Because I can remember auntie saying to - Miss Attwood, that was the Matron about having my eyes - tested. And - she said, well we'll find that out - when she's been with us a little while. And I never had anymore trouble.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But it troubled you for some years?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. Oh yes. That's why I - I couldn't - that's why I'm such a duffer at - arithmetic or anything like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Because you were handicapped in that way?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. And I - at school I used to go down to help with the - with the infants, 
the babies, because I can remember in the afternoons we used to turn the tables upside down and fix canvas to each corner and the children used to go to sleep in the afternoon for an hour, 'til playtime. And then I used to get them up and take them - let 
them go out to play, and put the tables up again ready for the next lesson. I can remember that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was that in Leicester?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No. No, that was London. London, because I couldn't see, that was in Bear Lane school, I remember that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You couldn't see?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So they just gave you the job of looking after the infants?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Looked after them and - yes, and - and do the messages, run the messages.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You actually couldn't see then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 I could - I just - I could see persons but I couldn't see
 enough to read - and write.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Were you always like that or did it sometimes get worse and sometimes better?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, no, it was worse to start with and then it gradually got better. You see. Until about - say I was about ten. Yes, when I went to Aunt 
Emily's, that's right, at the fire station, I could see then. And I remember being in the hospital because it must have been - Christmastime, 'cos the nurse - picked me out of my cot, I must have been - it must have been when mother - was alive then 'cos 
-
 I was in a cot. And I remember feeling the Christmas tree, with the parcels, and Father Christmas's beard. Fancy remembering that at this age. Seventy. And yet I remember that. And I think I must have had an operation because - I can remember - it was ei
ther a terrific bad dream - or I was coming out of the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 anaesthetic}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
 because - I could see this horrible thing - figures all running round my cot. And I can remember the nurse - taking me on her knee and saying, now it's all right, it's all right, it's all right. Oh right and as plain as if it was only yesterday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Do you remember your mother at all, do you remember her coming to visit you in hospital?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, no. No, I don't remember that. The only thing I remember mother - was - Friday evenings when we'
d had our baths, we'd line up for - a spoonful of this Scotts emulsion. That was a great - remedy in those days. Scotts emulsion and - brimstone and treacle. You've heard of that? That's right. That's right. 'Cos I remember when I was with gran - gran was
 
a great believer in this - brimstone and treacle, and I know - I went - used to like it, I was very fond of it. I - I - well - finished it off one day, there was so much in the basin, I don't know how much but anyway I had. She said, you've been to that b
rimstone and treacle and naturally I - I was in the toilet I suppose.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Your mother would administer this do}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8995913\charrsid675430 se}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430  would she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes. And my eldest sister's told me since - oh, not long before my sister died, about - five years ago, she said, do you r
emember the time - we had - we all had - crusts to eat? She said - they come home from school one day, I was in the high chair so I wasn't very old. There was - crusts on each plate. And evidently they didn't used to eat their crusts, and they used to put
 
them on the ledge under the table, there was a ledge under the table. And then - mother said - she said - mother had tipped the table up one day to scrub the legs and out fell all these - crusts. So of course - she said, you were all right, she said, you 
were in the high chair, you got sugar to dip yours in. I said, I don't remember it. She said, oh yes she did, you had sugar but we had to eat ours without. There was nothing to eat until those crusts had gone. I don't remember it. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was that your sister Hettie who told you that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Where had your mother come from, do you know?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 I couldn't tell you. I couldn't tell you. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was your father a Londoner do you know?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes, he was a Londoner, all his family were Lond
on but where my mother come from I couldn't tell you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was your Aunt Emily your mother's side of the family or your father's side?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Aunt Emily. Mother's side. Mother's side. And her name was Wardell. And in fact I went as Nellie Wardell. Not by my own name, Nellie Gilbey. When I was with auntie for a little while, you know, in the fire station, I was always known as Nellie Wardell.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you know why she did that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Well she wanted me to stay with her you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Sort of unofficially adopted you mean?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Then there was also the aunt at Hampstead Heath who wanted you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes, Aunt Mary Ann.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you think that your father could have had you adopted by one of those aunts?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. If he could let me, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But he wanted to keep you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And yet he let you go to the orphanage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And then you really lost touch with him after that didn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes, lost touch with him for - oh - years, then I was about eighteen when I went to se
e him as I told you. And my brother - my youngest brother, we lost contact with him for forty years. Until - not this last time he came home but the time before - ten years previous to that, we hadn't seen him for forty years. And that was my eldest broth
er that - got in touch with - I don't know whether it was the Red Cross - or the Salvation Army. And they found him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You think it was about fifteen years ago?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. Yes, 'cos we were at kings Road eight. Eight, and we've been up here four - five. And - ten years at - Anderson Avenue, and he died with in a - we'd been there about - six years. So it must be about fifteen years ago.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You wouldn't know whether your mother had a job before she got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 I couldn't tell you. I've no idea.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 I wondered if you'd ever heard any of the older girls talking about that?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And she wouldn't have worked after her marriage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So as far as her ever having done paid work outside the home you don't know?

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Could you tell me something about clothes, you mentioned that your Aunt Emily made clothes for you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes, she made lovely clothes. I had the best of everything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you get clothes from any of your other relations?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, only w
hen I was going to the orphanage, my Aunt Lucy - found me some clothes to go in.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Otherwise were all your clothes supplied by your Aunt Emily?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Your gran didn't make any?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. No. Gran didn't, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What about shoes, where were they got?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh Auntie Emily brought those.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 She brought those too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Even when you weren't living with her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, oh no, she didn't buy all - no, when I was at home - I suppose father bought them. You see. Father bought them you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You don't remember that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Don't remember that. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Do you remember if you ever got second hand clothes from jumble sales or anything like that? When you were with your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That I couldn't tell you, no, I don't - oh yes, 
yes, he got them from anywhere. My eldest sister, I mean she - she was still at school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But when you were with your father you had some very hard times didn't you?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But did you always have boots and shoes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no. No, sometimes
 - sometimes we didn't have shoes. I had shoes with the bottom out. Very bad times naturally.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you ever actually go barefoot?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no. No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You said there were children who did?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes, I can remember them. Yes, in my class. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But you'd sometimes have shoes that were .......
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Secondhand from other people, yes. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 How would you be given those, do you know?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Well Jessie - Jessie used to go to a - well I used to have the evening with the younger ones but Je
ssie used to go to another institute. You see, and often she'd bring a pair of shoes home and say, will these fit you Nell, see if they fit you? Oh yes. And I used to - where she got them from I don't know. But they were - what I can understand they used 
to be sent to this - institute - in a hamper. So many clothes from a mission, some mission. What I can remember. And - any child that wanted anything they - used to have them. You see?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Clothes and boots that would be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 It was more boots then than shoes wasn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Not shoes, no, I - can remember boots.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Coming up to about here, that sort of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. Yes. Black. And lace - lace-ups of course. And - I mean when I was with auntie of course I used to have the proper boots and - nice boots then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What about the mending of your clothes, did Jessie mend?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes, Jessie used to mend then. Yes. The only thing is, when Jessie went away and I was with father, and with my brother - well, nobody did anything for
 us, we used to - had to wash ourselves and - wash our own clothes out. Father used to do a lot of washing too, he used to wash the clothes out, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 When did he do that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Used to do it in the evening when we'd gone to bed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Where could he dry clothes in those rooms?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Up in his room - front room. We used - he used to have - the front room. By the fire.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 He'd dry them by the fire?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Wh}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8995913\charrsid675430 ere}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430  would he wash when you were in Anne Street and Vincent Street?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 He used t
o go and get some water out of the - tap from - we used to go through Mrs Lawrence's room to the scullery to get the water. And then he used to fill the kettle and bring the kettle into his room and - wash there. We should have to wash in that room you se
e as well. We never had a bath, I can't remember a thing there. We used to wash down and that's as far as I remember.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Just with a bowl?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 The same as you had to do at Miss Ellis's?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did Mrs Lawrence do any cooking for you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. No. Father used to do that at night.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What did he have to cook on there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 An open stove. Yes, open stove.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What is an open stove like, has it got no plates on it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 It's a - a - a - it's a - a shelf like that and then you come
 down, there's the grate - and the bars across. And her was the oven and then just beside the oven - often, not always, there'd be a - a little receptacle and there was - you pour the water in there. And there was a tap, and that used to hot the water, bu
t not all stoves used to have that, but this one I remember particularly used to have. Hot water then.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But if you wanted to boil a kettle?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Well you'd boil it on the open stove. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was that coke?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh I don't remember. No, I don't know, can't remember.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Some sort of fuel of that kind though?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes, coal or coke, one or the other. I don't think coke was - in fashion then, I don't - I don't remember.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Would that be in his front room?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Where he used to sleep.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 He'd sleep and cook and wash and do everything in there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And wash. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 After your sister went you often didn't have much?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, I never - we used to have what we could get, if there was anything in the cupboard we'd have it and if there wasn't - we used to go errands to get something.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did he cook in the evenings if he had something?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. Yes, if he was - he'd been down Billings - working down Billings - Billings - gate market, he could get a job, he'd come home with some fish. Or 
if he was in the - what's that market where the - the meat - Smithfield. Used to go round all the markets to get jobs I suppose, because he was out of work a long time then, sometimes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Which was the worst time, Vincent Street or Anne Street?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes, Vincent Street. Vincent Street.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That was the hardest time for you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Terrible, yes. Yes. Yes, often we used to go days with - often days without - no breakfast as I tell you 'til we got that the - free tickets at the mission.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was the mission near Shadwell, somewhere near there?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. Yes, somewhere there. I could - take you to the place but I couldn't - direct you to it, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
When you were at Anne Street did you go to any mission there to get breakfast or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no. No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was he in work more of the time at Anne Street?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Well yes, more. Yes, and - and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But that kind of work they often had odd times off didn't they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh - oh yes, yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But times were worse in Vincent Place?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 They were. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did he ever do any sewing do you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 He used to sew his own buttons on, I know that. Or if we had a button off.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
What about mending shoes, did he ever put a sole on a boot or shoe do you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 When we were little he u
sed to, when we - in - James Street when mother was alive he always used to do - mending. Because I remember the long leg with the foot on the top, iron foot on the top. I can remember him putting the boots on this and hammering away. Yes. And all the dif
ferent sizes of these iron feet - the little ones and the big ones.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But he didn't continue with that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, no, got rid of all that. Got rid - I remember - when we were at - Anne Street - we had a family Bible. I don't know whether they have them n
ow, and it had got a vast clasp on it. And it was heavy, could only just lift it. And we used to sit on the bed and look at this family Bible, there was - photographs on one side, one page and then on the other page was the - marriage - births - births, c
o
nfirmation, wedding, death, marriage and death, all on this - all the family - history on this one side. And we used to look - old fashioned photographs. We were real old fashioned. And of course we didn't know who - they were. But this was full of all ph
otographs and all the history, family history. And I often wonder what become of that Bible. As kiddies - of course we wouldn't know - the value of it but it would be valuable now I expect. Had all the family history on it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What side of the family was it, do you know?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
All the family, father's and mother's. Aunts and Uncles. Yes. I can remember one big photograph in it, there was - father had his four brothers. Sitting - four brothers were sitting - no, three brothers were sitting and father and a
nother one standing at the back. But of course all the others in the photographs in this album was - all different - Bible rather was all - French to us, we wouldn't know who they were. They'd be too old fashioned.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was the granny your mother's mother that you used to stay with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, that was - Auntie Emilys mother. Aunt Emily's mother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And Aunt Emily was your mother's sister?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right, yes. I've got a - a - a picture belonging to my mother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Your granny wasn't your mother's mother as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Aunt Emily and your mother had different mothers did they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 I couldn't tell you that. No, I couldn't tell you that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Your father's brothers, was one of them your Uncle Arthur that you lived with?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right, yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So really you had relations on both sides of the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You had some people who took an interest in you and helped on both sides?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right, yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So probably your mother had been a Londoner?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 I think so, I think so.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You never heard to the contrary anyway?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. No. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you ever meet any grandfathers on either side of the family?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No. Unless of course they were at the funeral and I wouldn't know. I just remember - one aunt and that was Aunt Ada at the funeral with - 'cos of the baby, Ronnie. That's all. I suppose that's why I remember that one.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Aunt Ada was another sister of your mother's was she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Yes. And my sister was named after her. She's still 
out there. Yes. Out in New Zealand.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
When you were in Vincent Street you had to more or less do everything for yourself and your brother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Were you any good at sewing, could you manage to mend anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did they teach you at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
At school, oh yes, we were taught at school when I could see. You see - no, no, I'd forgotten that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That must have been awfully difficult for you to try and mend things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. It's the same when we were making the
 - chains for Christmas - off of the paper. I could feel the - end of the paper. Ernie used to cut them and I used to fold them. That's how we used to - at Christmas. No, that was terrible place that was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 In Vincent street?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh, people used to sc
ream and fight and - carry on at night - at the weekend. Used to be terrible.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did they drink a lot, was that what it was do you think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Drink. I'll murder you, they'd scream murder and - oh -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Were there any other children living in that house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, not as we know. No, we used to keep ourselves to ourselves. I used to - daren't go out after it was got dark. Used to sit on the bed and wait for dad to come home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did he tell you to keep indoors?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Yes. The only time I 
remember - we'd - locked ourselves out or I'd lost the key or something. But it was cold. And we used to - stand - there was a - one shop - in the main road, where they used to sell - a sausage - hot sausages and pease pudding and all that sort of thing a
n
d it used to - they used to cook - down in the basement, and there was a grating. And we'd stand there to get warm. And then we'd go - go along further - along the road and - see the Christmas - toys and suchlike. Then when we got cold used to - stand in 
the warm again. 'Til father come home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Did your father ever tell you stories or anything like that when you were a child do you remember? Stories about his childhood or just talk to you much about the old days at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. No. No. All he used to s
ay, now when you get away from the table - you'll say, I thank the Lord for what I've had, and if there's something more I'll be very glad, but as the times are very bad I thank the Lord for what I've had. Used to learn that - off by heart. I remember tha
t.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you always have to say that then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did he teach you prayers at night?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, mother did - mother did that, so my sister told - mother used to tell us stories. Different stories.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did your father keep you up to your prayers afterwards?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no. No. No. No. Used to say them automatic I suppose then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 He didn't hear them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, oh no. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did he like you to go to Sunday school or didn't he bother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, we didn't, not when we were on our own. Ju
st my brother - just my brother and I, we never -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What about when Jessie was with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes, Jessie, we used to go with Jessie. Yes, 'cos I can remember when we were at Anne Street - we were upstairs then, because - there was some - the Salvat
ion Army in the street used to come and play - on Sundays and there was a black man up the - in the group. And - I can remember father saying - they used to sing, wash me and I shall be whiter than snow. He'd say, how are they going to get him white? I re
member that but - but apart - apart from prayers or anything he never used to bother. No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But Jessie used to go did she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes, Jessie used to take us. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That was Church of England was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Always.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you remember anybody ever reading you stories when you were a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh well, orphanage they used read us - to us. Oh yes, we used to have - I don't know whether you know the G.F.S. Girls Friendly Society. Girls Friendly Society. Well the - one of the committee used to 
come and take us in the evening, and we'd all sit round - in chairs and - she'd talk about the verse of Bible, chapter of the Bible and describe it to us. And then we'd have to write a - essay on it. And then once a year we were given a paper with - so ma
ny questions on, to answer them. And I won a prize then. Scripture prize. That's all I can seem to win, scripture prizes and - good behaviour and attendance, but lesson, no. I used to leave that to my sister.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was she good at these things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes, sh
e's - she's the brainy one of the family. And - she - funnily enough she didn't go in the orphanage. No, she didn't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 It was Ada and Hetty who went?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Ada and I, yes. Yes, but not Jessie. I don't know, Jessie seems - she was - always had to work on
 her own. Find her own way, she went into service naturally. She went on the land to start with. Then she went on munitions during the 1914 war. And - apart - when she left us, that was when she left us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 When she left you she went on the land?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, she went domestic service then. Because she was in a vicarage at Coventry.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 She found her own place then did she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 From then on she was on her own. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So it was just you and Hettie that went to the orphanage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. And Ada. Ada.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You came home expecting her to be there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 She never came - never come back.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 She'd already left school by then had she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. Jessie had. Because I asked her, I said, do - what become of you, I said, you know we were at Vincent Street? She
 said, yes, that dreadful place. I said - she said, what become of you? Of course I had to tell her all that happened to us then. Luckily we weren't there long, we were there about six months but it was a terrible six months.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You really had to look after everything yourselves?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Really rough, yes. Yes. And then we didn't know what time - what - we hadn't had a change of clothes even. Not my brother nor I.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What did you do about that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Just kept on - the same clothes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You'd go to bed in them and get up in them and that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. We'd have nightdresses or - pyjamas or anything like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But you hadn't had that before either, but Jessie washed your things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Jessie did. When we were - with Jessie, when Jessie was home - w
e didn't have nightdresses. We slept in our petticoats. Slept in our petticoats.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But Jessie would see the clothes were clean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes. Yes. Yes. And do our hairs for us. But - she said it was a real hard life, she says, you don't realize what I - I says, I do now but I didn't at the time naturally.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You think it was worse for her then than it was for you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes, because I mean she was older and she could understand.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 She had the sense of responsibility of trying to do something about it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. You see, and to think we were all in that one room with father and my eldest brother - and us children as well, all in the one room.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 This was at Ponsonby Buildings?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. And she - no, she says, you don't realize - how I - I says, 
I do now. But at the - I was too young to understand then, to take it in.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Do you know if your father ever got any help from the Guardians, the charity that was available at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh I couldn't - I don't know. Don't know. Jessie would know b
ut I wouldn't. No, I've never heard - no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So you used to have to look after Ernie quite a lot then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you remember any of the things you used to do for him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Just - see that he was asleep and - happy.
\par }\pard \ltrpar\qj \fi-461\li461\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\tx3780\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid5178298 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Put him to bed?
\par }\pard \ltrpar\qj \fi-461\li461\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid5178298 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes, yes. And wait for him after school and see him come home from school, and if I had anything given to me like biscuits or anything I used to save some for him. So that he'd have some.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 When you were with your Aunt Emily did she expect you t
o go to bed at a certain time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes. Always in bed by half past seven or eight o'clock. Eight o'clock at the latest.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did she sort of see you into bed and supervise that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes, yes. Oh yes, she was very good like that and - always had n
ightdresses and - supper. Something hot to drink at night and - oh - yes, she was very good.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did she come and tuck you in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes, yes. Say goodnight. So I missed that terribly. Oh dear.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You had terrific ups and downs didn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Right from one - the height to the bottom.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 They were really quite comfortably off weren't they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes. Yes. Yes. I often wonder what would happen if I'd have left - stayed there. I could have had music, I could - and then I think to myself, we
ll - during the war the war was terrible and I may not have survived. Because uncle had to come out of the fire brigade, and when I went back to see them - they were living in Camberwell then and he had a shop, ladies dress - milliner - milliner they used
 
to call them in them days, dress milliner, used to have costumes and hats and one thing and another. I went to see her - and even then she said, why don't you come and stop with me? She said, you could help us up here. You could do upstairs while I - serv
ed in the shop. But I wouldn't, I was in service then.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 This was when you were with Miss Ellis, you got a little holiday did you?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. I went up to see Aunt Lucy. Went to Aunt Lucy's. And that's when I went to see father. Round about eighteen the
n. Oh - I shall never forget his face. Oh, his face went white. He said, you're your mother come back again. I've never forgotten it. And I went - I told auntie about it, Aunt Lucy. I said, I shan't go and say goodbye to him, and I didn't. I couldn't to s
ee - see my father cry. Think it's dreadful - to see a man cry.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did they keep in touch with him and see him and look after him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, they just left him. They left him. He went from one - set of digs to another. You see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Always alone?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Th
at's why I often wonder what become of that Bible, the only thing - that he gave me that day when I went to see him was this picture of - belonging to mother. Oh, I said, to him. - 'cos there was this picture - there was two little girls - on a bed - I do
n't - I've got it handy, I'll just show you, it's a very old fashioned -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What about bathing at Aunt Emily's, what were the arrangements?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh they had a bathroom there, we used to have a bath - bathroom, oh yes. There was like - these were like lit
tle flats. In each landing you see. And I suppose there was about three to each bathroom. Three to each bathroom. Oh we'd have a bath whenever we wanted.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 With hot and cold water in the tap?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That wasn't so usual at that time was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, no. No. That was at the fire station.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 When did you have clean clothes there, do you remember?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh whenever I wanted them, whenever I got dirty I used to have clean clothes, I had plenty of clothes there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you have a bath on a particular night of the week?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, any night if I wanted one. If I came in - rather dirty she'd say - come on, to the bathroom.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Just like people do now?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 When you were staying with Aunt Emily how would she have meals,
 did they eat in the kitchen there or the dining room?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh no, in the - in the living room. They had a - a main room, two bath - two bedrooms and a main sitting room.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Would she cook in the main room?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, no. No, - they had a little scullery. Apart from that, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And then a sort of living room?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And then a sitting room?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, living room, a little kitchen and two bedrooms. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And you ate in the living room?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Can you remembe
r what sort of meals she used to cook, what did you have for breakfast?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh, used to have meat puddings. Oh for breakfast? What did we have for breakfast? Porridge of course. Eggs. No cereals like they do now. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Would you all have breakfast together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Yes. Unless Uncle was on duty, see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Because he had shifts really didn't he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Then you'd go off to school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was that the same school that you'd been going to before, did you always k
eep on at the same school or did you go to different schools?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
I went to two different schools while I was with Auntie. One was - I don't now which is which. One was Broad Street and the other Scrutton Street. I don't know whether they're still there. Scrutton. Scrutton.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Did you go to one the first time you were with her and the other one the second time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. That's right, yes. And the second one - I went through the - the - Liverpool Street station. To school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 This was the second one, the Scrutton Street one?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
I think so, I think that must have been it because I remember - more about that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Have you any idea why you went to two different schools while you were staying in the same place?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, I don't know. I don't remember.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was it something to do with the age range they catered for in schools?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh no, we didn't have anything like that. Whatever you were you could send to - any school. Go - go to any school. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So you don't know why you changed schools?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Were these Church of England schools?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes, both Church of England, I was never - allowed to go anywhere else but to a Church of England school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Why was that, do you know?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 I don't know - whether Auntie was anything to - yo
u know, they were religious or not I don't know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 When you were with your gran you also went to a Church of England school?

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That was Bear Lane.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That was yet another school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That was another Church school, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So there were the three schools?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's three schools.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Any others that you went to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. Newark Street when I was at the orphanage. And that's all down now, I've seen that down, that's right down, the church is still there but - St Mary's church is there but the school's down.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
What about when you moved to Anne Street in Plaistow, where did you go to school then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh I don't know the name of the school but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 It would have been a school nearby would it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Yes, we used to go down a long -
 what we call Inky Lane, there was an ink factory there. A long lane it was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was it really called Inky Lane or was that what you called it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, we called that because it was next to the ink factory you see, we say Inky Lane. When we got to the end - end of that lane we were nearly there, at school. Used to take us about -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 In Vincent Street would it be yet another school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes, that'd be Vincent Street school - there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So in every different place you went to a different school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 They were all different schools. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So that couldn't have helped you either?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No. No. You see - you go to one school and they put you down a standard. Or up a standard which - according to your - ability you see, they test you first and then -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Is there one particular school before you went to Leicester that stands out in your memory?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. Bear Lane school. I can remember that as plain - as if it was only yesterday, we used to do - country dancing there, Fridays - always dance - country dancing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you enjoy that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. Used to love that. 'Cos this Winnie Bunting as I told you - mentioned, she had long curly golden hair, and she used to play the piano. We used to do this - and there was always one little boy would come
 to me for my partner. Burton his name was and he was ginger. And I think - I think - oh I couldn't bear him but he would come to me. I - I'm your partner, I'm your partner, you're my partner aren't you? And I used to hate him. But anyway - I used to like
 that. And - in fact we used to do the maypole dance, which you don't often see now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was that on May Day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Oh yes. We used to -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you have a May Queen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. And a - a crown. And a - us - her attendants had to wear white dresse
d with roses. Garlands. And the boys used to wear sashes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But you left that school when you went to Auntie Emily's?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. That's right, when the - where I won the - attendance prize and a scripture prize. I couldn't see much there - then. I can remember being - and that's where I used to go and - help the infants. I remember that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But you never went back to that school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. No, no, not once we left there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 How long were you there do you think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 I should say - about two - three 
years, quite. Yes, because I went - I can remember three different classes. Because Hetty - Jessie was in the - class where they learnt them machining, so she must have been in one of the higher classes. Because I know the boys - the higher boys used to g
o and - and do shooting on the - roof, flat roof. But - yes, shooting and the eldest girls used to have this - sewing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Is that where you did the Empire Day things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 There were a lot of quite interesting things going on there?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. Oh yes. And Christmas was very nice there. In the infants, I remember the infant - being in the infants there - and - we used to have little concerts and one thing and another, and each - each class'd pick out - a - a child, or say two children to do
 a little party piece, what we used to call a party piece, either say a piece of poetry or sing a song or something.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was that where you got caned for not knowing hour sums?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Yes. Yes. Miss Crush was my teacher. Crush. There was Miss Crush
, Miss Hat - and Miss Dury, and we used to say Crush not the Hat, pinch not the Jewellry. And there was a Mr Pritchard and Mr Gosling for the - boys and used to say Mr Kickhard and - what was the other one, duckling. We used to say.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you remember if
 the teachers singled out some children for different treatment from other?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, I don't think so. I don't think so.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You don't remember that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Do you remember that at any of your schools, feeling that the teachers were prejudiced in any way against certain children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, there was one that used to be a favourite of the teacher. And of course she was a cripple girl.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was that in Bear Lane?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Bear Lane, yes. Louise her name was. And she'd wear }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 callipers}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430  - on her legs. 
And - we always used to have to - she'd say, now don't be cruel - anybody used to touch her you know or knock her over or - she used to be very strict - then, but otherwise I don't think there was any - discrepancy or anything like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you rememb
er any cliques or gangs at all in any of the schools you went to? One sort of group of children ganging up together against another group?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh well - well at the orphanage the orphanage girls used to keep together. 'Cos - I know, we were - we weren't 
allowed to speak - to anybody outside - when we left school. Come home from school - on our way home from school we were not allowed to speak to anybody, and - I asked then why and they said it's because you orphanage girls - are supposed to be an example
 
to the other children. They look to you to know how to behave and be ladylike. Wall ladylike, oh we mustn't hurry. Just walk just at the same pace and - 'cos I know if we were - one morning we were coming to school and we were late. Something held us up a
t
 the orphanage and we were late. We knew we were late. And we started running. And this Mr Rippon, you've heard me talk of Mr Rippon, he used to come to his office - up that street where we used to come through. He said, don't run. He said, don't run, the
 whistle hasn't gone yet. Of course he was - belonged to the committee. He knew we'd get into row if anybody saw us running. Don't run, the whistle hasn't gone yet.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 He sounds rather a good sort.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes, because often he - that was him that used to send the apples.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And you went to stay there and saw the apples on the tree?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Yes. I remember him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 He was a quite decent person?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes, Rippon - he was - something to do with the - printing works. Yes. Yes, I've seen - seen the books - printed, printers - Rippon.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 At that school did you feel in any way different being an orphanage girl?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Yes. We mustn't do this because we were an orphanage girl.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 This was said actually in the school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Yes. Yes. Remember who
 you are, she used to say. If you're orphanage girl you've got to behave yourself and you were - show the others how to behave and say, yes ma'am, no ma'am, thank you very much, and - suchlike.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you feel they were stricter in the school with you the
n than they were to the other children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no, they weren't stricter to us, oh no. No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
If somebody did something wrong, no matter who they were, they'd be punished in the same sort of way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You didn't get a heavier dose of anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, no, no. Oh no. No. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did they cane people at that school do you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, I don't remember them caning anybody, I think the most we used to do was - write out - so many lines. I know we were late one morning, and we
 had to write out a hundred times, I must not be late, I must not be late. Instead of doing play or - or was it going home? Were we later going home? We were late going, and instead of play I think we had to write out this - because I know you used to do 
I - I - I all down the page and then the next word. Used to think we got over it easier then but we - of course I don't suppose we did.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you tend to stick together in the school, the orphanage girls?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Yes, we did because - we were afraid 
of being - doing - if they got doing anything wrong - we'd have to do it with them you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You'd get the blame then too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. No, we didn't get the blame but - if - if we - if they'd got up to mischief and we were with them, you see, we'd have to take the punishment as well as them, you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And you were worried about that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. And I know - at the same time at the orphanage, we used to have to - across from St Mary's school to Nova Road school which was - quite a mile, over a mile - 
from one school to the other, to learn cookery classes. And - and - on the way - you could go down steps and walk along the canal - side. We did that one day. And we - our luck - some people saw the uniform, and they knew it was us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What happened then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh we had bread teas. Naturally.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
So if somebody would see something like that they would report it to the orphanage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Yes, if they knew us you see. They knew your uniform.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 The others wouldn't have uniform in those days I suppose?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 School uniforms weren't about then were they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No. Oh no. And I remember the little lace - collars, our collars used to come up to here. And they were called tuckers. Then, the little bit of lace. And every week we used to put
 clean - sew clean ones in. And if it was dirty say, you're tucker's dirty, go and get another one.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did they examine your clothes?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you have to line up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no. No. What do you mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you have any kind of in
spection of your clothes and your boots to see if they were shone or cleaned?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes, yes, the Matron used to watch you as going out to school. Inspection. And - yes, yes, you'll do, you'll do. Or - your hair's not right, and - we used to have to hav
e our hair cut - tied back and a comb, those that had - their hair wasn't long enough to his back, they'd have one of those combs that put your hair right back. And we all had those combs. The little ones like.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 The Matron kept an eye on that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did the school bother about that too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, they didn't - they knew we were all right. Yes. They never bothered. We used to have two pinafores a week, two clean pinafores a week. Wednesday and - no, Monday's and Thursdays. Clean pinafores. Pinafores with frills on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
What would happen say if you got your pinafore splashed with mud or something on a Monday or Tuesday afternoon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh we'd ask - if we could have a clean one. Why do you want a clean one? Then we'd show, you see. Or if
 they were get - got really - old. I remember once, I had a - nightdress and I was really cold in this nightdress, it had got so thin, there was no warmth in it and the sleeve came out. I said to Matron, I said - my - because when the laundry used to come
 
down from the laundry, when - the washing used to come down from the laundry, this used to be the girls washing, and then she'd read out - you - all your name - your names would be on your - set of clothes. Mine'd be N. - H.K. H.K. Yes. And you'd take the
m
. And sometimes she'd open them, oh these are getting old. You'll have to have some new ones. And - I can remember we used to have a lady come in - a Mrs Jolliffe, and she used to make the frocks, machine and do the frocks. And - her and some of the big g
irls in the evening - used to have a sewing - what they called a sewing bee was it, sewing bee I think, and - 'course we used to have to go to - go to bed, but they used to stay up for sewing bee and they used to mend all the clothes. Put buttons on.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you join in that when you got older?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes, I had to do my share. I know when I was monitor - I used to see to the Matron's washing. And I remember how pleased she was with me one day. I did the darning of her stockings and - her combs, she used to 
wear combinations then. She said, you've done that lovely. I could see then. She said, you've done that really lovely, she said, you can do - my - my laundry for always now will you. And I was so pleased to think she'd picked me out for washing - doing th
ese - clothes - laundry. And -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Were they the only staff, that Matron and the Undermatron?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's all, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 There were no other adults living there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 All the domestic work and everything was done by the girls?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was there not even a boy or a man in for really heavy work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No. No, the only time I told you is before the war, was this man used to take the laundry, out you see when it was finished, on a Friday night. Otherwise there was none of that at all, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And how many hours did the Saturday cleaning stint last?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh right from the time we got up, half past six 'til - about one o'clock in the - midday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What did you do on Saturday afternoons?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Well, we used to - bath or - wash 
or hairs, used to have to - that was a performance that was. Yes. Three girls would be put in charge, big girls, of washing our hairs. And two girls - two or three whichever the - how many washing tubs were ready - would have to go down, you can have your
s down, you and you. And then they all go and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You all had a weekly wash of your hair did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh not every week. Not every week. I suppose be about once a fortnight. Yes. And - the bathing, that was a - that was a performance that was. You go and bath next, you go and bath next.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Who would tell you to do this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
The Matron would tell you. Yes. Yes. Well of course we used to have to go straight to bed then. We used to have to say goodnight Matron, goodnight Miss Woodcock, and - off. That was the last.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
You mentioned you went back to one of your relations while you were at the orphanage for a little holiday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, I never went to - not from the orphanage, I went - went -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You went from the orphanage for a little holiday to Mr Rippon's place?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right, yes. Kirkby Muxloe.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 How long was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh I had a - fortnight. Fortnight, yes, because I'd been ill. I had shingles there I had shingles, I - don't know whether it was the war, I remember the doctor saying it c
ould have been shock, it could have been anything. She shouldn't have been in the laundry or something. That way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You mean you'd been overstrained?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. She shouldn't have been in the laundry or something, and - or else it was shock. He said, of the war.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Could that be because you were worried about your brother do you think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. No. About the air raids. Air raids, because - I never was -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You were near a munitions factory too weren't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right, and I remember - being 
in bed one night and - the Matron used to come round with a candle, which had a shade to it, and I used to hear her say to this - Undermatron, oh - there's a moon tonight, there'll be a raid tonight. And I used to lay there and shiver. Think - listen and 
t
hink - oh - worry all night, I used - didn't used to sleep because - oh she said there was going to be a raid. And I often I used to be awake when she used to come through. And listened to see whether she said oh, won't be any raids tonight, it's either t
oo dark or - too cloudy or something. And I used to be settled then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you have any other holiday while you were there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 I had two holidays, one there and one at - Ratby. Ratby. That's -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Is that near the coast?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no, that's in the co
untry, right in the country again. That was the - Mr - Poulds I think it was and he was the - he used to look after the woods and the timbers and the foxes and suchlike, rear the foxes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Sort of gamekeeper?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right. Yes. It was right in the
 country - because I used to dread going out because we'd go across these fields where the cows were. I didn't like cows.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What did you do there when you were staying there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh we could go for walks round the fields and go through the woods with 
him, he used to take the - the husband used to take us sometimes to feed the foxes. They used to put it - be in a big run, all wired in, and he used to grow them for - rear them for the shooting and suchlike. The foxes. Lovely when they were little.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you go with another girl?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes, we always had - yes, we always had quite a big one with them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So you had an older girl with you when you were there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. Oh I - I've forgotten to tell you when we were at the orphanage - there was one 
- treat we always used to look forward to. We used to go on the train to Ratby Woods. In the summertime, when the bluebells were out. We used to take the clothes baskets, washing baskets, with handles and we'd take - take cotton or string whichever we'd g
o
t and scissors and we'd pick these bluebells and put them into bunches, and put them in these baskets, and we'd have a picnic tea, egg - this Mrs Foulds that we used to go and stay with, and - sandwiches and suchlike, then come back and then we were allow
e
d to take - these baskets of bluebells over to the - it was only across the road, to old peoples houses, like they would be the alms houses, what they used to call the old alms houses then, in those days. Oh I remember the old ladies used to think they we
re terribly old. They generally used to think the world of these bunches of bluebells. Remember that treat we used to do.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That was every year was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Once a year. Once a year.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you wear uniform on that occasion too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes, always - never anything else. Yes, never anything else.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was that first holiday similar to the second one?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
That was at Kirkby Muxloe, that's - yes, they were all the same, country - holidays.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You just stayed with a family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Were you treated as one of the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Yes, yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You didn't have any extra specially hard work to do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no, no. That was a holiday. Real holiday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 It really was a holiday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Yes. You couldn't begin to realize - we'd wake 
up and - oh we haven't got to do - scrub the floor, we haven't got to - make the beds, haven't got to dust or anything. Because even before you went to school you'd got your - all got your own jobs to do at the orphanage. Oh yes, always.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What time did you get up then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Half past six. Bell used to ring and - whoever was monitor used to come and see that you were all getting up. Then she'd go down and make the tea and bring - Miss Attwood and the other one a cup of tea and some hot water. We all had
 to get on with our work. And if there was too much noise - the bell used to ring and she - I know I - she used to call, Annie, who's making the noise, where's the noise coming from? Please quieten it down.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Who was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's the Matron. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you have any idea when it was that your father died?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Well we've been here - I've been here - five years - last September, I was at - Kings Road eight years, I was at Anderson Avenue ten, and I'd been there about four years when my father died.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So it's about fifteen years ago?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Fifteen to - sixteen years ago.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Any idea how old he was?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 He was seventy-six. I see, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Did anyone that you were living with, your father or your gran or anyone ever keep anything like rabbits or hens or pigs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No. I - when - when - in the house at James Street where my mother died - my brother used to keep white mice. Yes. And oh I - oh I did used to hate the little things. They're lovely though, all white ones but he used to love them of
 course naturally and - see to them and my - gran had this dog, collie dog, beautiful collie dog as I told you but apart from that -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you remember that about James Street or did your sister tell you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no, I remember the - I remember the gar
den and the swing we had in the garden.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Even though you were only four you remember that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. I remember these - these mice and - there was a wall at the bottom of the garden, and we had a - a swing - on the - on the - on the - tree. And - in t
his wall there was a little hole about the size of your microphone and my finger - my - one of my sisters - put her hand in this - this - or finger, I wouldn't - don't remember it but she told me the dog in the yard - there was timber - timber yard beyond
 the wall there, this fence rather, and - he nipped her finger. But - apart from that I don't remember much about that but just the mice and - the garden. It was only just a small garden. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you remember your mother at all as a person?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, 
I can just picture her - going to the cupboard and getting this - bottle of medicine that we used to have every - once a week, Scotts emulsion. And my cripple sister used to have to take - oh, cold liver oil and malt, they still have it in the chemists no
w
. And she used to - oh we - it was a job to get her to take it. Of course her and I, we used to - were were - get in the scullery and I used to take it for her. I suppose that's why I got so fat and she didn't. But - still - no, apart from that I don't re
member.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You don't remember your mother putting you to bed or any of that sort of thing?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You were only four weren't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. But I slept - I used to sleep with my sister, my cripple sister, because I slept the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 quietest}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 , I didn't kick so much. And we were - I can remember being in a cot, so you can tell we weren't very old.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You and she shared a cot did you?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. Yes, it must have been a big one though for two of us. Jor one end and I the other.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was there anyone else sleeping in the room too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes, there was another double bed with my - sisters I expect were there. The three of them I expect, Ada, Jessie and Hettie.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 This was in James Street?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What about the other rooms, do you rememb
er how they were used, can you picture them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Well I can picture the front room, I can remember on Sunday - Sunday afternoon well all got - got ready to go to church of course - well Sunday school we used to call it. And I had a little pink coat on and - a bonnet, and my sisters used to wear - }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8995913\charrsid675430 tho}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 se - huge tammy }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 chanters}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
. They were all flat with a - a wire - wire - fitting inside, a wire - a wire inside. I know one Sunday morn - Sunday afternoon I was waiting for them and - and - they - their three hat
s were laid on the table, white ones they were. And I can remember - I can see myself now taking these - these wires out of the hats. And of course they all went crumpled. Oh I was - scolded and suchlike and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Were you actually given a punishment do you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh no. No, I don't remember the punishment, whether I was or not, but I don't remember - but I remember taking these wires out. You see, and each one - was a different size, the larger one was - larger wire, and of course they all muddle
s up. But I don't - I've never seen any since, not hats like that. But I do remember those hats and - and taking the wires out.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
But apart from the mice and the collie you don't remember any other animals being kept by anyone that you stayed with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. Oh no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 It wouldn't have been usual in London would it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No. Oh - I'm sorry, I'd forgotten, yes, my aunt Lucy used to keep hens in the back - in her back garden. Yes. Yes. Because she used to pickle the eggs in - salt. Brown jars and she
'd put the - each - egg was - was - dated and put in a layer of salt, and then the next day wed put another layer of salt and the new laid eggs on the top.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you look after the hens for her?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 I used to feed them and - get the eggs. I should th
ink she had about a dozen, not many.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
At James Street you wouldn't remember how many times a week you ate meat would you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. No, I don't remember much about that then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What about when you were with your father when he was in work how often 
do you think you'd have meat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh, about twice a week we'd have meat.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Usually on Sunday or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Sunday, yes. Sunday and - probably once a week we'd have a meat pie or some - or pudding or something like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But when he was out of work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no, we never knew whether we were going to get any meat or anything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Just what he could get?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. Yes. 'Cos it was - was very hard, I don't know how he - put up with it really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What was the situation when you were with Aunt Emily?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh I had good living there. Yes, we had - fish for tea and - oh yes, I had very good living there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did she do a cooked dinner once a day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. YES.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was that at midday or in the evening?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Well sometimes, all depends on my - 
uncle's - shift you see. Sometimes he'd be working at night, well then - she'd get a midday meal. A main meal. And otherwise it'd be the evening meal, you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So how often do you think you'd have meat there in a week?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh two or three times I sh
ould think. Yes, she was - getting a good living there you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Days that you didn't have meat what would she do for a dinner?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
I can hardly remember. No, I don't think I can remember, but I know we had - very - very good there. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you remember having tinned meat at any of the homes you had?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no. No, I don't remember.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you ever get some extra meat such as rabbit from poaching?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No. No. Oh I can remember my father bringing home some venison once. But I didn't like it, it's more - it's a rather sharp taste. I don't know where he got it from or anything but that was the only time I remember ever having venison.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Do you ever remember seeing hour father having less food so that you children could have more?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Well
 no, he used to be out early in the morning you see before we - got up you see. I don't remember that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you have a meal with him sometimes though at a weekend?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes. Sundays. Sundays, whatever - sometimes he'd come with a breast of mutton, of a piece of fish and - always shared with us, oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
But do you remember how much he would have compared with you, you weren't conscious that he was holding back?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no. No, I wouldn't know that, no, I - wouldn't notice that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did your father let you talk during meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes. Oh yes, we - have plenty of freedom. Did what we liked when father was there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Did you have any home before you went to the orphanage where you weren't allowed to talk?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You could always talk?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes, oh yes, even with Aunt - Emily I always talked, you know, naturally.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
When there was enough food, at Aunt Emily's or when your father could get food, could you choose what you wanted to eat or did you have to have a bit of everything that was there?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Well I'd have what I was given. What we were given, we weren't allowed to choose, oh no. No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 If you left anything uneaten on the plate what would they say, do you remember?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, Aunt - Emily wasn't very - very strict in that }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid8995913\charrsid675430 type}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
. I don't like fat meat. I remember - I don't like fat and - she - she'd cut all the fat off. She was very good that way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you remember what happened when you were with your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh I just left it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 He didn't mind?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Could you ask for a second helping?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh with Aunt - Aunt Emily, yes. But with my father wasn't enough - there was just enough to go round.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Do you remember your father or mother teaching you how to hold a knife and fork and spoon or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Well no, I suppose my sister did that you see, I don't remember. No, I don't remember that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you remember how you were supposed to sit at the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, I don't remember. Oh yes I do, my eldest sister - at least she's told
 me this - Willie, not Hettie - we went in our ages. And I was in the high chair. That was when she was telling me about the crusts under the table. But otherwise I don't remember. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you remember when you got older when you were you're your fathe
r and your granny, whether they were particular about you sat on your chair?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes, we were taught to sit up straight and - yes, hold your knife and fork right and - know what to use.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 They cared about that sort of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Could you bring a toy or a book to the table do you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no, not at the table. Everything had to be put away, nothing at the table.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you remember when you could leave the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 We used to ask and sometimes - Aunt Emily sometim
es would say, say your grace. And - I don't remember grandma - at grandma's whether we did say grace, I don't think we did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You repeated a grace that your father used to say?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Ah, that was a comic one.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 He wasn't really serious about grace?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
When you were in those different kind of rooms that your father had was there always a table to sit at for meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Let me see. At Vincent Street there was. Yes, Vincent Street. And James Street. Of course. Where was the other - yes, there was a table, yes there was a table. Because we used to take the leaf off to play with. Slide, yes, yes, I can remember that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And was there a table at Anne Street?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Anne Street, no, I don't think there was, no, we used to have meal in the - 
front room, there was only just - just the front room and the bedroom was up there. We'd sit on the couch and have our meals.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You'd have it on your laps?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 After you left James Street, in your other homes, did you always have the sa
me place at table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no, could sit anywhere. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 It was only in James Street you sat at the table in ages?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
That's right, yes. Even when I was with Aunt Lucy we used to sit where we liked. Yes, because - her daughters was - older than mys
elf of course. She was very good, Aunt Lucy. Oh yes. I think it was her that paid for us at the orphanage. I think she paid for us - at the orphanage, and I don't know whether she paid for my brother - when he was in the home, but I've learnt since when m
y sister was down - this time - that - it was Aunt Lucy that paid for us. And I didn't know that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And it was she who told you you were going there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. Yes, she told me that I was going to a school. But - of course it wasn't a school, well it was I suppose it was a - kind of school but - no, not as I expected a school to be.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
When she said that do you remember whether she asked you if you wanted to go, or if you had any choice in the matter?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Well no, she told me it'd be better for me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What did you think, do you remember what you thought at the time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Well I thought - where am I going to? And what will it be like, who am I going to? I thought, will I like it? And could I come back again, if - if I didn't like it? She said, oh y
ou'll like it, you'll like it, she said, be other little children to play with and - made it sound so nice you know and - I should be in the country and it'd be better for my health and one thing and another.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And then when you got there what did you think of it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Well I can remember the Matron - and my elder sister meeting me off the train - and - I said, how do you do, nurse. And she said, oh no, you call me nurse, it's Matron. And I could not use to it - get used to it because she was wear - use
d to wear a bonnet and a nurses uniform you see, navy blue of course. But - I often used to be corrected. Child, it's Matron.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Were you disappointed in it when you got there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Well I was because - well there's the - the work to do before you went 
to school. And your schooling. And you weren't allowed to play. You know, we would sit at the - when you got at home - when you got home from - say in the afternoon, you either went into the - room - the laundry to mangle or - the clothes and suchlike, or
 you did some sewing. But - of course when we had our holidays from school, you know, the - summer holidays, we were allowed to go in the yard and play sometimes, the little ones - we'd play but - But beyond that -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That was only in the holidays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes, only in the holidays. And Sundays we were all - we were - weren't allowed to play, we would - write letters or read books. Write letters, read books.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Any books you liked or were they particular kinds of books?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Well they were all kept down 
in the Matron's sitting room, and we were allowed to - go down and pick them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Were they nice books, were they interesting?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Yes, all sorts of books.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 They weren't just religious books or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, all story books. Story books. Oh yes, story books.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you have to write letters, did they supervise that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh no, no, those had got people to write to - have you written to so and so lately? And if we had letters come - Aunt Lucy used to write to me of course an
d - they were all - read before we had them, of course. And we'd see them on the - on the dresser that was in the - girls sitting room and say - may I have my letter please.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You must have been thrilled to see a letter there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes, rather, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was it only Aunt Lucy who wrote?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. Well only her, Aunt Lucy you see. I didn't - I only had my Aunt Lucy you see then. I didn't used to keep in contact with my father.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Had Aunt Emily ever written?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. No. From - the time the - Uncl
e left the fire station - retired from the fire station, I never heard from them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 She wasn't the one who opened a milliners shop?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes, that's the one, Aunt Emily, in Camberwell. Church Street, Camberwell.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 I thought you went to see her later in years.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 I went later on but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But not in the orphanage time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No. No, no. No. The only one I went to see when I was at the orphanage was Aunt Lucy. And that's when I went and saw - saw my father you know when I told you.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So Aunt Lucy was the only one that wrote?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But your sisters would come and visit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes. Yes. Did I tell you about when I was living with gran - the public house, I think I mentioned the Noah's Ark. Public house where she used to go. T
hat's right. Well in this Noah's Ark there was an alcove - in the front - front part of it, quite as big as this room, and when it was raining us children play in the - played in this - alcove, and of course we'd act - Red Riding Hood as I told you and - 
o
r recite and - play our own games. And there was a corridor one side of this alcove where the people used to go into the saloons, different saloons. And we used to listen to them singing and one thing and another. And I got - one or two songs that they us
e
d to sing, I can remember them from this day. There's two I know, but the - on - there're three rather I remember, but two I remember myself, and one - when I was about eighteen - a girl I used to go out with, she began singing this song one day and I sai
d, oh, I said, sing that again, I know that. And it's one of the songs that - a man used to sing on his own, solo, in this public house.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you remember the name of it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes, I've written them out. The Wedding - The Fatal Wedding was one, that 
was one this solo, three verses to that. I can't sing it now, I used to with her. And ten two others, there was the - I expect you've heard this one - let me see - A Little Child Shall Lead them, I expect you've heard of that one. No, no. A Little Child S
h
all Lead Them, that one. And - no, that's nothing to do with the Messiah. The Fatal Wedding is the long one that the man used to sing solo. Fatal Wedding, and - and I don't know this title to this one and and I only know one verse. A telephone to mammy de
a
r. She's forever in the bright blue sky. She's been gone such a long long while, we don't know how I miss her loving smile. I cannot tell you what her number is, still I know she's in the sky, and I long to hear her voice so dear as I used to do in days g
one by. I just remember that one verse of that, and that's the other one, two verses to that one. And three verses to that one. That's a long one.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you remember the tunes at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes, I can - yes, I've been getting them on there. One hand of co
urse. Yes, I've got them -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Are there some more songs there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, not on this one, no. No, it's just little bits I can - this is a poem I composed during the - during the war, the last war, during an air raid. That one.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That you composed yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. This is - Sabbath Hours it's called, that one. The wedding bells were ringing on a cold dark winter's night. The church was decorated all within seemed gay and bright. A woman with her baby came and saw the lights were low. She thought of
 how those sleigh rang for her three years ago. I want to be admitted sir, she asked sexton old. Just for the sake of baby here to protect her from the cold. This wedding here tonight he said is for the rich and grand, so whether hangs the snow, outside y
o
u'll have to stand. While the wedding bells were ringing the bride and groom were there, marching down the aisle together, while the organ peeled an air. Telling tales of fond affection, vowing nevermore to part, just another fatal wedding and another bro
ken heart. And then it goes on again, just - sexton once again.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Do you remember your parents bringing you up to treat your brothers and sisters in a certain way, how they brought you up to behave towards your brothers and sisters?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh very - had t
o look after each other. My older sisters always looked after us little ones. Oh yes, I can remember them - taking us to church and bringing us back. Always. And I know one day we - one Sunday she didn't take us to church. She took us up to Wanstead Flats
 
because there was a balloon came down. And I can remember seeing this balloon, it was just - they were in - it was - going down, the gas was going out of it and it was all fluffy. And we hadn't been to Sunday school. I remember her getting a good telling 
off for not taking us to Sunday school. Somebody - told mother, but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That would be Jessie?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, Hettie. Hettie was the eldest one, yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you remember if they said you should hit back or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes, fight our own battles, we use
d to have to fight our own battles, oh yes. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What kind of people do you think your parents hoped you'd grow up to be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh I don't know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Do you have any idea what sort of things your father felt were important, did he ever talk to you about what he felt?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh we must do our best. Do our best - and never be cruel to people. And always say you're sorry if you did anything wrong.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 He used to say that did he?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What did they think of swearing, do you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh no, they didn't like that. No, they weren't allowed to - oh no. Weren't allowed no swearing in the place. Oh no, never.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was Aunt Emily the same?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes, yes. And if I came home from school and said anything out of the ordinary she'd say, you mustn't say that. She said, that's not very nice to say.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 When grown ups were talking were you allowed to join in when you were a child?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, with grandma she'd say - I'm not talking to you, wait a minute. Wait 'til we're finished and then you can say.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What about with your father, do you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no, I don't remember about father. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did he ever have friends in and talk with them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, not that I know of, no. No, we were more or less on our own - really.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did Aunt Emily ever have company?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes, she had company. Auntie - well I used to call her Aunt Elsie, I don't think she was a real aunt but - you used to call automatically auntie this, auntie that you see. She used to come and - Uncle Will, that was her
 husband I suppose. He was in the - Waterloo fire station. Oh yes, used to have her company you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And could you join in then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes. Oh yes, I could tell her if - what had I been doing and - you know, any little treats I'd been at I used to tell them and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You were quite encouraged to take part in the conversation?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Yes, with them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Not that children should be seen and not heard?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you ever remember being punished for anything, you got a hiding once 
for taking stiffening out of collars I think you said?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh - when Aunt Emily's making a dress - to go to this fireman's ball I suppose.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You actually got a hiding for that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Oh yes. And for going out into the street - with my nice dress
 on and spoiling that. I was supposed to go in to see Uncle then. That was before she was married. She was taking me with her.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 She was courting then was she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. And of course she was taking me all dressed up in my Sunday best. So I didn't go, 
I had a good hiding and put to bed. And of course after she'd gone - gran used to come and say, you can get up now, auntie's gone, but you must promise not to do again - not to disobey again. Not to - mustn't disobey.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did gran ever give you a hiding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no. No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you ever remember her punishing you for anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Not grandma, no. Oh no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Or your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Well only once. We were always allowed - we were always - supposed to be in bed before he come home. This was when h
e was in work. But I remember being in the street playing skipping one evening, and you know in the summer evenings it keeps light, doesn't it? Well child like we were playing - skipping, and he clapped his hand on my shoulder. A really a good hard smack,
 that's the only time I remember - him coming and hitting me. You know where you should be don't you? And - I scooted then. I was in bed before he come - he said, you be in bed before I get up there. I was. That's the only time. That's the only time.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Had he told you before that you shouldn't be out then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh we were - we expected to be in bed by the time he come home. Oh yes. That's the only time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 The other children weren't round about?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh a lot - no, no, a lot of them were left and - go
 in when they liked and - naturally, and of course I didn't realize the time. With being daylight.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
You say you were brought up not to be cruel and to do your best, do you think you got your ideas more from your father than from other people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 We
ll no, from other people more. Yes. Yes. When I was at the orphanage and with Aunt Emily. Yes. Yes, she was - she was the one that always - made me go to a church school, you see, and I was to do - my best and - say I'm sorry if I hurt anybody and - give 
anything back that I shouldn't have taken and - never to take anything that didn't belong to me, when it was wrong.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 She was the one who gave you more sort of guidance about things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Yes. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did your father talk much to you about lif
e and how to behave and that sort of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Well just to be - behave yourself and be good and so on, do your best as I tell you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15816437\charrsid675430 he}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430  the sort of man that talked a lot?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, he was very quiet. Very quiet. Yes? Very quiet. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 He didn't sit and chat in the evenings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no-no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 I expect he was pretty tired wasn't he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Well he used - I can remember him sitting in the chair and then he'd say - bedtime, come on, off to bed. You see, often he didn't used to come in 'til late, when we'd gone to bed. You see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 At one time he was like a taxi driver wasn't he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes, that's right, and different hours you see, we never knew when he was coming in. But when he was in work it was eight o'clock our bedtime, we were always in bed by eight o'clock. Always.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 If he didn't come in did you sometimes stay up very late?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh no, we still in bed. Jessie used to see - make us go to bed. Oh yes. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But when Jessie went off to the Vicarage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Well of course we did - w
e did as we liked you see, when it got dark we naturally went to bed. Or we got cold - go to bed.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You had this bad trouble with your eyes but were you ever ill in bed at home?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No I wasn't in bed but I - I was home from school for a long while.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Because of your eyes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
With the shade. And I couldn't lift it in candlelight even. I wonder I can see so well really, after all - when I think back. When I think back - that I couldn't give - just cottons, pink in one hand and blue in the other. 
But I can remember going to this hospital in the dinner hours and having my eyes - ointment and drops in my eyes, and my brother used to come with me - to get me back to school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you ever remember having anything on your birthday, to mark it as a sp
ecial day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Birthdays, now let me think. No, I don't think I remember. Unless it was a - with Aunt Emily, I might have had something then but - apart from that birthdays used to come and go really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Just like an ordinary day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And at the orphanage too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
The orphanage, let me think. Yes, at the orphanage, the only one I remember was my sister, she brought me a - the - my two sisters clubbed together and bought me a brooch. A lovely little brooch. And I must have left - I thi
nk I told you, I must have left it in - in the - schoolrooms on Sunday school. I never saw it - that's the only one I remember, birthdays.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Can you remember anything about Christmas Day when you were with your father, when you were with Aunt Emily you went to a big do, at the Albert Hall?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. That's right, the firemen's childrens ball - party.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Do you ever remember any other Christmas at all, Christmas when you were with your father for example, would you go to any other relations or friends for Christmas Day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, no. No, I remember the - I used to know - take Dolly, my crippled sister, to her different parties. But I used to go with her. And I remember one - at one party I said, oh I'm not a cripple, I said, I've just brought my sist
er. But this Father Christmas whoever he was - take this, take this, and I had the same as she did. I was so thrilled to think I had a doll the same as she had.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 These were special things for cripples?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 For the crippies, yes. Yes. But my - my bro
ther, my youngest brother, he wouldn't eat any fruit, he didn't like fruit at all, no oranges or apples. And if we had - like at school we had a Christmas party - and - we each had an orange and an apple given to us, and a bag of sweets. I used to have th
e oranges. I used to give him my sweets so that I could have his fruit. I couldn't understand him not liking oranges.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 They were a particular treat those days weren't they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But on the actual day itself do you remember if you
 used to do anything special?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. Just an ordinary day. We used to go to church. We used to go to church.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did your father go too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no. No. No,}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid675430  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 just my sisters, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But you didn't go over and see your grandma or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 It was a quiet day at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes, just at home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Did your father ever manage anything in the way of a stocking or was he not able to do that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, we didn't have a - no, what we had given to us we - was what we had at pa
rties. Not otherwise.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And those were organised by the school or something?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right, either the school or -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You told me that your Aunt Emily had a piano?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But you didn't have anything in your own family did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Do you know if you'd have had anything at James Street, was there anything there?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No I don't remember, I don't remember a piano being - Aunt Lucy had a piano. Oh yes, yes, 'cos her girls were - learning the piano then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you remem
ber ever having a sort of sing-song, gathered round the piano singing in any of the places you stayed at or your own home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
At gran - at gran's she had a gramaphone. One of those old fashioned His Master's Voice. Yes? With a big trumpet - a - a - cyli
nder records, not the flat records, cylinder ones. And - it used to be on a tripod and - with a - a chain to hold the - the funnel up, and she used to - we - we always got a sing-song there. We all had to do our party piece.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Sing on your own?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What about with your father, did he ever sing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no, I don't remember him singing at all, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you ever remember your father playing any games with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. Oh he - I remember - he taught me how to play draughts. Draughts a
nd dominoes. Dominoes, I've got those still but - I don't know what become of them but - not Home, oh no, no, I've had that since - I've been married, that one. Yes, he was very fond of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 dominoes}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 . Very fond of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 dominoes}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 . And we used to have - proper box - iv
ory ones, they were really good ones. You don't see them these days. I don't know what become of them. Fives and threes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Any cards, did he play card games?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. Not cards. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You mentioned you had a big family bible?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes, I - I'd love to know where that went.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Any other books at all do you remember in any of your different lodgings?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Only the prizes I won. Children of Many Lands. That's one, and then a prayer book. And A Bible, that's about all I had. Otherwise -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did your sisters have prizes too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes, they had prizes, Jessie won a scripture prize. And - and Hettie, she won a medal for swimming, diving and suchlike. But - apart from that we didn't have many games, we made our own games. I can remember do - filling 
these shelves and little ornaments on a table and - getting rings and throwing them over. Hoop-le and - we never had organised games like they do these days.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What about newspapers, do you remember if you ever had a newspaper?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did we? Well I - w
hen I was with Aunt Emily - I used to have to bring a paper from the station - railway station as I came home from school. And - for Uncle, always brought a paper for him every day. Because I think he used to do a lot of horse racing. Yes, because he used
 to get in a temper if he'd lost. But - but at home I don't think we had a paper, I don't remember. Don't remember a paper coming.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Do you ever remember seeing your father or your aunts or your grandma sitting and reading, were they keen readers at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, I can't remember. Can't remember gran - reading. No, I don't think we used to have a paper at all. Not when I was with my father.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
You told me once that your father took you to visit your sister in Whipps Cross?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right, Leytonstone, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Do you remember any other occasions when he took you out anywhere or any visits or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, that's the only time I remember him taking me out. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Most of the things that were bought in those days used to come to the door did
 they, the coal came to the door you said and the salt and the milk?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. By cart, yes. Yes, and the milk.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
But when you stayed with Aunt Emily or your father was getting any money did you go shopping or did the grown ups do the shopping?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 O
h Aunt Emily used to do the shopping. Oh yes. Unless of course she ran short of anything and then - I remember one day she sent me out for some pale salt sausages. And she said, hurry up because uncle'll be up for his dinner and I haven't got any. Don't b
e
 long, run all the way and run all the way back. There was me saying these pale salt sausages, pale salt sausages, by the time I got to the shops it's pale pink sausages. And I can remember the - the - lad - on the counter laughing at me and I ran out of 
the shop without them. I was so upset with them laughing at me. Pale pink sausages. I've never forgotten that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you go home without them then?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 It was on a Bank Holiday you once went to visit your Aunt Mary Ann wasn't it?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That'
s right, with Aunt Emily. 'Cos she used to help with the sewings and - roundabouts and suchlike you see and - often - while - when I was up there, you know, the - what do they call them - overboats - the small ones, the childrens, in the childrens playgro
u
nd, was a small - miniature overboat. Have you seen it? That's right, a big wheel it's called now, it's called a big wheel, and if they wanted the - to make the weight, one of the men, I remember one of the men grabbing and say, you're just what we want. 
A
nd he put me in this - this thing, and I was so terrified. And uncle - my uncle was on the roundabouts and he heard me. He came up and - reprimanded this man - don't you ever do such a thing again. Don't you put her on that again. Just to get the weight y
ou see. So that it would go over. So I never went on that, but I could go on anything else, anything I liked, swings, roundabouts and hoop-la's and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you enjoy it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes, I used to love it. And then - when I came home - I could go down the s
tairs, down a flight of steps to a big - caravan where aunt used to keep all the - hoopla - boxes of chocolates and ornaments and things for the - hoopla stalls and - that's right, and I could have what ever - whatever I want. Naturally it was always a bo
x
 of chocolates as well as a toy. And I remember she asked me to go and stay with her. Wouldn't you like to be my little girl? I said, no, I want to stay with Aunt Emily. I wouldn't stay, I often wonder what would have become of me if I'd have stayed there
. Hampstead Heath.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was she a real aunt do you know or was she also just called aunt?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh she was my a real aunt, yes. She was - mother's sister. But - and her - his - her name Cox.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was that her married name?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Yes. Yes, 'cos uncle wa
s - Uncle Harry was alive then. Yes, I think I should have been - you know - well looked after there. But of course I should have had to help on the swings and - you know, I've had to - often wondered -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Strange to think you had those different opportunities?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes, and I never took either of them. I went back home again.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
When you were at James Street, when your mother was still alive, you used to go to Sunday school?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Yes, I can remember my sisters \{ILLEGIBLE\} to church. And I re
member -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Church as well as Sunday school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes, oh yes, I can remember - I don't whether it's the - it'd be Easter - no, Palm Sunday. Because - there was a donkey - in the - procession. And they were carrying palms - palm - you know, palms. And I
 can remember them going round the church and I was so thrilled watching this donkey. In fact I was that small I stood on the seat to watch, so that I could see. Remember that. So it must have been a high church. Must have been high church. That was along
 
the - let me see - that would be along - where would that be now, along Barking Road I should think. I believe it was St. Andrew's - that we used to go to. I could take you to the place now, if it's still there, if I got to the Barking Road I could take y
ou there but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 I suppose you never saw James Street again after the home broke up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No. No. No. But I did hear that - the plaque - the brass plaque was put up after the 1914 war with the role of honour - on, and that was put outside our house. Our front room. On the wall.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was your mother one of the people who died in the 1914 war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
That's right, in that street. In that street. Yes. But I never saw it. 19 James Street that was. 'Cos I asked the number of the - the house, I said, what numbe
r was it, and they said, nineteen. Oh, I said, we used to live in number nineteen. And that's between the front door and the - front window - wall, just a small wall and it was in this - I said, well that's the one we used to live in. But I never - never 
did see it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did your mother and father also go to church or did they stay home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, I don't remember them coming with us. No. I don't remember them coming with us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Your first home after that was Ponsonby Buildings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And your father didn't bother about Sunday school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no, no. It was Jessie that took us. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And she stuck to that quite firmly did she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes, yes, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
How about when you were staying with grandma, did she like you to go to Sunday school or didn't she bother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, she - I don't think she bothered. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 It was Jessie who was the one who kept you to it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right. Took us, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did Aunt Emily care about that sort of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes, I used to go to Sunday school th
ere, yes. That was - I don't know where that was. Not far from the station anyway. Not far from the station.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And did your uncle and aunt go?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, they didn't used to go, no. I didn't go every Sunday there. Not unless I felt I wanted to go.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you ever remember any Sunday school outings at any of these Sunday schools?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes. We used to go to - now where was it? Chingford. Chingford would it be? We used to go by brake then, horse and brake.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's a covered wagon is it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Y
es, and we used to sit face to face. Used to hold about eight of us, and there'd be - oh - about a half a dozen of these - brakes. And - we used to have games and - we used to call it the - Sunday school treats. Sunday school treats, half day, used to hav
e - a picnic, and then sports. And - did we have prizes? I don't think I ever won any prizes. I don't remember. But we - I used to run - we used to think that was wonderful, go to see the -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Were there any other social activities you remember organised 
by the churches that you used to attend?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Only the - Friday evenings, happy hours as we called it at the institute. As I told you we - we got the - got up these concerts and one thing and another, plays.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That must have been quite good fun?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes, lovely. Used to act, we'd think we were wonderful to be - taking part in these - plays. And I was quite a youngster then. I know I was Japanese in one of them and then - what was I, a pansy in another, for spring, summer, autumn and winter. And so
 many took part in each - section.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And Jessie went to an institute?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
That is the same one, but she was in a different - class to me, different group you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 It was all the same thing but she was older so she was in a different group?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And she was with the older girls you see. On another evening.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's when she used to manage to get some secondhand clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Do you remember anybody at any of those things taking an interest in you as a motherless child or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, only once when we were at Vincent Street. When - I suppose my father was out of work then, and the teacher - that was when she gave - used to give us the tickets for dinners - then. 'Cos she asked me if I'd had any dinner one day. And
 she gave me some of her - sandwiches. And she said, have you had any dinner? I said, no. She said, when did have your dinner - did you have dinner yesterday? And it happened I hadn't had - we hadn't had dinner then. We used to have what we could get when
 we got home you see or run errands, but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So then she gave you a ticket did she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
She said, well you could have free dinners. And have - take this ticket and - of course I asked her if I should have one for my brother as well, so we both used to 
go. And us schoolchildren - what they called the dinner children, we used to go two or three minutes before the others. And all line up outside, in the playground, and then march to this caf\'e9
 or hotel wherever it was we used to - go to, and we used to sit in these - special tables and we used to have a lovely dinner. Well used to be - we used to call it lovely dinner. It was really good I suppose in those days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Good plain food I suppose?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was that most of the time you were in Vincent Street you had that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. I think it was - Lord Shaftesbury was it - some Lord had - had - had endowed so much for these poor children. Free dinners. Lord somebody, I believe it was Shaftesbury. Some Lord anyway endowed so much for giving these - children dinners.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What did your father say when you told him, do you remember, was he pleased?

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, he didn't mind, he just - said, lucky, you were lucky.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That was good because not all places had it at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no, no, no, there's a lot of them never used to have anything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
It's interesting that she picked you out, I wonder why, do you think she asked all the children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
I don't know. No, I don't know, but I - whether I was kept in for some reason or }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15816437\charrsid675430 other}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430  I don't know, but - sh
e'd be eating her sandwiches, I - often used to see her eating sandwiches. I'd think to myself - I'd love one of those. Kiddie like. But still - whether - whether she noticed it I don't know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you belong to the choir at all in any of the churches you attended?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, only at the orphanage.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You did at the orphanage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes, you had to learn so many songs and - two carols, every year. And then the committee used to come - to give our prizes out, you know, or - all these girls that were leav
ing - were presented with a - Bible or whichever they preferred, a prayer book. And we had to sing our - these songs to them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 To the committee?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Did any of the churches you went to ever have a Band of Hope or temperance clubs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes, we had - G.F.S. Bible class. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was there a Band of Hope at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Well I think this - institute that I used to - belong to, the Temperance Band of Hope - at Peabody Buildings, the one I used to - tell you that we got off these plays, that was a Band of Hope. That was the Band of Hope, yes. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you sign the pledge and that sort of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh no. We were only children, we didn't - but we - you know what the Band of Hope was for. It was to keep off - drink, that we didn't - and yet my gran used to drink.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But not to excess?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh no. Oh no. No. Oh no, she was never - drunk or anything like that, oh no. But of course there were a lot of drunkards in those days in that - part of London.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You remember seeing them do you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes. Yes, I used to - I didn't used to like it, I used to be very frightened of them. Used to run into gran.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did gran ever go and sit in the pub and drink or did she always bring it home?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no, she brought it home. Brought it home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What about your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, he never went out. As far as I know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did he bring some home too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, I don't remember him bringing any home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did Aunt Emily go out and have a drink?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, I don't remember her going out. No, I 
- I think uncle used to have - they used to have - in the - in the - fire station there was always a canteen downstairs. And they used to go down there to get a drink - and cigarettes if they wanted any, yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you know if your father took an interest in politics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No. I don't remember. I can remember Aunt Emily and gran talking about suffragettes. 'Course I didn't know what they were then. But I can remember them talking - suffragettes, used to think what on earth they were. Couldn't think who they were. But -

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Were they favourable or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh I don't know. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But you don't remember your father being interested in politics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Would you have any idea what his views were, whether he favoured one party more than another?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, I wouldn't be old enough to realize that then. No. No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You wouldn't have known whether your mother had been interested would you?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Or your grandma, do you remember any of your family ever being interested?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, she used to say the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 suffragettes}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430  were a noisy lot. That's all I know, I don't remember -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you know if they were Liberal or Conservative or Labour?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no, no, I wouldn't know that. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 At that time some men felt that they were under pr
essure to vote a particular way depending on how the employer would be voting.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes, who they worked for, that's right, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
And in some areas a man would feel he had to vote Conservative or Liberal because of a landlord.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No I don't remember that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you remember hearing talk of that at all in London?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, I don't remember that, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
In those years you were living with your father did he have any fun at all, did he have any pleasant outings or times when he could enjoy himself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, I - all I remember is he used to come home and sit and - no, I don't remember him going out for -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 He didn't have friends that he would go and see?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
The only time - I've got a photograph of him taking - in a boat - a shop outing, lik
e they do here, like they do in these days, the whole - factory go out for a day's outing, and - he was working with a Mr Nevelle at the time. Furniture removing van. Pentechnicon they called them in those days. And he went on the shop outing. Mr Neville.
 They all went out to - Ramsgate or Margate, and of those.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But apart from that you don't remember him going out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, he never went out otherwise.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And he didn't bring friends in?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. Oh no. No. Well we hadn't got the room you see. Hadn
't the room. Besides we had the - hadn't the - food for - to entertain I don't suppose. Not then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you remember if you were ever invited out with him anywhere?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. As far as I know no. No. I can't remember.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 When you were staying with him you mainly just saw your gran did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's all, yes. Just my gran.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you ever see your father's brothers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, I don't remember the - don't remember them, he had four brothers but I don't - ever remember them. They were all set up in b
usiness, when my grandfather died I know, they were all set up in business. But my father was the only one that went down. The others all -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So the others were quite well-to-do then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Any idea why your father wasn't set up in business?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
I don't know, my sister - we've often talked about it and she said, I think it was; because we had such a big family. And mother being ill. But - he went down and down and down. And then the strikes - strikes and - what did they call it - the 
- slump. He went from bad to worse.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But those uncles would have been comparatively well off?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
They would have been, yes, they were set up in business and father could have been well off. He'd had a butchers business.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Your grandfather you mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, my father - was set up in business when my grandfather died. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But you don't know at what stage he gave up that business?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, I don't - wouldn't remember that, no. No. Because when I had him living with me, after I was married, h
e always used to buy my meat. I never used to take his pension from him, but he'd buy my meat. He says, no, I'll buy the meat, he says, let me do something. And he used to come home on a Friday from Maidstone and bring the meat.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 He chose well did he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes. 'Cos he knew what to buy, I never knew, I used to say, I'll have that piece.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 They know when you don't know don't they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes, they do, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did he ever talk about his early life when he was living with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, he didn't, no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 He wasn't one to think back and talk about the past?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. No. I suppose he didn't think we were old enough to understand.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 I wondered if he would when he was living with you when he had his pension?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 At that stage of his life did he talk much to you about the early years?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No. He was a - comic at times. Because I can remember him putting my - sons on his knee - and - making them laugh in different ways. Little stories he used to tell them. I can't remember any of them but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But the didn't talk to you much?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 How he lived, no. No, how he lived in his olden days, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 It must have been a great struggle for him with you children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 I wonder he never married again. I've often thought to myself, it would
 have been far better for him to have married again. With the - cripple sister - and I can remember my }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 auntie}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430  saying at the funeral, if only it had been - Dolly and not my mother. We could have spared her more than - mother. And I can remember my Aunt Lucy
 saying, well she was left for some purpose. She was left here for some purpose. And I wonder - I've often wondered - if anybody else - has ever been baptised, confirmed and married in navy blue and white like I've been. You see, when I was at the orphana
g
e - they couldn't find out whether I was baptised or not. They couldn't find my baptism card or anything. I suppose it went with the home. So of course before I was - I was confirmed I'd got to be baptised. And of course being - what was I, fifteen I thin
k
 then. I was baptised at the orphanage, well that was navy blue and white - uniform. White gloves and white ribbon and suchlike. But navy blue frocks. I was baptised and then - confirmed. We never had white frocks for confirmation. Which every girl looks 
forward to naturally, white frocks for your
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But as far as reading stories to you, that didn't happen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Aunt Emily or anybody?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 It wasn't so common then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You told me all about the jobs you had to do to hel
p your aunt and uncle, what sort of things did you have to do in the home for your father, did you have to do the cleaning and that type of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, I never - don't remember doing cleaning, no. Washing up, yes. Washing up.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Who would sweep up and all that type of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Well it was never done. Not in those days, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Jessie didn't do any sweeping?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, Jessie was away you see - at the time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So Jessie mothered you when she was there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Oh yes, she was she did her best and - I but she
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But she found it too much?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Too much, yes, and when we went to Vincent Street that did it, she said - I said, do you remember Vincent - this is when - since we've been - grown up, I said, do you remember Vincent Street? Oh, she s
ays, yes, she say, can you wonder that I went - I ran away?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 She ran away did she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
She says, I - I was determined to go - run away, she said, and get some job. She said, and I went - that's when she went to the vicarage.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 One day did you just find she'd gone?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 She'd gon}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15816437\charrsid675430 e. Yes. Yes, after school, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid15816437\charrsid675430 
Confirmation and - of course we had white veils, and white gloves, and our hair ribbon white. But - and navy blue frocks. And - then - I was - and I was married in navy blue. I often l
ook back and - wonder if anybody else was in - three big occasions in a girl's life. And I mean you're baptised in white aren't you? Christened in white.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You don't remember that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. And confirmation - confirmed in white aren't you, and your w
edding should be white.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Do you remember if your father ever took part in any sport or watched sport at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, I don't remember. No. All I can remember is him trying to get work and -

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 When he was out of work would he be going round looking for work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. Oh yes. Yes, he often he often used to come off and take his shoes - I can remember him taking his boots off - oh - tired. Looking for work. And often we used to think - see if he'd got anything in his pocket to eat. No. Some days he'
d come - day after day with nothing. And then sometimes he'd come home with something. Oh, a real treat, something. Of course Jessie doesn't remember that because she left home. That's just in between - the time that she left - and - we went back to Jane 
Street. Vincent Street was - the hardest time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 It was after that you went to your Aunt Lucy for a while?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And from there to the orphanage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 To the orphanage, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But that hardest time Jessie had gone?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. She sa
id she - I've often asked - since - oh, two or three years ago when she came up - if she remembered it. Yes, she says, I remembered, she says, you know what I went through then, she said, you'll never understand. She was only fourteen. And she says, looki
ng after you - children, she said, I couldn't stand it any longer.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Had the older two, Ada and Hetty, gone into the orphanage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes, they'd gone. Yes, they went -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 More or less on your mother's death was that?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh not quite, after that, '
cos they weren't old enough then I don't think. Wait a minute, four - no, I don't think so. I don't know where they went, somebody else had those, for a little while anyway, 'til they were old enough to go into the orphanage. Because you were only allowed
 in the orphanage - say two years at school so that - you soon went into the - the laundry to earn the money - for the orphanage you see. But when I went in - in my young days it was rich and poor.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 These were the actual categories?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Yes. I
f you were poor you were poor and if you were rich well, you were well away. But I was saying, the different sweets we used to have to what they have today. Have you ever seen any tiger nuts? No. They were - now how can I explain? You know monkey nuts? We
ll, that - that sort of thing but very }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 shrivelled}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
 up. But very sweet. These tiger nuts, we used to got a lot of those for a ha'penny. And honeycomb. Now let me see, there's a similar - that's right, but we used to have huge - pieces, oh as big as my hand for a ha'penny. Just the real honeycomb. Not the 
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 chocolate}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
 or anything, just the plain honeycomb. And if we got a farthing or a ha}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 '}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 penny we'd go and get this huge lump of honey - honeycomb it was called. And then licorice roots. You've heard of licorice roots? Its - like a root.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Just the licorice?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, no, not the back licorice. Like a root. Root of a tree. And it was licorice. Licorice root. And you'd chew and chew and chew. In - strips perhaps, ah as wide - wide - thick as my finger and about that
 length. You'd get so many for a penny or a ha'penny, whichever you had and then locust beans. They were shape of banana, shape like a banana but flat, and very dark brown. And there was beans, hard beans inside these. Used to eat - eat the outer - outsid
e
, it was like a - banana skin flattened but - brown. Very hard. It was sweet, that was sweet, but you couldn't eat the beans, the beans that were inside it, which'd be the seed I suppose, for the next - locust beans and - licorice root, honeycomb - and of
 course the Spanish - things that we used to - we get now, but those are the -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Spanish is licorice?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes, that's black.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you ever take that as a medicine?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. That - oh licorice powder, yes. Licorice powder, yes, I do remember that. 
Licorice powder. I think everything else was the same as they do - get now. A lot of the things are coming back aren't they, aniseed balls and that sort of thing, they're coming back now, we used to have them. And - oh another game we used to play with bo
n
ds, the boys used to call bonds. Little tiny things - in the - shape of a bomb, no bigger than a - what shall I say - a thimble. And you - open the - they're in half, you open it, put your cap in - and it's on a string and you drop it and it - explodes. Y
ou don't see those now. They used to call those bombs, that's boys - used to frighten everybody. No, I think that's all. In games and songs. Just outside a tiny cottage, stands the father of the child. \{BLANK\}
 He has heard his baby pleading, for her darling
 brother to come home. With a sigh to her he gently whispered, with a sob he clasped her to his breast, I will love you Lily always, little darling's heart now be at rest. And then you sing the chorus, up a bit high for me at the moment.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Just another Fatal weddings it's called?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
That's right, that's what it chorus, yes. Do you want it? Just - now where are we - While the wedding bells were - not that isn't the one. And a little child shell lead them, lead them gently on life's way, and a little c
hild shall teach them, how to love more dearly every day. And will bring them close together should they ever care to stray, she is an angel sent from heaven and will surely lead them on their way. I just can't get it at the moment. Desks they used to use
 
at school. Nowadays they have - tables with - that seat about six. Whereas in my time there was one long hall and you each had your own - you turned the desk up - the lid of the desk turned up - altogether, a long row, and there was your own individual pl
ace. And you had slates and - and - slate pencils, not - books like they do now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You had no books?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 When you get to the senior you did. In the higher school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you when you were in Leicester at the orphanage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Ah no, we had books there. And two to a desk. Two to a - to a desk there.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But little ones had slates?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Just the ordinary ones. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Do you remember any of the homes you lived in if anyone ever baked homemade bread?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Well I should imagine my mother did. I imagine my mother did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But you don't actually remember it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, I don't remember ever seeing it, no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you remember any of your relations or family making homemade jam?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, I don't remember that, no.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Or anything like pickles or bottled fruit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, I don't think so. No, not as far as I remember.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Any homemade wine or beer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No. Oh at the orphanage they used to pickles. Pickled onions at the orphanage used to.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Your Aunt Lucy pickled eggs didn't she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Nobody you lived with in London ever grew any vegetables or fruit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, they wouldn't have the garden, no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 At James Street you didn't have a vegetables garden?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no. No, no, nothing there, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you ever remember any tinned fruit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Tinned fruit. Well no, it was usually - more or less come in jars - what fruit we used to have. Jars then. Those grey jars - brown jars. About four pound I should think they'd hold, four to six pound.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That would be like we now get in tins would it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Would you have dried fruit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes, we had dried fruit - for Christmas because I can remember the - Auntie making Christmas puddings. She used to make currant - puddings and mincemeat.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you have a stir of the pudding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes, we always had a wish and stir. Naturally.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That was Aunt Emily?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What about dried vegetables, do you remember those?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, I don't think we had dried - they weren't in now. No. Hari
cot beans - and lentils we used to have. And in soups we always had pearl barley which they don't now. They don't use pearl barley now like they used to - in olden days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 It was always in your soup was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Always.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Can you remember, you 
wouldn't remember in James Street how you were served your food would you, whether there was a certain order in which everyone was always served?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Well, yes - father was always served first. We all sat round the table, yes, I remember sitting in the - high chair there - then, and we were all served one after the other, the eldest first and then the - father first and then the - yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 William first?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did your mother serve it from the pot she cooked it in or did she 
put it onto dishes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh I don't remember that. I don't remember that, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you remember how Aunt Emily did her serving up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Well of course she served uncle first. Oh - oh she had vegetable dishes on the table. If we needed anymore we could always have it you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Do you remember who you used to play with when you were a child, were they children just nearby?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes, just my - school - friends. I remember one day we were playing skipping - a girl - her name was Annie Pickett, I do
n't know why I remember that but - this particular - thing I suppose makes me remember it, we were skipping. And we were eating sweets at the time, and one got lodged in her throat, and she died. It choked her, yes. I can remember that as plain as - and s
h
e was the first person - I ever saw - in her coffin. I wouldn't go at first but - her mother said, oh you must see Annie. And I thought how beautiful she looked. It was all padded inside and there was - violets, violets and little tiny daisies. Oh she did
 look lovely. I thought, oh she's like a little angel. We were only tiny, I should think I'd be about seven - or so then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Who were you staying with then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Aunt Emily. Yes. We were skipping then you see and - of course - all of a sudden she - shudd
ered and went to the floor. Well of course naturally we ran for her mother but - she was taken away but she died. Just got lodged in her throat, that's why I'm always afraid of my children would - giving them hard sweets. While they're running around, but
 of course children more - used to it nowadays.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 How did it come about that you saw her in her coffin, were you invited over?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes, they said, you must - I said, no, I didn't want to do it. I said, I've never seen anybody and naturally I was a 
bit frightened as a child. She said, well you come with me. And I can see the coffin now, with a candle each end. A light. And she looked so lovely.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Were you just taken over on your own by her mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes, taken upstairs and all had to be very quiet.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you think her other school friends went and saw her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes, yes, most of them did that we were playing with at the time. Yes.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But you didn't go to the funeral?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no. No, I didn't remember that. That's the first one I've eve
r seen, that was the first one I ever - person I'd ever seen dead of course. And I suppose that's -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You didn't see you mother dead?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No. No. Well I don't remember anyway if they did show it me, I didn't - don't remember.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you actually play with your sisters or were they too much older then?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh we all played together. Yes, yes, we'd play together, yes. And I can remember one of my elder sisters always read to us on a Sunday. Yes, because - we weren't allowed to play on a Sunday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was that Hettie?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Hettie or Jessie, I don't know which. One of those. But we weren't allowed to play - and go out in the streets on a Sunday. Had to sit in the parlour and - read your book.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So she'd read aloud?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes, she'd read to me. All different stories, that I could understand.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Like school prizes and that sort of thing?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 I suppose so, I presume, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Was there one of your sisters or Ernie that you felt particularly close to or did you feel much the same about all of them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Well I was close to Dolly. My cripple sister. There was only thirteen months between us, you see, and she - she always clung to me more than the others because we were together most. You see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 When you went out to play were you allowed to get dirty?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Well - we got - as ordinary children do get dirty but - Aunt Emily was more strict - on that - score.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 More strict than gran?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes. Yes. Gran was a bit - you know, give way to me more. Like all grandmas do. Oh yes, yes. Oh yes, they say I spoiled my grandchildren but I said, that's grandmother's privilege.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Do you remember actually being punished for getting dirty, there was the time she dressed you all up to go out wasn't there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Ah yes, on a Sunday, that was on a Sunday, and
 she was going up to see uncle then. I suppose while they were courting that would be you see, 'cos uncle wasn't a - he was in the fire brigade but they weren't married I don't think you see, and she used to take me up with - to her and uncle used to sit 
r
ound the fire engine for a little while they were talking and then - he put his hand in his pocket and give me sixpence. He'd say, go and get some sweets. Well of course that's while they wanted to talk together naturally. And of course I wouldn't know th
at. And he said, spend it all, he said, spend it all. I thought, oh lovely.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you ever have a bicycle when you were a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh - no. No, never had anything like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you ever have a bicycle at any time in your young days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, I didn't, No. No, no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 They were rather more of a luxury then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh they were, yes, was only the really the gentry or those - rich people used to say. Father's in good - positions at that time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 There was a big difference then wasn't there?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. If you were poor you were poor. You see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 When you were a child did you think of yourself as being poor?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no, I just took it natural you know, and didn't seem to worry me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You were saying there were the rich and the poor, yo
u didn't think of that when you were a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Not as a child, no. The only thing I -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 When did it start to dawn on you that there was such differences in life?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Well when - when you didn't get anything to eat you know, when things were very 
bad. And I could see these other children nicely dressed and I thought, oh - what a lovely frock she's got on, and then she had something nice for her lunch, you know, the midmorning break. We wouldn't have any. I'd think, well why is that? And I used to 
think, oh 'tis 'cos dad's out of work. You see. That was my opinion anyway but - how Jessie put it over to me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you speak to Jessie about these things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes. Yes. I talked to her when she was home - in fact this year. Did she remember, she s
aid, you don't know what I went through, she said, I - seeing you children without anything, but, she said, that's why - she left home. She felt she had to go and - do a bit. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 At that time there was a big difference in the way children dressed was there?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes. Yes. I mean - there's one little girl, she's very nice little girl she was, Winnie Bunting her name was. And she had -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 She was the one with the biscuits?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right, and she had long ringlets. Long - golden hair, really 
golden hair. And she used to play the piano and I thought, oh her mother must - have plenty of money to be able to let her play the piano.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Do you remember being brought up to treat rich people or people of a different sort of way of life differently from others?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes, we always were learnt to respect them you know and - say, yes ma'am, and thank you very much ma'am and - especially at the orphanage, always. Oh yes, if you didn't - yes ma'am, and no ma'am, and - more or less - bob a curtsey when
 they gave you the prizes or anything, give you anything -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Had you been taught to say ma'am to people be}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 fo}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 re you went to the orphanage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh no, no, we'd say, thank you and - always say please and thank you but - not to that degree anyway.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 D
o you remember in those years before the first war hearing people referred to as real gentlemen or real ladies?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Well my mother used to say he - he's a - often used to say, right gents around, I've heard him talking to my - eldest brother. What was hi
s name? Oh dear. And he said you didn't have to - speak to them, those that got in the cab, he used to drive one of those - what they call hansome cabs, where the driver sits right up at the top, two wheels. And - they have a little - flap that used to op
e
n to talk to their passengers. And - he said you didn't have to speak unless they knocked that - flap, and he would open it and - yes sir? And where do you want, and suchlike. Often used to talk to - Will and say what - I've had to drive so and so to - th
e theatre or maybe to a - so and so's house, you see, Hyde Park or somewhere like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And he'd know who the people were you mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes, he'd know their name - because they were well known people. Yes, that's right. Hyde - Hyde Park area and - where's the other one - Finsbury Park, round that area. Right away from us naturally.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 A lot of very rich people lived around Hyde Park and Finsbury Park?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes, that is the area - there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Those were big houses?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 They're still up some 
of them big places, yes, some of them are. Berkely Square and - you've heard of Berkeley Square. Pall Mall. At the top of Pall Mall. And Rotten Row, I've heard him talk of Rotten Row. Where the Queen Mother's house is - no - the Mall, the Queen Mother's -
 house is in the Mall isn't it, Clarence House. That's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But if he said somebody was a real gentleman what exactly did he mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Well he'd have to doff his - cap to them, and he'd give him a good tip. He'd say, oh I got so and so, he said, that was Lord so and so. He'd call it Lord so and so whether it was Lord so and so I don't know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Do you remember people using the term real lady, do you know what they actually meant by it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Well Auntie - Aunt Emily - would say - I've got so and so
 coming to see me now, you sit still and don't speak until you're spoken to. And I used to think, oh she must be a lady. Whether she was or not I don't know but I used to class her as - upper. Yes. Upper class and the lower class.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you think of it as upper class and lower class at the time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Because she was dressed differently.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You tell so much more by how people were dressed then could you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes, yes. You watch people going by and say - we used to - as I told you we used to 
sit in this - alcove in this public house, we used to watch them going by you see. Say - hmm, she's - she comes from so and so. No, she doesn't, she comes from our way, 'cos she had - she's got a skirt right on the floor. It was dirty. You see, the lady -
 a lady'd have a clean one every day. Whereas a - another one wouldn't bother you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's changed now hasn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes, a good change I think. Good change. And then if we were singing in that alcove and the people came along from the saloons
 going out - they'd perhaps give us a penny, say, that was very nice, and - and - give us a penny. Oh that's champion, we used to say, that's champion. And then - everybody else go out and think, oh they're nothing, they're nothing. They're nothing.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you think at that time it was possible to move from one class to another?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes. Yes, if you tried hard - I mean, if the men worked hard - they worked up. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And also to move down?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes, like father did, he went down instead of m
y - his brothers - made money and got on well. And didn't want to know us because we were down. You see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You never visited them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. Oh no. Only Uncle Arthur and Aunt Lucy's husband.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 He was a brother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 My father's brother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 He was a wheelwright?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So did you feel they were in a different class at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. Yes. Yes. We weren't allowed to go around there unless Aunt Lucy asked for us, you see. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But she was kind?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes, yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But you never met the others, the other brothers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, no. No, I wouldn't know my other uncles.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 I wonder why Uncle Arthur was different from the others?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Well that's why I met - how I met him through Aunt Lucy you see. The others I didn't. You see - - 'cos - they left us you see, and of course they lived in a different area to what we did. You see as - as they got up they lived in a different area.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you know where they did live?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 One lived at Forestgate. They had a garage,
 he finished up with a garage. And - that was Uncle Perry as I called him. And the others, I don't know where the others lived. I lost -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 They lived in better off parts of London did they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Yes. Yes. They lost a - a son, one of them lost a
 son I know with the - first world war. Because I remember my father saying, one of your cousin's have gone. But who it was -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But it was a cousin you never knew?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. No. I don't remember seeing them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You went to church in your family didn't you, you were Church of England?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes, that's right, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Were you aware of people going to chapel and being different from church people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, that's the funny thing, I've been thinking of that, we didn't. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you know any people who went to chapel?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Do you remember any clergymen calling on your aunt or ever having anything to do with the clergy at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
We did at the orphanage of course, they used to come every week, once a week every week for the Bible - Bible lesson, but - Aunt Emily's let me see - no, I don't - remember there, not at Aunt Emily's. Not gran's, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So really your first contact with people like that was at the orphanage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right, yes, that's where I -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you have to call him sir?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
What about schoolteachers, there was that one who was kind and asked if you'd had your dinner wasn't there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Ah, I don't - I don't know her name. But I do remember the first one - the other teachers, there was 
Miss Crush, Miss Knott, Miss Hat, Miss Dury. And I told you we made up a rhyme about them. Miss Drury and - Mr Pickard and - Mr Gosling. But - otherwise I don't remember the ladies - the teacher's name that gave you the biscuits but - I can see her sittin
g at her desk now and - I suppose I was late - going out and doing my sums over again you see that I'd - got wrong. You see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 At that time where would you have placed the teachers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh we had to respect them. Oh yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But were they the rich or the poor or the upper class or the lower class?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh we'd think they were - upper because they - teachers were very - good, we thought oh they were - they must be rich - to be teachers. You see? Well of course you do, I mean you've got to have - t
here's all the - the apprenticeship and all that, there's - you've five years of your life gone even now isn't there for teaching. Oh it's gone down? Oh I see. Well I mean that's a lot - that's a lot out of your life to - and expensive time too. Yes.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
What about the shopkeepers, did you have anything to do with them, how would you treat a shopkeeper in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh we'd have to say please and thank you but - as a right, we'd just go and ask from what we want and -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You wouldn't call them sir?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Do you remember being brought up to think of some families as being rough and others as being respectable?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes. We weren't to play - allowed to play with the rough ones, I wasn't anyway, not when I was with gran.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What distinguished a family as rough?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Well, ragged and - and dirty and they used to fight, you know, fight and - swear too. Anybody swore oh they - they were rough ones.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And you were kept away from them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did your father also keep you away from rough children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. Oh yes. Weren't allowed to - mix with all - all and Sunday but - but we weren't often out when I was with father.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But you said Vincent Street was a very rough area?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. We wouldn't go out to play
 there. No. The only time - I remember we - were out once and that was near Christmastime - and father - or I'd lost my key or father had, or he was late home anyway, 'cos I remember - looking at the toy shops and one thing and another, and keeping warm a
t the - there's a - next to the - two or three doors away from the toy shop was a - what do you call them now -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 A grille, a kind of grating?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
That's right, yes, a cafe of some sort, and they had a grating and the heat used to come up and we used to stand there and get warm. Then we'd say, oh let's go and look at the toys again. 'Til father came home and then it began to get dark and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
What about this little girl Winnie, what job would have her father have done that they were so much better off, do you know what her father's job was?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No I don't know, but - oh, I - yes I do, he had a bakers - bakery.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 He had his own business?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. Yes. And she was the only child. She had lovely clothes, always had shoes, lovely shoes, all sh}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid11339072\charrsid675430 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 ne - 
all clean. She always looked clean. And I remember at school always allowed - we always had to show our hands, to see if our nails were clean, and hands were clean. And - the next school I went to - the teacher said, show your hands. Naturally I put my ha
n
ds out and she said, what are you doing? I said, you want to see my hands. She said, not like that child. You had to fold your arms so that your hands come there, I can't do it now, fold your arms behind so as your fingers - so. And show - show your finge
r
s - I - I can't do it now but I used to then. Show hands. And used to - and - that was to keep your shoulders back and sit up. And she had a little stick about the length of your - microphone there, and - if you didn't sit up, she'd - being you on the bac
k with this - stick. Oh.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Which school was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That would be Broad Street I think.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 When you were staying with Aunt Emily?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you remember Winnie's mother as being different from the other mothers?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, I 
never saw her, no. No. But we always - us other children used to let her go first. I don't know any, but we did, we used to let her go first. Whether we were shy or - frightened or what I don't know, but - used to -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Were there any other children that were as well off as she was that you knew?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes, quite - quite a few, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That was at Bear Street?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So there was quite a mixture?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes, mixed school because the - girls had one playground and the boys had another. They didn't have.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Socially it was fairly mixed too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes, yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 The standards of living were quite different were they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Do you remember times when you were better off, like when you were with Aunt Emily or your father was in work, thinking - feeling sorry for other children who were poorer than you were?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes, I realized then that I was lucky. 'Cos I always had nice clothes there and I used to look - you know - I used to be like that. I never though
t I'd go back to it. When - when I - did leave Aunt Emily and went back to grandma, I'd been away a fortnight then, and - as I told you, they had the police out and one thing and another to find me, she bought all the clothes with me - with her. Yes, all 
my nice clothes - all the nice clothes. I thought - often think, well - another person wouldn't have done nowadays, they'd think, well she's gone and that's that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Do you remember people making a distinction between craftsmen and labourers, a man who'd served his apprenticeship and a man who didn't have a trade at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Well one was the boss and the others were the workers. More or less. If you were a porter at the - at the railway station you were just - a worker. And then the guards - man, w
ell he was above you naturally. And they'd say, yes sir. The others had to respect him. Even at that - level.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 There was a big social distinction in the working class itself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 When you were a child at Blackfriars or with Aun
t Emily do you remember being aware of who were the most important people round about?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, we knew the Lord Mayer - was somebody grand. That sort of thing. We knew that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But not beyond that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 It wasn't like in a village where the vicar is important?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh no. Although - when the vicar used to come to school we always had to call him sir. And we weren't spoken - we never spoke to him unless he spoke to us. Oh yes, we didn't mix with him. They - he was one of the upper class - 
class as you might say then. Nowadays they mix with the people more don't they. They've got to otherwise they won't get the people will they.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What about doctors, did you have any doctors who used to call or anything?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Doctor. No, I don't think I remember - any doctors coming. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you ever remember seeing a policeman around where you lived as a child?

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes, in Bishopsgate. They didn't - go out on their cars and motorbikes like they do now. They used to have to walk in - single file
, and there'd be about a dozen. As they come to one area - two'd branch off to that area, that's their - was their beat, and two'd go that way. And two another, 'til all - they were all used up. Yes. But no cars, no bike - no bikes or anything like that. 
The only - car we used to see was the Black Maria, then we knew somebody had been wicked and they were taken to prison.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you ever remember seeing the police arresting people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh I can remember seeing - one man. Only one man, I remember seeing t
hem put him on the stretcher. There's no ambulances like - there are today. There was just these stretchers in different huts along the road. And whoever - police was on that - duty there, that area, they'd unlock this door and - get the - stretcher out a
n
d - I can remember seeing them running along the road - and it's only just two wheels, I'll tell you where I saw one, in - Sandown, Isle of weight, in the museum there. It was up in the corner, I said, that takes me back some years, when I was a child tha
t - and it had got the hood on just - as though - exactly - like they used to be.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Why was this man you saw put in the stretcher?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
I don't know. Don't know whether he was drunk or - or whether he was taken ill or what but I remember them lifting hi
m up and putting him - on this stretcher as I used to call it, and they wrapped him in a grey blanket then, and put this hood up and away they went. I suppose to the nearest hospital or if he was drunk they'd take him to the prison.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 When you were a ch
ild did anybody say to you, I'll call a policeman, if you were doing something?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh they used to say, I'll tell a policeman if you don't - if you - policeman would be after you, but - there was one man used to come - used to work at the - powder facto
ry. Yardley's - I don't know whether it - no, Cherry Blossom, Cherry Blossom factory, and he had a wooden leg. And of course boy like - used to watch the boys, used to go after him, peg leg, peg leg, and there used to be a policeman waiting round the corn
e
r - evidently he'd spoken to the policeman about it, and the policeman used to flick those boys ears as they got to the corner of the street, this man used to - never used to take any notice 'cos he knew they'd be - they wouldn't come right near him. He k
new how far they were behind him. He used to get round - just round the corner and then - a policeman'd come round. Just clip their ears with their hand - with their gloves. We thought that was dreadful. They'd run then, the boys'd run then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you remember what that man's name was with the peg leg?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh no, I don't. And we used to know it was always six o'clock. Always six o'clock.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 When he came along?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. And boys - than in those days - was - another mischief they used to get up to. Th
e - carts, as you know, or the cabs, didn't go very fast. And they'd go behind the cabs and get on that little - bar at the back. Like a - a car has a bumper well that was on the back of these carts whichever they were, either the water carts and - and th
e
 boys used to sit on there. And then the other'd say, whip behind guv'nor. And of course he'd - swish his whip you see and - they'd have to clear off. They couldn't do that now with the traffic like they are - like it is now. The same when the water carts
 
used to come along - in the very hot weather. They don't do that now but - they'd be - have the spray, sprinkler at the back, sprinkler, and sprinkle the road, and the boys used to get behind it, take their socks and shoes off and - run behind and have a 
cooler. A shower. And of course the others'd call to the man, and of course he'd whip this whip round and - they'd have to get off.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did girls ever do that sort of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no. No, girls were - that was above us. Beneath us girls to do anything l
ike that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 How do you think the police treated the people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh not too bad, not as far as I know, I've never seen - I've never seen anybody - you know, being roughly treated by a policeman or - or being arrested.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You weren't in fear of the police as a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh no. No. But we knew we had to behave, if we saw one - coming along, a policeman. We'd have to behave. But other wise we - we weren't afraid of them. No. I wasn't anyway.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 All the homes you had were rented weren't they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was there ever a landlord that you saw much of?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh when I was with gran - when I was with gran he used to come every week, and Aunt Emily's - their flat went with the job. With uncle's job you see. Like my husband's. Used to have the house on the farm you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So at Aunt Emily's there wasn't a person coming round collecting rent?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No. No, just at - gran's I remember. And of course Jessie used to take our rent.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 She used to have to take it somewhere?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Don't remember him coming - up there.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you remember any feelings about your landlords at all when you were a girl?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, not as a child, if - it was the landlord it was the landlord you know. Ordinary tradesman.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you ever remember anybody making a
 terrific did outside anybody else's house with a lot of tin cans and kettles and things to drive them out of the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh no, I don't remember that. No, only at Vincent Street, that was a - they used to scream and - weekends used to scream, come home drunk and - shout murder and one thing and another and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But not people organised banging tins?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, no, not in gangs, no, no. No. Only the boys up to mischief tying - cans to the - cats tails and suchlike, I've known that. Little demons.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 They used to come round?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
That's right. Oh yes, the boys used to have them - little barrows with the ties on, oh yes, they used to have those.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Collecting, penny for the guy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That was not girls again?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no, no. Not gir
ls. No, we'd have the windmills, we'd play the - make the wind - mills, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 I'd like to ask you a bit more about when you were with Miss Ellis.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh the quakeress. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was there a servants hall at that place?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. No, we used to have - our meals in the kitchen. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That was the only place you could sit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's all. Yes, or upstairs.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you feel at ease with Miss Ellis?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh no. I had to behave myself and - be out of the way while she was anywhere around. Unless of course I was serving the meal - naturally.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you feel at ease with the other servants?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Well I got say - mind my manners with them. And talk to them - they used to talk to me naturally.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Would you say you felt relaxed with them though?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Well I didn't at first. Until I got used to them, then I did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
When you were there would you say you were lonely or did you have enough companionship?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Well I hadn't anybody to talk to of my own age. Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you actually remember feeling lonely?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Well I felt they were - too old for me, you know. I couldn't open my heart to them and ask them questions, like I used to often think, well - I used to go to my sisters.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You could tell them your worries and things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you ever feel homesick there or at the orphanage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh at the orphanage I did. Oh yes, yes. Night after night often we used to think - there'd always be one of the girls crying. You hear - hear them crying.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But not at }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 Miss}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430  Ellis' you didn't feel homesick?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No. No. Yes, because she used to have the - wounded soldiers in for - afternoon tea. In the gardens.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
So you were there when the war ended and didn't leave her 'til the following year?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 The next year. Then I went to this - oh what was it - Taylor, Mrs Taylor.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 How many years were you there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh I think I was there about eighteen - or two years, because - they took me away with them to - Wales, as companion to the - a nanny I suppose. Family - childrens nurse a
s was, but of course she was over seventy then, and needed someone to look after her, while the others went away you see, went out. I - used to sit with her in the mornings on the sands, and then in the afternoons - it was her that taught me crocheting an
d suchlike. Always had to be doing something. Either knitting or crocheting.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you get married from that place?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No. No, I went to - Tyler's - when did I go to Tylers? Oh I had a month at - with my sister in - in the factory. 'Cos Jessie was in
 a - as I told you on munitions, and then she went into this factory, Fair - Fairbrothers in Leicester. Fairbrothers, they used - to make - braces, mens braces. She said, why don't you come in with me and - in the factory. Well I hadn't been - been in a f
actory in my life. Oh dear, the noise of the machines and the - language of the girls, swearing and suchlike. It was awful, I - well it opened my eyes really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You had not mixed with people like that before?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. And - fancy talking like that, and 
- oh I couldn't get - no, I was only there a month, because - my sister had been there so long that she was used to the machines, they were all electric you see and once you put your foot on the - pedal and your work was gone. And I had to make - I was on
 
a binder as they call it, and I used to do - have to do a hundred and forty-four pieces to one dozen. Then you only got one and threepence a dozen. You see. Well at the end of the week - I was only earning twenty-seven shillings and my board and lodgings 
was twenty-five. You see, and sharing room with my sister as well.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 It wasn't worth it really?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, oh I couldn't do it, I couldn't stand the noise, the machines were going all night. You see, so I left there. Where did I go from there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 It was some kind of sewing machine was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 It was a - yes - yes. And that was stitches and bind - linen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Where did you go from there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Let me see, where did I go from there? I think that's when I went back to service, Mrs Tyler's.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You went back to her again?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, no, that's when I went to there. Yes, I think that's there. From there. And then - where did I go, oh Miss Tollett's. Tolletts in - Murtonfield Road, Leicester. He was J.P. then. He was J.P., he was really upper class. That - th
at was only - one, two, three of us there, no, four. Edith - no, three of us there. A houseparlour maid, myself and the cook. That was a nice place too.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 How long were you there?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh I must have been there about - oh I should say from two years -
 onwards. Two years onwards. And then from there - I left - I was out of a job. I don't know how I come out of a job but anyway - from there - I met my husband's sister - ah, the - the girl I used to share a bedroom with there, Nora, took me up to her you
n
gman's house. And there was fourteen children in the family. And there was - I can remember the first day I was there. The mother was washing, it was on the Wednesday, my half day. She said, would you like to get the tea for me? I said, oh yes, I don't mi
n
d. Well, I said, where's the tablecloth? She said, oh we don't have a tablecloth. No tablecloth? 'Cos it was a polished table, it was a big oval table. No, she said, we don't have a tablecloth. All right. So I said, where's the bread? Well I out up two so
lid l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid11339072\charrsid675430 o}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
aves. Two. And put them on the plate. I said, what do they have with it? Well, she said, you can put that basin of dripping out and, she said, that pot of jam. Well naturally I thought it was the little pot, instead of that it was one of those big - b
ig jars you see, a six pound jar. She said, put that on the table. Well to see those children eat. That - two loaves were gone in no time. And they used to wear boots then. The father was as - bootmaker you see, and - when we'd cleared that lot out and th
e
 children used to go out to play. As the older ones were coming home from work - say well that's ; now let me see, there's - Arthur, Logan, Edgar, Charlie - oh - oh I don't know, about seven of them anyway, and - she said, well so and so's dinner's the fi
rst one, I used to - there was a flap on this - open range and there were - with a shelf, and each dinner was - seven dinners there. So and so's was first and then - as they come in I used to get their dinners out and put them on the table.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 She was very well organised was she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes, yes. But - oh dear, see these children - think, well when - when they going to finish. And every child come home - the father had a big bench this side of the house, this side of the room with all his tools you see, 
shoemaking tools and - they all used to have to change their shoes and put their shoes out - or boots, whatever they were, some had shoes, some had boots, underneath this bench, and put their old ones on to go out to play. Oh what a lot of shoes. It remin
d
ed - reminded me of the orphanage you see. And then when the big ones come in of course they had dinner - their tea rather. And their dinners, they had dinner at night 'cos the children used to come home for midday dinner. I remember on the Sunday I went 
t
here Sunday one day. And - teatime came. We were all in the front room. Or all us older ones, such as myself, had to go in first. And the young men and - girls - all sat round the table. And then the mother'd say, now you young ones, you can come. So as w
e
 got up there was a scramble. Who was going to sit in the - so' and so's place. And when - even when I was married I remember taking my two children there. Was-the mother there? No, the mother and father had gone then, mother and father had died. The elde
s
t daughter was taking - taking over the family there. Naturally my children had - used to have another plate for their sweet. Well they had their first course. And Mary, her name was, come on she says, get on with your pudding. Well, he says, I want anoth
e
r plate. This was Maurice, my second son. Oh, she said, you'll get - take that piece of bread and wipe your plate round, you use the same plate. But he wouldn't. No, he wouldn't have his dinner - unless he had another plate. She said, you've got to get us
e
d - you wouldn't stay for a holiday here, you do the same as we do. We wouldn't allow for - weren't used to - too much washing up I suppose. And I remember when he was ill once, when we were staying there. She said - do you remember the fish kettle? With 
a
 big - handle. I used to do two roly-poly puddings as they called them. One - with jam in, and another one with onions if you please and the bacon. Instead of putting the jam and rolling them up, you put bacon and - the - jam and onion - the - bacon and o
n
ion. And we - and tie them up the ends and put them both in this fish kettle, leave them to boil. And I'd make a big bread pudding in a big - meat tin. And that'd all go. And it used to take me all morning to do the vegetables. Vegetables and these puddin
gs. Oh dear, I was -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But that wasn't how you met your husband?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh no. In - in a way it was because - his - sister used to lodge there. You see, and I was out of a job then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 She had lodgers too as well as all those children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Yes. 
Oh yes. She said, oh there's always room for more. And she said, if - that was when - I hadn't got anybody then, Nora took me up there and - my other sisters, Jessie wasn't married. I don't know where Hettie was. Anyway this - Bella said - look, she said,
 
my lass, she said, there's always room for one more, she said, if you ever want any up come up here, this is your home. She was a wonderful woman. But anyway, I was telling you, Rose was there. She said, we want a dormitory maid at our - at Bedford. Oh, I
 
said, I couldn't do that. I'd only been a between maid or something like that you see at the time. Oh she said, I'm sure you could, she said, you can scrub can't you? I said, yes, I can scrub. She said, and make a bed? I said, yes, of course I can. So any
way I went. I left }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 Leicester}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
 then and went. I wished I'd known the job first - you know, a long while. And I was always allowed in the childrens day nursery because she was nurse - to the master's children you see. And there was only myself allowed in the d
ay nursery, with the children, none of the other maids were allowed - in the day nursery, and - I could go out with nurse as well. She was always called nurse you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So you had a friend there as well as quite liking the work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Yes. And 
there was eight - eight of us there in the - servants quarters, there was eight servants then. We had some fun there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 How long were you there then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh I wasn't there very long. I was only I should say a year at the most. And of course - my husband used to see his - come and see his sister, that's how I met him, you see. Went out together.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Were you there 'til you got married?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes, I left there and - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 After you got married did you take a job straight away?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no. No, I
 didn't take a job 'til; oh - the boys were quite - about eight year old I should think when I first took a job. But it was too much for me, I couldn't do the two together.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was that when you were doing the dairying work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right, yes, yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Which was really with your husband's job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes, it went - went in with Alec's job. Yes. Like they do now, a - husband - would do his ordinary job and the wife would help - in the house. Husband and wife job.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But your duties were the dairy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
In the dairy work, yes, bottling and - sterilizing the - the - separator and suchlike.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was that more or less full time work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh no. I used to go in the morning at six 'til nine. And then from three 'til six in the evening. Hard work while you were at it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And you had your own house to look after didn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes. It was too much for be because I collapsed. My father was with me at the time. And he said, now, he said, it's no good. I remember having the doctor then. And he said, no, he said, she's overworking. It's too much.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 How long did you keep on at that work until you collapsed like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh no, my - husband had to leave. Because that came in that work you see. That was only that one house you see for the - cowman and his wife. Of course we had to go out you see, had to move there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 How long had you been doing that dairy work before that happened to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh - not long.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 A year?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh at the most. The most. Yes. And then we went to Northampton whe
re Maurice was born, and that was another job where I had to go in the dairy. Well I - stuck that 'til - before - just before Maurice was born, 'til I realized he was on the way. 'Cos I collapsed then.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You collapsed again?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. In the snow one 
Christmas. I can remember the eldest one, he was about four then. Hardly four because there's three - two and half years between each one, and I remember him saying - are you better now mummy? And my husband - he went and fetched my husband I suppose. And
 from then on I - I didn't take any work. Then we had to move again you see because there was only the one house. It made such a lot of moves you see. The same with - at - at Four Elms, in }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid868964\charrsid675430 Kent}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 , you see, my husband had to move from one farm to another - 'co
s they wanted - one farm was like a nursery. When - if the cattle claved or were ill they were sent up to this Ide Hill Farm. So of course we had to move from one - perhaps lower farm up to the higher - higher farm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Because he had to carry on looking after the cattle you mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 More or less - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid7365922\charrsid675430 veterinary}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430  work as well you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But you never had to do any work then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Not there, no. Not there - no. Oh no, I couldn't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you never do any work after that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Not after that. No. Oh no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 How long were you in the Northampton job before you collapsed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh I'd been about - eight to nine months, I know, because there was only myself and another young person in the village - and more or less it was - Gutteridges and - Cutteridges
 and - and - another name. One was intermingled - the families - it was always like - just the two families, in the whole village. Generation and generation. And like it his young person and myself were the old - the youngest ones in the village. And we u
s
ed - they used to say, there go the modern ones. Just - we used to go out together you see. There go the modern ones, 'cos we'd got our hair bobbed you see then, that was all the fashion, which was the latest then. We - they - they mixed - the Gutteridges
 
and - that just remains, Gutteridge is one, that sticks in my mind, and then there was another one, another name. And either - either that was my uncle or that was my sister - my cousin or - so and so. And we used to - my house was - my cottage was the la
s
t one in the village. And - I had to go there was only one pump. For water. And that was in the centre of the village. So of course I had to go down the hill to the centre of the village to get every pail of water I needed. And wash day I used to carry my
 
baby in one arm and bucket in the other, and often when you got down there in the wintertime there'd be no water. No water and you'd got to take some to put in to start the pump going again. How we used to do it, I - when I look back on it, would I do it 
again? No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What year was the first child born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh, Charlie was born 1923. 1922. I only had - I was married in September and he was born the following August. So I didn't have long really on my own. Although in these days - we got our home - to s
tart with, our furniture and everything to start with. It was a four roomed cottage and I'd got it all settled.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Because it went with the job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 The house went with the job but you had to have the furniture in it you see.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So with all these moves you always had to move the furniture as well did you?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes. Oh yes. And - we'd only - only been married a week when we got - as I told you, I think I told you, when we got there - there was just our furniture, there was the two beds, and the two
 bedroom furniture, but no - our boxes hadn't arrived - with our spoons and forks and sheets and suchlike, tea cloth and etcetera. They were at the railway station, by the time we'd walked the three mile from the - railway station on the Saturday - it was
 
afternoon you see. And of course when we found our boxes - we thought naturally as young ones say, oh let's lay the line down first and - then suchlike, and we did that and we had something to eat. Then it come - bedtime. After tea. We'd better go and mak
e
 the beds. Where's the sheets. The boxes haven't arrived. So of course we had to walk all the way back again, it started raining. Had to walk all the way back to the Kings Langley. I don't know whether you've heard of Kings Langley. Walk back to Kings Lan
g
ley and of course the guard there, the chap in the railway station said, oh we can't open the - goods yard anymore, not 'til Monday morning. Said, what are we going to do then? So - anyway there was a very kind - village store, sells - Post Office cumever
y
thing, to a sewing needle. And they were good, he lent us a lamp, he lent us a - paraffin, two knives and forks, two cups and saucers. I said, we can always do with cups and saucers so we went take those back. And - a kettle. You know, just lent us enough
 for the weekend. So my husband could - borrow a cart from the farm to go down Monday morning and bring - well we slept between two mattresses for the weekend.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Did you ever wish you could have had another job, when you were working was there ever a job or career you feel you would have liked to have had?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes, dairy work. Dairy work. I should love to have taken - if I hadn't had the children, and my health was all right, I should have kept on with -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You really liked that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes, I liked
 that - making butter and - separating and - bottling and all that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 In any of your jobs did you ever belong to a trade union?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No. No. Since I was - when I was - after I was married I worked at Cromptons for a little while in Chelmsford, part time, and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was that after the dairy work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes, after I was married, oh I - yes, just recently. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Since the last war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes, yes. Oh about - that'd be about - we've been up here - four - eight - about twenty years ago that'd be. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 How long did you stay there then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Part time? Well I didn't stay there for long. 'Cos that was too much for me. But - doctor - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You were there less than a year too do you think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Yes. But - it was all right, I didn't mind 
it. That was canteen work, that was canteen work.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Serving up the food and that kind of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
That's right, yes. But - 'course that was - there was plenty in there, was - one, two, three - four cooks and - vegetable cook - another one'd be anoth
er cook for something else, pastry cook, and then in the - next - next section'd be the washing up section which'd be four girls in the washing up section, one on the washing machine, washing up machine, and two at the sink and another one piling up. And 
then there'd be four of us in the canteen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was that serving?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Serving and - doing the canteen - the counter down. Polishing and - 'cos all chrome plated you see and the - the urns and all that to be seen to.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Were there any other part time jobs you had?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. That was - that was - apart -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And you never managed full time work again?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No. Oh no. No. Oh no. When you've got a family you can't do both - no, no, you can't, no.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 When you were working did you feel that employers and 
workers had the same interests or different, the same sort of outlook or different?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh they didn't care as long as the work was done. You see. And - one thing there I remember - my money went in with my husband's. I never knew - knew what I earnt. Wh
ich I think was very unfair. Really. I think - if you're working you should have a separate pay pocket, don't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Did you feel that there was a division of interest among workers themselves, that some workers had a different outlook from others? When
 you were in the factory for example did you feel that all the workers had the same kind of attitude to work and the employers
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh no, some didn't like the employers and some did, you see, oh yes. All depend on the employer, sometimes we had - nice - foremen and other times we didn't. You see?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Would you say that full time work changed your attitude to life in any way? Thinking back particularly to when you were in service, do you think it changed your outlook on life at all, what you experienced in service?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Well I don't know, I was always - always had to work you see and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You worked at the orphanage too of course?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes, had to work before you went to school even. You always had - all had your jobs to do before you went to - got ready for school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So really going out to work wasn't such a change for you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, not for me. No, no. I didn't have easy life. Like once you leave school - or you - or you start work you think oh you're going to have easy life in the evenings, well you didn't. You still had to work.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What time did you finish work with Miss Ellis?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Miss Ellis? I always had to be in bed by half past nine. She was good that way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 She didn't keep you up very late?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 When you were there did you get to know any new friends, boys or girls?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh no, we weren't allowed - I wasn't even allowed to go to the back door to the milkman. Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Boyfriends would have been fro}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid11339072\charrsid675430 wn}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 ed on would they?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Any girl friends, did you ever go out with a girl?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's where I met Nora.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You met her at Miss Ellis' did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, not at Miss Ellis'. I come in contact with - how did I come in contact with her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 In one of your other places was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Ah yes, I 
went to another place, Miss - Tollits. He was J.P., that's right, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
But you didn't have any new friends in that period up to the end of the first war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, I didn't - didn't have any girl friends, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What about friends from the orphanage, did you keep in touch with any of them?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Ah there was one or two used to go to a Bible class on a Sunday. And I was - that was once a month, and Miss Ellis used to let me go to that. That was on the Regent Road and I'd go straight there back. She al
ways used to time me. I had to be in by this certain time. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You'd see these old friends there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You didn't correspond with anybody?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh no. No. This - this person that took the Bible class, she was also on the committee of the orphanage. So of course her and Miss Ellis'd be in co naturally.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
About your evenings out, how often were you allowed out while you were with Miss Ellis?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh once a week. Was it once a week? Wait a minute, let me think. From four to six - and t
hen from six to eight. That's twice a week. Then on Sundays - Sunday morning - one - one Sunday it'd be Sunday morning, another - Sunday be Sunday afternoon and evening.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 It alternated?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But you always got some time off on a Sunday?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right, oh yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And you always got those two short spells?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Always had to be in by eight o'clock. Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But you were allowed out on two evenings of the week?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But not for very long?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. No. No. Got to be there and back.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Was there anything that you particularly liked or disliked about your position with Miss Ellis, in that job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Well when - spring cleaning. She used to have some lovely - lovely - ornaments - and things. I wasn't allowed to touch them. But I could watch Jessie - washing them and putting them back. Oh they were beautiful things, they must be worth - oh -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You mean you liked the spring cleaning?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes, I didn't mind that, I didn't mind the h
ard work, I got used to it you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was there anything you particularly disliked about being there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh she was - I didn't have long enough out. No - freedom.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You felt confined?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes, no freedom. And I used to have to wear long frocks and - oh dear.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
In that household was anything homemade, like bread or jam or pickles or wine or beer, do you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, the only thing that - was there - Miss Ellis would always have - what do they call it now -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Herb beer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, in th
e - filtered water. Filtered water. Always filtered water. But - what is - the cook was very good at - soups. Very good at soups. She could make any - lovely soup. But apart from that - no, not making any jam or anything like that, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did they grow fruit and vegetables there?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No. No. Because they had to get rid of the gardener when the war came. He went you see. And it was all put down to lawns and roses then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Who looked after that then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That was the coachmen, when the horses went he
 took over the gardener's job you see. And the boy - just had a boy to help him, do the knives and suchlike. That was - when I saw knife machine.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was any livestock kept at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Not there. Oh no. Oh no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was there meat eaten every day there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Meat? Oh I can't remember. Well I suppose - no, always had fish alternative I expect.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 It was always meat or fish?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Something, yes. Always cooked meal. Oh yes. Yes, midday always.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Were you well fed there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Yes. But of c
ourse it was wartime and we didn't have much butter. Or anything like that, everything was rationed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did she use tinned meat at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, I don't think - don't remember. Don't remember that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you have the same food as she had or different food?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes, we had the same food, yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Even when she had that six course dinner and that sort of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh no, we didn't have six courses, no, we just had the two. But we were served the same as her, more or less what she had.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You'd have the same quality of food?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. Oh yes, yes. Oh some did - no, some didn't have the same. No, no. No, at Gosworth Hall - the - servants had different - menus to what the - went into the dining room, oh yes. There.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But the food was quite good?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
It was good, yes. Yes. Yes. And used to have shooting parties and suchlike. Oh yes, at Gosworth Hall. Go}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid11339072\charrsid675430 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 worth Hall was - no, that wasn't - that wasn't -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That wasn't miss Ellis'?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Miss Ellis had a piano didn't she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes. She played beautiful. But of course in those days - ladies, young ladies were brought up to - that was their - always taught to play the piano. That was always their accomplishment. They were nothing if they didn't - couldn't play the piano.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And one day you heard her playing didn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes, I stood at the hall - there was a huge hall, oh it'd be bigger than this room. Just a hall as you entered into the front room - front door, there'd be this big hall with huge pot plants and suchlik
e and this gong, and these swing doors, from the kitchen, leading from the kitchen department into the - hall, and I could hear her playing and I just opened these - listened. And she came out - and caught me. She said, what are you doing there? I said - 
I
 was listening to you playing. That's nothing to do with you, you go into your own place. That's very rude. But she did - she used to play that - Humoresque used - I used to like best. And - American - the American - anthem. She'd play that. Yes. Yes. The
y play that now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did she ever have a musical evening?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Now let me see, no not there. Miss - Mrs Tollitt used to, they used to have music in the evenings.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But not Miss Ellis?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did she have books?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh library, yes. Wonder
ful library. Although really the - it was really the breakfast room, where the library - where all the books were round the wall. Lovely lot of books, but we weren't allowed to touch them of course, only clean them. Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you ever try to read any of them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 She never said you could?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did she get newspapers and that kind of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Newspapers? I don't remember having - newspapers there, no I don't remember.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 She didn't pass them on to the kitchen anyway?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you remember her reading and was she a keen reader?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, I don't think she was a reader because - more or less - in the winter she'd spend most of her time in her bedroom. Because she was getting on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Were you there on Christmas Day at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Christmas Day. Oh yes, I must have been because - I left the orphanage - a week before Christmas, that's right, and went to Miss Ellis'. So I must have had a Christmas there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you remember it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, I don't think I do remember. Don't think I remember that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Perhaps you would have gone to one of your sisters do you think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
I might have gone to Hettie's, that's the only one. 'Cos I remember going - when the orphanage had their Christmas party, which we h
ad as I told you once a year, I had an invitation to that and she let me go to that. And I won a prize that year which I didn't know I was going to get. That was John Halifax, Gentleman.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you ever go away with Miss Ellis on a holiday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no. 
Oh no, she went to - she was - friends with - Lord and Lady Reckitts. The - the Reckitts Blue people and Emerson Everard the brewers. They were her relations, the Emerson Everards.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Were they also a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid7365922\charrsid675430 Quaker}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430  family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did she think it wrong to work or play on Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But you had to work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh - yes, we had to - get her meals. Mind you, she didn't - she'd have everything cold. Oh yes, on a Sunday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 She didn't expect you to cook a big hot dinner?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, no, no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did she regularly go to }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid7365922\charrsid675430 Quaker}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430  meetings on a Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Well she used to up - and when I - when I first went there she used to go but - latterly she didn't. She was too ill - really or either getting too old, I don't know, but she d
idn't used to go. 'Cos she'd have a - the - horse and cab used to come - and take her. She used to wear these - wide crinoline frocks, oh dear, I think on the ground -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 She was Victorian?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes, I can see her coming down the stairs now with this - 
wide frock and then - wide frock as they came down the stairs. And she'd have her hair - snow white hair, and done up in - up in a little knob in the top and in the summer time when she was entertaining she'd have two roses, one each side. She used to loo
k really nice - when she was dressed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you know if any of the other servants were }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid7365922\charrsid675430 Quakers}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 ?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no. No, they weren't. No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 She wouldn't have said grace out loud at meals on her own would she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 I never heard her. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And you didn't have grade in the kitchen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. Not in -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 She didn't have family prayers did she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Not - oh yes, she did. Yes. Yes, in the morning, yes. Miss Leate used to take those. That was the - companion.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What happened at those?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Well we us
ed to - she'd ring this - bell. She used to have a little bell, not the gong. And we'd all march into the - breakfast room as we called it there. And we'd each have a chair to kneel at. Say these prayers. Read a verse out of the Bible or a chapter and - s
ay these few prayers and then - we'd have to go out again.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So you all went in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 The coachman too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh no, not the men. Not the men. Only us - only us three and Miss Leate, and Miss Ellis. She used to sit in a - high chair, you know, an - a -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 She didn't kneel?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. No. But we did. And - and we used to have prayers at -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You were saying about Miss Ellis?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
She would have our caps and aprons spotless. And they'd got to - got to be just so, and Jessie, she used to h
ave those little lace caps with the long streamers down the back. I wouldn't wear one. I said, I don't want those - one of those, I'm not wearing none of those, 'cos I'd never worn anything like it at the orphanage naturally. I had one of those little - l
ike a nurses cap. Oh well, that'll do me, I said. And I wouldn't have one with the - the - the aprons with the crossed over at the back with lace.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But she didn't insist on this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. No. No, I - she said, why aren't you wearing them? I said, well 
I don't like the stuff on my hair.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 She didn't make an issue of it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, she said - 'cos Jessie was - really the head one of course. And she - been there so long that -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 I suppose she'd let her have some authority over you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Jessie w
as used to - - being - old fashioned like that. I used to call it old fashioned. Naturally it would be too old fashioned for me. Really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Do you remember if Miss Ellis took an interest in politics, or would you not have known about that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 I would not that. I wouldn't know that. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Do you know if she had friends, she had these soldiers, do you think she had actual friends though?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Well she used to have a nephew come down - to stay. Master Howard we - we used to call him. It was Master So
 and so and Master So and so. And he used to come and stay very often. But he was - now where did he come from? Ireland? Somewhere abroad. And he'd got a business of his own naturally. And I presume she left all her money to him. She must have been worth 
a a lot of money, he was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 How did he treat you when he came?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh he just - we sat at the - he sat at the table, we just served him, we didn't -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 He never spoke to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, no. He did speak to Jessie but not to me. And she'd always say, y
es Master Howard, or - I'm getting Master Howard so and so.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did he give a tip?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, not as I know of. Not as I know of.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 She and you used to clean the boots did you say?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes, yes. I used to, she didn't, Jessie didn't, oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you remember having a woman friend who would come in and see her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Who, Miss Ellis? Well she had her - her own companion, naturally, but - oh yes, she used to visit us. Oh yes. Yes, used to come -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did she have an at home day when they would come?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Not as I know of. Not as I know of.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Do you think she was quite content with her position in life or do you think she would have liked to have been higher in the social scale?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Well I don't think she could get any higher. To me she was - it
. You know. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 She was I suppose in that particular society wasn't she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. Oh yes. And she'd sit in this four-poster bed. I remember seeing this four poster bed, she had this - shawl on and - the fire'd be going and - I used to have to put t
his footbath - hip bath I used to call it, hip bath, her bath every night. Of course - the fire was going all day - all night as well. And of course there was always back - the back stairs and the front stairs. We weren't allowed to use the front stairs, 
oh no. The servants - back stairs - always. Oh yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did she ever use the back stairs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no. No, no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What about Miss Leath, was she a front stairs person?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Oh yes. Yes. She was -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was she really treated like one of the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. She had her meals with Miss Ellis - too, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What did you think of Miss Ellis and her way of living at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Well I thought there was nothing in it. All she did was - sort of - sleep and eat. But of course she was getting on I suppose to me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 She had this interest in the orphanage of course?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Ah yes, used to go to the committee meetings.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Were there any other things she used to go out to do you know, was she in other organisations and good works?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no,
 only to the - quaker meetings. To start with, that's all I can remember her doing. Really. And see to the soldiers. With the soldiers.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 She didn't have much of a life really?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, no. No, lonely life I used to think. Just herself to think about. 
Although she must have done some good to have had these soldiers.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did Master Harold gave you a tip when he came to stay?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh no. Not me anyway, he may have done Jessie, but not to me. 'Cos I never saw much of him you see, he was always in the front of the house.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Is there anything else about your time with Miss Ellis that comes to mind that you haven't spoken about?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
She had a studio. With some lovely pictures, whether she did them or not I don't know. And there was nothing - nobody used 
to use the studio. But the - portraits were all there and the - casel, painting easel and - and the palettes, and nothing had to be touched, it was always left - as it was. I can never remember anything being altered in that one room. And there was a litt
le - what do they call those - what they used to make the wool with, the spinnet. Spindle.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You mean the spinning wheel?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. There was one of those in the corner. And then these - all these portraits all round the room and the paints and - and -
 that was never - never altered. We used to have to put everything back just as it was. And I can't remember using - the room - using that room at all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 It seems strange doesn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. I often wonder what happened, why that room was never - used.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 It wasn't added to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No. No, no, everything was left just - the easel's got to be put in that one position, the - each - portrait - if one portrait was in the wrong place she'd notice. Oh yes, if that was on the wrong side of the room, it' had got to be moved back again.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So her wits were all about her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. My word yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Were you quite frightened of her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, I wasn't frightened of her but - I think - if she was around I'd - I'd watch my p's and q's you know and - I wouldn't go to the front of the room or any- you know, into the front of the house while she was there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Did you take part in any sports either before you went to the orphanage or during your orphanage years?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh at school. School used to. I used 
to love sports. And especially P.T. We used to call it P.T., they call it P.T. now. Called it P.T. then. I used to go after school hours in London - now where was this, along the Barking Road. And it was the - was it the Polytechnic? And we used to do the
s
e - I got as far as club swinging. We did the countermarching, and then the flags, and dumbbells. And then I wanted to do the - the club swinging but of course my arms were too short, I used to knock myself out nearly. So of course that was out. But I use
d to like the marching and the drilling and the - vaulting horses and suchlike.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was that a sort of institute or something?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's right. Yes. Evening. Evening classes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Not to do with the church though?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no. No, no. No, the - no, the
 - the happy evenings, that - that was to do with the church, that belonged to the church.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But not this physical exercise?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What about any other sports, you did some swimming at one time didn't you?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. That was first I
've ever seen a swimming bath at school. And we all stood along the bath, we'd never been to the swimming baths before. And this teacher took our hands and dropped us in. We either gone - mind you we knew - she told us the - actions and suchlike. But - oh
 we - the screams that went up. We'd either got to go under or up.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was that in London?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Yes. That was in the Balaam Street baths.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you learn to swim there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Yes. Yes. Yes, my sisters could all swim. At least Hettie and Je
ssie can. Hettie won medals. She got a - a - I say medal, a certificate and medals 'cos she had that with a chain and she lost it once when she was in the baths. And had to dive three times to find it, it was on the bottom.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What about other kinds of s
ports like netball or hockey, did you ever do anything like this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No, no. No. No. The older girls used to do netball at school but I didn't. I didn't reach that class.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You didn't do anything like that in Leicester?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Not of those, no, no, no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you ever have any kind of hobbies when you were a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Well no, because if we hadn't anything to do at the orphanage they'd find you some sewing to do. And I can remember, even with that - finger - was in a sling -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 When it was caught in the mangle?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. I had to - they always had a - funny - funny thing this, used to have a box, and as the dressmaker took the pins out of the dresses - the bent ones she used to put in this one box. And - when a girl wanted anything to do, or
 the little ones, she'd say, well get the box out, and we'd have to get this box out and bend these pins straight. And I can remember doing that with these two fingers, bending those pins straight because I had nothing else to do.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Even though your finger was sore?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So you never had a hobby?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, you couldn't, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You didn't collect stamps?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no. No. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And you didn't before you went there because you didn't have the facilities?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. No. No. The only ho
bby we had the orphanage was to - there's one day a year, one half day a year, we used to go into the country with our - with the laundry baskets, get the bluebells, that's the only thing - used to -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But you didn't have anything like collections of things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. No, nothing like that, no. Or embroider or anything like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
You said you once went to the theatre and you were listening to the music all the time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Ah that was - yes, yes. That was with auntie.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Any other entertainments of that kind that you remember, concerts?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
When my brother come home from the - on leave, during the war, he took my - elder sister, and I was at the orphanage then, and he came and took me out. We went to the theatre then. And I can remember sitting in
 one of the boxes. They must have paid a - nice bit for that, during the war. But - he come home - do they call it French leave, he shouldn't have been home. I learnt that afterwards, I didn't know, 'cos - I didn't learn that 'til after I - my sister said
, now don't you dare tell anybody, don't you dare tell anybody you've been out. I learnt afterwards that he shouldn't have been home. A lot of soldiers did that at one time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You don't think he got into trouble about it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. Evidently the Matron d
idn't know or else she wouldn't have let me gone I don't suppose.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What about cinema, did you ever go to see Charlie Chaplin?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh no. No. I did at home. We used to have - Saturday afternoons, only used to cost us a ha'penny - to go into this cine
ma, when it first came out. And it was - there's no seats, there was just long forms as children I can remember sitting - and this train coming towards us a seemed huge. I can remember the first - and then as we came out we had - either had sweets, little
 
- two or three sweets, or a nougat, what they called a nougat, bar of nougat given us. They don't do that now do they. We used to look forward to that. Otherwise I don't think we had any - except the Sunday school treats of course. From the Sunday school,
 I used to go. For half days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You never went to any other plays except those two visits to the theatre?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No. No. No. No. Oh at the orphanage - we used to have another afternoon - to one of the committee lady's - half day. We'd have tea on the lawn and - games. And then home. That was another -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was that nice?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes, we used to look forward to that. I remember Mrs - Leeson - Leeson, her name, she had two daughters. And - it was in - when strawberries were out, we had a - an afternoon with
 her and we had strawberries and cream, that's the only time I remember having strawberries and cream. As a child.,
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That was another occasion?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 At the orphanage, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 These were sort of annual things were they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you re
member in any of the homes you lived in, with your grannie and Aunt Emily if they had friends coming in for tea?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh granny used to have - several friends come in. Oh yes, often, have a cup - there was always a cup of tea whoever came in - any time those days, it was - always a cup of tea.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did your father have friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No. No. He never - as far as I know, not when I was - with him. No, we lived more or less on our own there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you think he was lonely?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Well he must have been I sh
ould imagine. I can't imagine a man - living all alone like that, just with his family.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was Aunt Lucy friendly to him as well as to you children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes. Yes. But - she - she was - she disagreed with him - not - finding work, I think - she thought he ought to have - made more effort to find work, so that he could pay for us you see. That was my opinion. As I got older.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Do you think perhaps she thought he ought to have gone into a job which was more steady?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Yes. Yes, he had too many different - jobs I think. Why I don't know.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 He was sort of freelance really was he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Well - he went from one to another - as far as I can remember, because he was on the brewers drays, he was the handsome cabs, and then he worked on the - pante
chnicon as we called in those days, which is a removal - that's right. Mr Neville. Don't know why he -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And he always stuck in that type of work did he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. Sort of labourer. What I call - what I'd call a labourer's job. Not a high up job. Like a railway guard or -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
It's strange that when he had this butchers business he never got a job in a butchers shop?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. And why he didn't keep it. I often wonder why.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You don't know why?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. No, I can't -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 It's quite a mystery really isn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes, and yet the other - other - my other uncles - made a success of their jobs. And he had the same chance as them - them, they were all set up, as far as I can understand from my - sister that's died - dead now, that they were all set u
p in a - a jolly good business. But father never made a success of his. Why I don't know. But she said it's because he had such a big family, the others only bad like two children, at the most. You see, and we were so close together.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you think it was maybe the worry and anxiety of it?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 It could have been. It could have been that. And then with mother being ill.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you say your mother was about thirty-nine when she died?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes, she was very - very young. Very young. Well she was no mo
re than forty-five anyway, I know that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 She wouldn't have been having just had a baby would she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No. No. Yes, Ernie was only eighteen month old. And at one - there was one between Ernie and I.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 He passed away didn't he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. There was 
hardly - there was only thirteen months between my next sister and I. See, it was one after the other.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 It must have been an awful strain on her health?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
I think that's what - yes, I think so. Too quickly. T.B. She contracted - yes, she contracted T.B. and of course Dolly took it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 I wonder if that was T.B. you had in your eyes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
I don't know, could have been because - I can remember Aunt Lucy saying - to Miss Attwood which was the Matron - she said, well if it's in her - if there's anythi
ng like that in her, you'll find it. Because when you leave school at the orphanage you have to go before the doctor. You see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 He examined you did he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. Well - and - and you should have gone - I should have gone when I went to the orphanage b
ut somehow or other, during the wartime I suppose, it got overlooked and I didn't go. You see. And when I did go at - when I was fourteen or when I had my finger - bad, I remember the doctor saying to Miss Attwood, this child - should never be in the laun
dry. But of course - but of course you'd got to, there was nothing else for it. Scrubbing and - cleaning.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So even though he said that you still had to do it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
I still had to go, yes. Long as you could do it. 'Cos I know my sister Ada - she often u
sed to faint. Often used to faint, mind you I didn't, only when I had my finger - ill of course - bad of course. But she often used to faint, we used to have to - go to communion as I say, and she often used to pass out. That's why I never - I was never a
llowed, I - I think that's why I was never allowed to do the three hour service on Good Friday. They always went for three - three solid hours to church.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Well I was never allowed, I did an hour and then she'd say, you and you and you go home. And leave the others.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Those of you who weren't very strong?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. So whether - whether it was T.B. I couldn't tell you, but - anyway I - I remember. Aunt Lucy saying, well - if it's in her it'll come out. But there, it didn't, so - that's that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That was the Newmark school there wasn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
The Newark - Newark - Newark Girls Orphanage. Newarke. Yes. The orphanage - the orphanage for Newarke - Leicester.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 And what was the school called?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 St Mary's school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That was ah church school too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Church of England. 'Cos the church was - the school was here and the church was up on a hill there. Just on the - other side of the street.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 At that school do you ever remember being punished for anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, only kept in because I cou
ldn't do my arithmetic. That's the only way. I fainted while I was there too. We were having prayers one morning, kneeling up on the - forms. I passed out, but - was home from - school three weeks then. But - I think that was when - there was a - a -epide
mic of influenza. I think that's - that was when, 'cos I - I remember girls going down like ninepins one after the other. We had the big room for them - all in that one room.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Because you were all ill?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes, one after the other.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 When you left school you were fourteen weren't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Oh yes, you left at fourteen those days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Would you have liked to have stayed longer if you'd had the opportunity?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Well I would have done because I could have learnt more, you see I didn't have muc
h chance when I was younger, because of my eyesight. Therefore I only got as far as - I was in standard six when there was seven and ex-seven to go you see. Well - they were learning French - until the war started and then it was all finished and no more 
French learnt. Nor the National Anthems, we were all learning National Anthems. And then when the war broke out we - were not allowed to sing them. I suppose that's -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You mean you didn't learn any more French?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. No. The - there's two classes i
n this one big room, and that was standard six and they were learning - the - Marsalliese in French, and I used to listen to them. I used to copy them you see and used to think - oh I would like to be with that }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid7365922\charrsid675430 classes}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430  because they're learning all these - 
anthems, you see. And we were learning - what anthem were we were learning. Oh dear. Belgian. Belgian. Belgium. No. No. No, Belgium, 'cos the flag was - red, yellow and black, that's right. And they - they were doing French, and I thought, oh I'd love to 
learn French, but - I never got as far as that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you know why they stopped it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Because of the war. And we weren't allowed to sing the anthems. And we used to have I remember two little Belgian girls come to school. They were refugees from Belgi
um when - Belgium was over-run, in the 1914 war. And one little girl was blind. And - in one of our concerts she sang - Please give me a penny sir, and we were all in tears by the time she'd finished. It was so real to her - and to us. Oh no, no, it wasn'
t please give me a penny, it was won't you buy my pretty flowers, that one. That one.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
After you left school did you ever attend any evening classes or part time education?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no. No, not from the orphanage you see, all we had was - Bible class, t
he G.F.S. and then the vicar's evening. And then at Lent we always had to a Lenten service during the - evenings.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you have any regrets about your education?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no. The only thing - I wished I'd have learnt more.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But do you think you }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid7365922\charrsid675430 benefited}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430  from attending school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes. Well I think I've learnt more since I've left school. I've picked up a lot up since I left school than - when I was at school. I used to like reading, and I used to like compositions, at school, and singing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But not sums?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No. Arithmetic was out. And history - too, I could never - never remember the - the dates.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 History was taught in a very boring way then wasn't it?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Yes. Yes. And I'll tell you another thing we used to do - the Lady of
 Shallot, we learnt that poem and we had to act it, we act it as we - each part we had learnt so - say four or five of us were picked out and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That must have been quite nice?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh I used to like that, used to like acting. I could do - act the foo
l if nothing else. As I used to say.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Do you remember what money you got from Miss Ellis, what pay she gave you?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 A pound a month. Twelve pound a year.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Paid how often?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Once - once a month. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 What did you do with that money?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Well I used it to buy my uniform. All my clothes. Oh yes. Oh yes. Had to keep myself in clothes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You had to buy those clothes that you didn't want to wear?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 I suppose that took up a lot of your money?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes, I never - coul
dn't save anything. Never saved anything. - I remember cooke once - she bought me a - one of her hats. She said, what hat are you wearing? I said, I'm wearing this one. You were given - we were given one hat from the orphanage and two of everything. And -
 
I'd only got this one hat and I said, I'm not wearing that any longer. So she said, well I've got a hat for you. Well, the old fashioned thing. It was square - it was like a sailor's - sailor's straw with all flowers all around it. Oh - I wouldn't wear it
.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did you say so to her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Oh yes. Oh she says, you are ungrateful. You're ungrateful, she said. I should have been glad of that, she says. At your age. I thought, would you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did any of them ever take you with them to any relations?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Who, the maids? Oh no. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 You just visited your sisters?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Yes. Well I only had one you see because Jessie was on munitions.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 It was just Hettie you saw?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 That's all, yes. Yes. And she was only in rooms when she married. She couldn
't get a house.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was Ada not in Leicester?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Ada - where was Ada now. Hettie and - Ada, she'd be in - at the Bishop's - house.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Was that in Leicester?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes, that was - Bishop Langham there. Yes, because I went out to tea, I went to tea wit
h her. Remember one Sunday I went - and he had those - bells - in - in the hall he had a set of those - and - you - you rung those with hammers. Oh, I said, let me have a go. He was out, Bishop Lang, he was out and of course I said, oh. I got, While sheph
erds watch their flocks by night.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 So Ada was in service there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes, she was there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But she didn't have her own home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no, no, no, no. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Were you a bridesmaid at Hettie's wedding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 I should have been. But I was on holiday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 In London?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No, at Kirby Muxles. Yes, so - of course I didn't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Were you disappointed about that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But Ada could come and visit you sometimes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes, Ada - and Hettie used to come and visit me at the orphana
ge. But Jessie didn't of course.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Could Ada and Hettie come and visit you when you were with Miss Ellis?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Come and sit in the kitchen with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Yes. Hettie did. But - Hettie only come once. That's all. Only came once. And 
my brother came once. And he - that was him - said, you're not stopping here, he said, you'll be in the looney bin, as he said it - then, they used to say it then. But he meant the - asylum. He said, you'll be in the looney bin if you stop here much longe
r
. 'Cos they were so much older than myself you see, that's - I suppose that's why. And I'd got to keep so many rules and regulations that - you see, and when you leave school - left school at the orphanage - you had to put your hair up. When you were at s
c
hool you had it down in a plait - with navy blue ribbon. But once you left school - had to do it up in a roll at the back there, pin it up. You see. Never let your hair down then. You were really grown up then as you thought. And aprons, you had aprons in
stead of pinafores. But of course they didn't let you go out to service until you were - become a woman. You see? That's why I was late you see, leaving the orphanage, because I didn't - come to pu}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid7365922\charrsid675430 ber}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 ty 'til I was about sixteen and a half, you see, and that
's why - I suppose I was kept there 'til -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 They waited?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. Some were earlier than others you see and of course they were ready for going out but I wasn't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 I wonder why they did that, have you any idea?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No idea. No. I don't know why.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But soon after you came to pub}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid7365922\charrsid675430 er}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 ty you went?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
Yes. I was sixteen you see. Sixteen and a half when I went. 'Cos I would be - seventeen the following March. I went out just before Christmas when we was seventeen the following March. And I often wo
nder whether that - with mother having T.B. whether that held me up.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 I've heard it has a lot to do with the weight of a child.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Well I wasn't heavy as a child.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Thin girls are more likely to have it late.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh I see. Oh I haven't - I have
n't heard that. And then I've often wondered if it was the food during the war we didn't get things you see, we didn't get things - fruit and stuff like that in the war. We just had the plain food at the orphanage.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Did anybody tell you about the facts of life?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 
No. I can remember I was - pumping water, this - had a pump there to pump water and Mary was the monitor then. And I said to her, oh, I said, I've injured myself, I said, doing that pumping - 'cos - it was my morning for pumping the water,
 fetching the - carrying the water. I said, I've injured myself. She said, what do you mean? Of course I told her then. So she said, oh don't you tell anybody. I said, why? 'Cos I didn't feel - ill mind you. So she said, don't you tell anybody but, she sa
i
d, when you go to bed tonight you go and knock on Matron's bedroom door and tell her. So of course I knocked on the Matron's door - and - she said, oh that's - the sin of womanhood she says, that's a sin of woman - oh it's dreadful. Sin of womanhood, she 
s
aid. She said, don't you ever tell anybody, she said, that's a secret between yourself and nobody else, she said. She said, and if you don't have that, she said, you'll never have a child. That's all I knew. That's all I knew, it's unbelievable. In fact -
 
as I told you, when Mrs Benner, she had these fourteen children and one Wednesday I remember going up - there and she was - busy making the beds. No, she'd finished her washing, that's right. She said, I'm going to make the beds now. So I went and natural
l
y I said, I'll come and help you. I thought, oh these beds, I said, what a lot of children you've get. I said, you must have a lot of scars on you. She said, what do you mean? I said, with all these children. I don't know if I can tell you what she said. 
I
 suppose I - she said, well they come the same way as - they come out the same way as they go in, and that's all I knew. That's all I knew when I was married. I often laugh about it and I've told my husband, 'course he laughted the same as me. Yes. Nowada
y
s they're taught right from childhood aren't they really. I think it's a good thing, I thought then, if ever I have children I'll tell them the facts of life, they won't be - embarrassed like I was. It was very embarrassing. I thought we were the wickedes
t couple on earth. Yes. Oh everything was a sin to - at the orphanage, anything, sex or anything like that. Daren't mention a thing. The word even.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Not even as girls among yourselves?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 No. If you were caught whisper - found whispering - what are y
ou talking about? No whispering here. And I know one day we were - there was four of us talking about another girl. And this - miss Woodcock came - the Undermatron caught us. Now look here, she said, going the write this out. There's so much bad in the be
s
t of us, so much good in the worst of us, it doesn't behold any of - any of us to talk about the rest of us. We had to write that a hundred times. She said, don't you' ever do - whisper about anybody - she thought we were taking about something else which
 we were but of course we didn't tell her that. It was about Olive, she was rather grumpy and - she - something we hadn't done right I suppose but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid5178298 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 But no girls there ever got into trouble or anything?
\par }\pard\plain \ltrpar\s15\qj \fi-461\li461\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid5178298 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid9393546 NM  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057\insrsid1707796\charrsid675430 Oh no. No. The only thing - the eldest - th
e big girls - were found dropping letters by rope - string down to the choirboys as they're coming out of choir practice, used to come past our orphanage.
\par }}