{\rtf1\adeflang1025\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\adeff0\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang2057\deflangfe2057{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}{\f38\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f39\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f41\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f42\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f43\fbidi \froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}
{\f44\fbidi \froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f45\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f46\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f48\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}
{\f49\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f51\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f52\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f53\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f54\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}
{\f55\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f56\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden 
Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs20 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}}
{\*\latentstyles\lsdstimax156\lsdlockeddef0}{\*\revtbl {Unknown;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid2511297\rsid5012086\rsid6570139\rsid7290649\rsid10566951\rsid11945116\rsid13122499\rsid14034483\rsid15206755\rsid15993523}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 11.0.0000;}{\info
{\title Information about interviewee}{\author PRASAD3}{\operator lhorto}{\creatim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min7}{\revtim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min7}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords18572}{\nofchars105866}{\nofcharsws124190}
{\vern24613}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 http://schemas.microsoft.com/office/word/2003/wordml}}\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1800\margr1800\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0\ltrsect 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\donotembedsysfont0\donotembedlingdata0\grfdocevents0\validatexml1\showplaceholdtext0\ignoremixedcontent0\saveinvalidxml0\showxmlerrors1\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace180
\dgvspace180\dghorigin1800\dgvorigin1440\dghshow1\dgvshow1\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\splytwnine\ftnlytwnine\htmautsp\nolnhtadjtbl\useltbaln\alntblind\lytcalctblwd\lyttblrtgr\lnbrkrule\nojkernpunct\rsidroot14034483 \fet0
{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}\ilfomacatclnup0\ltrpar \sectd \ltrsect\linex0\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ltrpar
\ql \fi-461\li461\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid7290649 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\ul\insrsid7290649\charrsid16072257 Information about interviewee}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid7290649 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid7290649\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\ql \fi-461\li461\ri0\widctlpar\tx2057\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid7290649 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid7290649\charrsid16072257 Date of birth}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid7290649    \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid7290649\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid7290649  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid2511297 1887}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid7290649\charrsid16072257 
\par Gender}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid7290649           \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid7290649\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid7290649  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid2511297 F}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid7290649 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid7290649\charrsid16072257 Marital status}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid7290649 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid7290649\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid7290649  
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid2511297 SINGLE}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid7290649\charrsid16544153 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid7290649\charrsid16072257 Occupation}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid7290649 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid7290649\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid7290649  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid2511297 Dressmaker}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid7290649\charrsid16072257 
\par Geographic region}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid7290649 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid7290649\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid7290649  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid2511297 
Liverpool, Lancs}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid7290649\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\qj \fi-461\li461\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid7290649 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Your name please?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Amelia Margaret Ross Southern.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 And your present address?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 This - 117 Sandhurst Street, Liverpool 17.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 And your marital status - you're not married are you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. Never been married.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 And your year of birth?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well I can't just say but - we'll have to go - I should have got -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 So you were born in 1887 which makes you eight}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14034483\charrsid10566951 y }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 three now?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Now, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Where were you born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 I was born really in Bickerton Street off Lark Lane near a little shop that's just near Lark Lane but it was very nice in those days.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 And that was Liverpool 17
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes. It would be then, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 How many years did you live in the house in Bickerton Street?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Oh not very long because we went from there to - over the water. To Higher - Higher Tram - not Higher Tramway - to Bebington where my father was co
achman for a Mrs Cochane - Cobane. And we lived in the cottage there and then we came back to Liverpool and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 How long would you have been in Bebington?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 I would be - oh I was only a tiny little girl when we came back.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 So it wouldn't have been long?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No, it would be about - five years at the most I should think then we came back to Liverpool. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Where did you live then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Then - we lived in Sibley Street off Lark Lane. That's nearer Hargraves Road.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Liverpool 17.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Ye
s, I can't remember the number but it was Sibley Street. But it was Sibley Street. And - me father then - was at Stevens and Joneses, Mossley Hill Drive, coachman. And - oh they were very kind to us, the young ladies - Miss Flossie and Miss Mabel. And the
r
e was Mr Sidney and Mr Buckley. And they used to - I always remember where we went to live at Upton eventually and father was with the Hanneys of Green Bank they used to come and take me, when they had a house at Hoylake, to tea with mother I always remem
b
er that. Oh yes. And I used to sit in the nursery with the children. And my mother used to say, now be very - say please and thank you. And mother had her tea with the nurse you know in the - her place. Well it was fun and - always bought me a little gift
.
 A cup or cup and sacuer to bring home with me to Upton. They were awfully nice people. And for years, Mrs Hodgkinson, they used to come - and when we went to live in Burdett Street eventually - when father was with the Gibbons - they - used to send me lo
v
ely boxes of lovely nice clothes that they didn't hardly wore - dresses and lovely hats and people used to say to my mother, you dress your little girl very nicely. My mother said, you must never tell anybody - it's nothing to do with anybody. She was rea
l Scotch, my mother. Very cautious. So she -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 So you moved around quite a lot didn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Yes, three times over the water. Yes, and the last time was at Hoopen Mount with people the name of - what was it name, the gentleman - he was a barrister a
nyway and - me father was coachman. Poor dad who lived - and mother used to - mother said, I don't like going on a Saturday father, she said, a Saturday flit's a short sit and we're not stop. So we went and we didn't stop because he ordered me father - al
t
hough he had a gardener and two boys - to go down into a place and dig this dirty stuff up. Me father said, well sir, he said, I came here to be a coachman. I didn't come here to be a muckman. And he said, I won't do it for you nor nobody. Well he said, y
o
u take a week's notice. No, said father, I'm a liveried servant and that's a month, he said, and you're a barrister and you ought to know better. Well he did ask father to stay on. Me father said no I wouldn't stay. So it was me that took this house from 
M
r Capstick. I came over and I heard the lady was leaving this house and going on the other side of the street so I - I stood there and waited for Mr Capstick and I said, may I have the house as my parents would like to come back to Liverpool? He said, cer
tainly. Nine and three we paid when we first came and now I pay two pound fivepence. Gone up and up and up.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Can you think which house, road, street or area you lived in for the longest when you were a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 The longest as a child? Oh - well of c
ourse when father was with the Gibbons - we lived first of all - we lived at the cottage first and then we moved to Burdett ; Street you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 How long would you have been in Burdett Street?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 So in between I think father was with the Gibbons - oh 
about - oh - good many years. Be about fourteen or fifteen years I should say because - when they were away - the used to have to pay his wages into the bank and father - father had to go - and I remember Mr Wiley at the Bank at the Vale, he was an awfull
y nice gentleman and he used to be - you know, tell us what to do for the best and - so that was it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 So that would be the longest time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 So would Burdett Street be the house you lived in most as a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes. Next door to Vener. Yes, would that be fifteen - yes, that's right. Yes, that's right, yes that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Would you say that the family made these moves when you were a child because of your father's job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes. That's right. Yes, that's - that's right, yes, oh yes. You
 see - mother didn't want to move but it had to be after mr Gibbon died well you see we sort of - in a - he had to make a - yes, yes, yes, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 How many brothers and sisters did you have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Never had - I had a little sister who was dead b
orn. Mother had a fright with a dog. It - she went out to put the ashes down the old ash pit one Sunday morning and this stray dog had got in and he jumped at her like and she jumped to and the consequence on the baby was deformed and dead at birth. But t
h
at was the only - me father said she - mother was so ill, mother he said, they'll be never no more children, he said, I wouldn't let you go through it. So father - we never had any more - much as I would have loved a brother and sister. Yes, I would have 
loved a brother and sister Mrs Hodkinson.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Still you've made up for it in keeping friends over the years. In fact you sometimes keep friends longer than you do brothers and sisters.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes, they say so, yes. I had a very dear cousin who lived in Sco
tland - her name was Davidson, Mrs Davidson, and - she was a lady's maid to people in Scotland and the lady died and of course her - she wasn't required and - she was out one day before she'd left this - the lady walking along Tynemouth and she }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14034483\charrsid10566951 saw}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951  a gentl
eman coming towards her. And this gentleman was a Mr Walter Davidson. He was a salmon fishing man and he had a place on the other side of the water. And he said, well, well, if it isn't Jessie Dalrymple. And - they had a talk and he said are you on - are 
y
ou off duty at all? She said, sometimes. And his wife was - widower then. So he offered to take her to tea to the teagardens when she was off and - so this went on. So - her sister, my other cousin that lived at Creton who were bakers, the Walkers their n
a
me were, she used to go there and he followed her up and so he proposed and they were married so - she was only five years married, Mrs Hoskinson, when he took a heart attack. And she ran along this country road to a farm called McDonalds. And Mr McDonald
 
had been a policeman, retired. And he phoned the doctor to come at once from Gatehouse, her mother's home. And he came but what he had passed on. But he always said to her, if anything happens to me you'll bury me with my wife - me first wife. She said, c
ertainly. Though he's buried with his first wife. At Ochenfirm - a little - beautiful little place.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 How old was your father when you were born - can you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Thirty-two or thirty-three. And I - I was born in the first twelve months of their marriage.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 So you think they'd either be thirty-two, thirty-three or thirty-four?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Well I should say thirty-three to thirty-four Mrs Hoskinson. They were - I know - I think they were thirty-two when they were both - because there's only so many months between mother and father.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Where did your father come from?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
He came from - from - well Birkenhead was his - yes, but he - they went to Bromborough 'cos they had a house there. Me grandfather Southern was superintend}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14034483\charrsid10566951 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 nt of Birkenhead market and he learnt}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11945116\charrsid10566951  the butchering - like at the le}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
ridge - could see to animals and that and you - my mother used to say little did she think when she went to order stuff for her lady and - saw this tall man with a tall hat walking round that she'd ever marry his son.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 What would your father's occupation have been?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
When he - at first he was a gardener I believe. He had learnt the gardening and then he went in for the - to be a coachman, yes. That's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did he have any other job before or after - apart from gardening?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
No. No. When he retired Mr Wilson gave him a pension. Mr Frank Wilson who was Lord Mayor of Liverpool. Yes, he came here and he asked my mother had she any money. My mother, I have a little saved but not a great deal. Well he s
aid, I'm sorry about Southern, he's worked very hard and he said, if - when he gets better if he'll come down to the mill, he said, we'll discuss things. So, when father was able to toddle about mother took him down. And he allowed him, Mrs Hoskinson, a p
o
und a week 'til he died. And a man used to bring it up every month that would be - a monthly lot and then I was at business and I allowed them as much as I could afford. So mother - hadn't - they didn't then have the old age pension. Well it was very stra
nge, I had a cousin from Scotland - not Mrs Davidson, another cousin Jessie - and she said, oh a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11945116\charrsid10566951 u}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
ntie she said, have you - don't - couldn't you - you ought to get the old age pension, she said. Mother said, but my - but my husband's working Jessie. She said
, oh but, she said, do you mind if I write to the Daily Mail - you take the Daily Mail? Yes, I'll - yes, you write if you want to. So Jessie wrote and they got a reply to say yes, she was entitled to it, work or no work. So they both got their ten shillin
gs. I thought they were that pleased.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did your father do any casual or part time jobs in his life?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No. No. No, he didn't, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Do you ever remember him being out of work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Oh well he might have been a week or two just getting into - when changing jobs. Yes, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 But never any longer period than that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No, he was - no because he worked for the Greeks for a time, up Devonshire Road.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Your mother was roughly the same age as your father when you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 She was a Scots woman was she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes. Mother was named - her name was Jame}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11945116\charrsid10566951 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951  McGall. Yes. And - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 What part of Scotland did she come from?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Gatehouse Fleet, Kirkcudbrightshire. And - and she - she was a twin, me mother. But
 the boy died. Mother was - I think she was a housemaid-waitress really - waitress really to these - this lady that - that lived at Oxton when she come to live.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Living in you mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes, oh yes, yes, yes, yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did she work after she was married or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No, no. Only which we took in a boarder now and again to help. No, we stayed - she stayed at home and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 When she was a waitress - in a private house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 It was a gentleman's house - a very big house, and the gentleman was
 a - a lawyer and he wasn't very - mother hadn't been very long when he died. And the name was Machin. Mr and Mrs Machin and they had two daughters and one son. I'm called after one of the daughters - Miss Amealia. Mamy they called her for short. And Miss
 Nora and Master Tom. And - so mother was really like - she used to wait at table and my godmother that has died that lived at Bootle, Auntie Flora, she was and Edinburgh woman, she was the cook. And me mother's friend. And friends for years. Yes. Yes.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 So your mother didn't have any part time jobs or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No. No Mrs Hoskinson, no dear.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 How many rooms were there in the house in Burdett Street?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 There was the sitting room, kitchen and back kitchen and three bedrooms and a bathroom. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 That was exceptional wasn't it?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes, and - yes, and a little garden in front we had that half - half of the street. Like Lena's and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did you have an inside toilet or was it an outside toilet?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 We had - both upside and - outside. Yes - yes. I think I'm right in telling you we had an upstairs one. I'm sure we did. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 You say that sometimes you had lodgers - did anyone besides your parents and yourself live in this house, any relatives or lodgers at all?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No. No. I
 had - when the war was on after my mother died I took a - a - some people from London. No, not when I was a child. This was when mother died.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did your mother pay anyone to help her in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No. I helped her all - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Was the washing done at home or sent out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Yes, at home. Blankets done - father helped her with them. We used to get up early on a Bank Holiday and he'd have the boiler on and - he'd have the blanket - and then he'd say, come on Margaret to me, you get the breakf
ast ready. I wasn't spoilt I can assure you although I was an only child. And that was it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did your mother or father make or mend the family's clothes - did your mother make any of your clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No, she didn't, no - I - no. No, no, I - when 
I went to the Bon of course it was alterations really and then I just picked it up and made things and made for mother when - she required it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 She would have mended your clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Oh mended the socks and all that sort of thing, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Were your clothes new or were they sometimes second}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11945116\charrsid10566951  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 hand?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Oh they were new - latterly after the - you see, after the Jones's went away and left -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 They were the people who let you have these nice clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes, yes. That was when I was quite young, yes, oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 But after that they would always have been new?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes. That's right - oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Where would your mother have bought clothes for you as a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well - we usually - we went to - she liked Lewis's and I bought things at the Bon
 and got them cost price when I was at business you know. Got so much off you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 But she liked Lewis's when you were a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes and when we had our mourning when father died it was Lewis's we went to - for our hats but we got our coats from 
the Bon because I knew miss Bogus - was one of the sales and so - I - she showed us - yes, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Were shoes always new or were they sometimes second}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11945116\charrsid10566951  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 hand?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No they were new, I got them from - usually either the stores or Mansfields. Mothe
r got hers from Mansfields there - round the corner as you go to Riches.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did your father ever mend shoes for the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang1034\langfe1033\langnp1034\insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang1034\langfe1033\langnp1034\insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang1034\langfe1033\langnp1034\insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did your father help your mother with any of the jobs in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Oh he did. He used to clean the 
windows, inside and out, for me mother. 'Til I stopped him. I said, you're not going to do those windows any longer, father, outside. You're tired when you come in and we'll do }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11945116\charrsid10566951 
the inside. And he used to swil}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 l the yard and do all those sort of jobs. So I s
topped him doing that because I thought he was getting that he needed a little more rest. And I wouldn't let him do - and I paid for the windows - so that was it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Was there anything else he did when you were a child - did he ever light the fires?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
I used - yes, I was - I was told to - father used to light the fire in the cold winter days but he - made me learn, and he learnt me, Mrs Hoskinson, when we used to have rabbits from Scotland or that he used to make me stand and watch him do it and he ma
de me do it and cut it up so he said you'll know how to do it if you've time comes when I'm not here perhaps. Oh he was a very practical man.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did he do any decorating or repairs or any improvements to the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Decorate? No, but he - me mother 
once said, you're not like any other man. You can't do anything. So he said, I'll do the little back bedroom mother. We got some paper and he went upstairs and you never saw the like - it was all ripples up and down. Oh - talk of rippling sea - oh, well i
t was funny. Well we had this friend from Waterloo come - Abel and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11945116\charrsid10566951 S}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
issie from Maudsley and Abel was foreman painter and decorator. He said, come up and see my work Abel. So Abel went up and I could hear roars of laughing you know. Now, he said, every man t
o his job, he said, now my good lady thought she would give me a job, he said, but never again. And he wouldn't. No - that's the only thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did he ever dress you or undress you or bath you or read to you or tell you stories?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No. I was very 
shy of me father. I were very shy - and even when the time come for my periods and there was diapers about I used to be that shy and me mother had to hide them. Yes. Put them - I wouldn't like me father to see anything like that. She said, you silly girl,
 he thinks they're dusters. But - I was very, very shy of things like that. Very.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did he ever read to you or tell you stories as a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes, oh he used to read me stories when I was a little one and - I used to love to - when I was small - get 
on a chair, when he was sitting and - do his hair and - and look at him, see which way suited him best. And he used to fall asleep.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did he ever take you out without your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes. Yes, he did. Yes. When we lived at Upton, we had a Sergeant Al
ec lived with us for a while. And Sergeant Alec was a very nice gentleman, very fond of children. Well when we left Upton and came here to the Gibbons - he went to Liskeard I believe with the result was one - when we'd had the flu father took me over the 
w
ater and the first person we met coming along was Sergeant Alec in his uniform. Well he was that pleased to see us he was - he went into a big fruit shop and he bought me the great big bag of fruit to bring home with me and I always remember that, it stuc
k in my memory - the kindness of that man. Oh he was a nice man.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did your father ever look after you whist your mother was out at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No. Oh well I have been like when -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 When you were little?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes, that's right, but - very rare. '
Cos they always used to try to go together. Do their shopping. 'Cos - in the old days, Mrs Hoskinson, mother used to get her vegetables and fruit from a - a shop called Haywards up Park Road - it's not there now. And from a shop - the meat shop - I forget
 the name, on the bottom side. Lovely meat and they used to send it to us. But they - used to go together to - me father used to, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 You mentioned you had several tasks to carry out at home - you took over some things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Y-s.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 What particular jobs did you do when you were small?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Well on a Saturday after I come home from business - I used to do the baking for my mother in the back kitchen. Make her - jelly tarts and weekday cake and a sandwich, perhaps a few scones if I had time. Then in
 the evening my Scotch friend used to collect me and we used to have just perhaps a little run to the Pier}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11945116\charrsid10566951  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
head and - and over to - over the water and back again. That was my weekend. I went to church on a Sunday - I had to go.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 When you were still at school were there any jobs in the house that you had to do regularly?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Just the - the front step and the outside lavatory. That was my - and the brass, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did you continue to do these jobs after you left school - the brass and the front step, or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Well - when I went to business after - I did a little occasionally - I wasn't obliged to do it. Mother used to do it because she thought I had quite enough then. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Were you expected to go to bed at a certain time in your schooldays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Well - no, but mother never liked late hours and father was a great believer in - if you have to be up early well you want to get to your bed sort of early, so father went - used to go half past nine to ten I think. But - I used to go a little earlier 
than that. Yes. And I had me own room you know - awn room when I got older.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did your mother or anyone else put you to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No, I went myself.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 What age would you have gone on your own?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Oh about - oh - I thought I was very clever - oh, I'd be about - oh - six or seven when I could go. Yes, oh yes, I remember, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 You had your own bedroom and your parents would have another room?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes. That's right, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Having a bathroom you would have bathed in the bathroom in Burdett Street?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 How often did you bath?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 I had a good bath once a week and I had a wash down otherwise - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 When would you have had clean clothes to put on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Oh I had them - if I perspired I had them changed often really, yes, because - I was rather }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid11945116\charrsid10566951 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 nclined to perspire under the arms you know. Yes. Mother used to have them ready for me and I used to put them on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Where did the family have their meals?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 In the kitchen. Kitchen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 The back room or the middle room?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 The kitchen - the like - what we call the middle room, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Were there any occasions when you had it in another room?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang1034\langfe1033\langnp1034\insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang1034\langfe1033\langnp1034\insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No. No. No. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No - always in this room and if we had visitors they joined us here, yes. We had - sat in the sitting room 'til the tea was r}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11945116\charrsid10566951 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 ady, but - oh yes, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Where did your mother cook?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Mother. Me father sat here and me mother next to him. And I sat at that end - 'cos I was near the back door to get up if they wanted anything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Where did your mother cook - in the back kitchen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Well of course in those days, Mrs Hoskinson, we had to cook here for the oven - had no gas stove, only a little round ring, that's all. You could boil a kettle and you could put a pan with a - some potatoes if you wanted. B
ut here was the oven 'cos we used to cook the meat and make bread and everything. We always made our own bread for years. Oh yes. And when we lived in Burdett Street when it got hot weather there was a shop at the top of Burdett Street called Leatherbarro
ws and they would take the bread and bake if for you in the summer months. In the big tins.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 What time in the morning was breakfast eaten?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well father had to have his ea}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11945116\charrsid10566951 r}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 ly. He had his on his own - when he had to get out.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did he get it himself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes, he got it himself. Bacon and egg or tomatoes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Always a cooked breakfast?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes, he liked a cooked breakfast, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 And you and your mother would have had it together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes, later on, yes. Yes, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 What did you have fro breakfast in the week - would you have always had a cooked breakfast?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Sometimes, I wasn't - I liked a little toast really - buttered toast and perhaps a little marmalade. Sometimes I had - a little - mother insisted on me having and egg boi
led but I wasn't very keen on eggs. If I had an egg I liked it boiled hard and I even do yet.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Would you have anything different on a Sunday morning for Breakfast?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well - yes, no, yes, I might have a little bit of bacon - I - but - I didn't have 
an egg - just the bacon, perhaps a little bit of fried bread with it. You know. Nice and crisp. ;
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 What sort of things would you usually have had for your midday meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well, usually after a joint on the - on the weekend there was enough left for
 Monday with the vegetables fried up or heated up whichever and - mother used to make a - my - of course it was me made a big apple tart and she'd make some custard with it or a rice pudding and that sort of thing. Anyway, that was ig and then Tuesday use
d
 to be usually stew - either stewed meat or perhaps liver and bacon. And - I forget what Wednesday was I really don't know. And fish usually one day we had. Father wasn't a keen fish man. He didn't care for fish but he used to say it was too light for a m
an that had to work hard. He wanted a good boiled pudding after it or something like that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 What about the Sunday midday meal - would that be special?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Oh - yes, kt - yes we always had a roast or a - we always had so}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11945116\charrsid10566951 m}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 ething very nice. A bit of roast beef or a shoulder of lamb or perhaps a small leg of lamb and - seen us having a - a nice chicken sometimes, just how - the funds would go.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 What about evening meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well - in the evening father never liked much for his tea if he'd had a good
 dinner, he just liked - he liked - when the lettuce was in season he just liked some nice bread and butter and lettuce and a little sugar dipped in vinegar and he enjoyed that. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 So he wasn't a big eater in the evening?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. And he never had 
- perhaps just a cup of tea or a cup of cocoa for his supper and a biscuit, but he never had a big meal - he didn't like it - no, no. No, nor mother didn't either.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Your mother baked her own bread?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes. For years she did that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did she make her own jam?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Yes, she did. With blackcurrant and strawberry and gooseberry and father used to go to the wholesale market and get them for her. Well I've seen - when we lived at the cottage - she used to do - and she'd get the preserving pan out and do
 it. Yes, it was lovely too. We had a lot of hens in those days at the cottage. Yes. And people used to knock at the cottage door - do you sell your eggs? No. Mother said, we don't sell them, we just have them for our own - but she used to give many a hal
f dozen away. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did she ever bottle fruit or vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did she ever make pickles or wine or medicines for the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Was any beer brewed for the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did they grow their own vegetables and fruit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No, we had to buy them all dear, no. Yes, even when we were at Upton - no, we had to buy them all - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did your mother buy any tinned fruit or vegetables when you were a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Used to buy tinned fruit if I remember rightly
. I can't remember tinned vegetables though Mrs Hoskinson. Tin fruit because - there was a shop up Park Road called Slaters, it's near High Park Street, and - she used to go there and she used to buy big piece of bacon and - then we used to slice it and s
he used to get some cheese from Slaters and the tins of fruit and odd little things - eggs perhaps, cooking eggs and that sort of thing, that's all though from Slaters. No - no -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 How many times a week did you eat meat would you say?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Oh well - be 
Sunday wouldn't there and then what was left for Monday. And as far as I can remember - Tuesday might be stew or might be liver, I wouldn't be sure, and -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Would you say mainly once a day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 I think so, I think so - yes. Yes. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did you ever get some extra meat such as rabbit from poaching - you mentioned you sometimes had rabbits sent to you from Scotland?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Would these have been from poaching do you think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No - they were killed - a shop and - shop -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Do you remember seeing your mother having less food so that you or your father could have more?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. Never. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did your father have more to eat than your mother and you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well - he - he enjoyed his food but he wasn't a big eater for a big man. Just o
ne helping and - and that, he'd never have a lot - no - and, no, he wasn't a gourmandiser as you call them - these - some people, they never satisfied are they. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Were you allowed to talk during meals or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Mother - father used to say - litt
le children should be seen and never heard. He would listen if I had anything important to say like, but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 But he didn't want you to chatter?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No, he never liked a lot of chat - no, and I never was allowed to do that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Could you choose what you wanted to eat from what was cooked or did you have to have a bit of everything that was on the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
No, I'd usually take what they gave to me. Yes, I never grumbled. The only thing, Mrs Hoskinson, I did not like was split pea soup, I did not like it. Liked Scotch broth and - clear soup and chicken soup but I didn't like - oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 What was your parents attitude if you left some food uneaten on the plate?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well I very seldom did that. I usually cleaned me plate really and they - they s
aid, that's right, dear, you'll grow a big girls. No, I - I was very good, I - I - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
If there was something on the table you wanted like the salt could you ask someone to pass it to you or did you have to wait until it was offered to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 I u
sed to say, may I have a little of so and so - whatever it was, yes. And - and then I used to get it really. - But I always remember when I used to go out to tea, there was a lady friend of me mother's and they used to have lovely cakes on the table and I
 used to think to myself, now if I'm asked I'd like that one. Believe me you - when my turn came that one had gone. I didn't care whether I had it or not.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Could you ask for a second helping as a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes, I sometimes had a little more but me fa
ther when he cut the meat on a Sunday gave me always a good helping and me mother said, I think you give her a little too much. He said, now she's a growing girl, she can eat a little more. So I got that little extra. I was all right.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Were you expected to hold your knife and fork in a certain way and sit in a certain way at table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes, I was told to sit erect like and hold them like that. Yes. That's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Could you bring toys or books to the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No, I wasn't allowed to do that. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 When could you leave the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Oh well, when - they said they'd finished I could get up. If I said I wanted to go to the toilet or anything like that well that was quite all right. But I always waited until father and mother got up from the table. Yes, always, Mrs. Hoskingson.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did you always have the same places at table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Yes. Father was - generally always here at any time - this side, and mother was here. When we had a Scots chap who stayed with us for a short time mother allo
wed him to sit next to father and she sat next to me. And I still kept at the bottom end and I still keep this end. Yes, I do. They often tease me. But I like that end, I don't know why. Yes. But - many a time at night after we've had our dinner - we have
 a cup of tea I take in me lap and have it and the family sits where you're sitting and we have our cup of tea. She's awfully nice.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did your father always have his midday meal with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes. He always came for his dinner, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 And would you have your evening meal together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Yes. Yes, this tea - he'd come in usually about five or thereabouts you know. I haven't told you though, once when we were with the Gibbons of course we had to move about with them, we had to go and live in the big ho
use at Aigburth. It's what they call Aigburth Lodge - not the Lodge - it was - it's up the Vale there - the first big house, I don't know whether it's a dancing academy now. But that used to be Gibbons house at one time. And we had to go and look after on
e
 of the sons - father and mother - while they were away in Egypt. And mother had to cook Mr Ernest his meal and - father used to - I can - I think I can see me father taking up his coffee at night to save me mother up the stairs. Yes. Of course she told m
e
 mother, Mrs Gibbons, a very fussy lady, she said, Mr Ernest likes it very black. Black coffee he likes. And you have to get it from a certain place and grind it and he likes so many spoonfuls. Mother said, I'll try and follow your - instructions, so that
 
was it. So we were there. I had to come all the way from the Lodge to St Michaels school here - a walk along the road. And the boys used to tease me 'cos I used to wear a Scotch - cap and the used to pull it off and throw it along the road. The boys knew 
me at school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 With a pom-pom you mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Yes, 'course there was Tommy Hanley - Jack Hanley is - you see Tommy Hanley was Jack - Tommy was - they were belonging to our choir. Used to sing in our - and Arthur Askey lived on the other side of the stre
et. Yes. He was great one at the cricket field here and used to give at our concerts at that - Belgrave Road. He was - and he married a - a St Michaels girl - Arthur Askey.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Do you remember him as a boy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Oh I think I can see him now - very fussy 
little chap. He had one sister and ahw was a beautiful pianist. And they lived on the other side of the street. I couldn't tell you just the number but it was - it's before you come to Bryanston Road on the other side and - Jack and Tommy Hanley they live
d
 out Milner Road way. And - his mother was a widow. I believe he once - when he'd been starting his acting - Tommy - he - he took off his - he went into a fish and chip shop, he was so hungry and he forgot to take his warpaint off you know and his mother 
didn't know him when he got home. But Jack Hanley was nice. He was an older brother.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 When you had meals at home how was the meal served - did your mother.......?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well she put the potatoes in one dish and the vegetables in another. Yes, and if it
 was mint sauce it was put in a little - and the gravy in a gravy boat.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Was your mother an easy person to talk to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes. But she was a bit reserved my mother. You couldn't - you had to just be careful how you approached my mother. She wouldn't - 
she wouldn't just give you an answer right away, you had to just wait. But you'd get it off me father but not me mother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Your father was eas}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6570139\charrsid10566951 y}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951  - to talk to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Oh yes, me father was - I was great favourites with me dad. I loved me dad.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did your mother show you affection?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Yes, she did but it was - you see, the Scotch people, Mrs Hoskinson, don't show a lot of affection. They're very reserved with it really I think. And mother was one of the reserved people I think. But once you knew me moth
er she was a - lovely underneath and she would never get - anyone into trouble, she would never say anything about anybody and if you - if you don't say any - ask anybody questions she'd say, say you don't know. But don't get anyone into trouble. I've had
 me father laughing many a time telling her about the things.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 But she wasn't demonstrative in showing affection?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No, she wasn't. But she had a pair of twinkling eyes, my dear mother, and when she did laugh, oh it was good to see her. And I used t
o love to hear her when she started to tell you about her romance. I said to her once, mother - how ever did my father tell you he loved you very much or proposed or whatever? Now the - you shouldn't ask questions like that - that's very personal and -

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 She wouldn't talk about that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. Oh no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 If you had any worries could you have shared them with her or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Oh yes, yes. Yes, oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 And your father the same?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes, yes. And mother who's one of these sort of people if I wa
nted - she knew I wanted something - to buy something - she would give you that extra money to get it. Said, put that towards what you've been saving. And she - help you to get it, yes that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did your father show you affection?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes he did
. In this respect, I always longed to have a diamond ring, of all things in the world. I was getting older them mind you - I was much older. And he said, well you shall have one my dear he said. And so, my mother had saved up and so she said, now you go t
o
 town and buy that girl a ring. But I would have liked one with a little sapphire in the middle and the stone each side, but anyway we went to Charles's there in - opposite the station and - me mother got me this little diamond ring and I've got it upstai
rs. It's a nice little ring. I told me family when anything happens to me you're to have it dear and I hope you'll wear it. She looks at me, she said, go on, don't talk like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did your parents expect you to behave - how did your parents expect you to behave towards them?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Well they liked me to show them great respect which I tried always to do so and - never was impudent. The only time I spoke back, and I wasn't rude really, you see my mother was very strict about coming in if I was out on a S
unday or anything and I remember this Sunday I - it was a little late because the people didn't make their supper early and I came in - I was about quarter of an hour late and my mother said, now you're very late and - so I just turned and I stood and I s
aid, well, I said, I think it's time I had a key. Because, I said, I can't just come at the moment. And I got a key and that was it. But that's the only time. That's the only time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did your parents say you should hit back or not if another child hurt you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well no I never had occasion to do anything like that. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 You don't remember your parents saying if they hit you you hit back?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No, they never said anything. But they said always stick up for yourself but I - I never - no, no, no - and I never -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 What kind of person do you think your parents hoped you'd grow up to be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Well I don't know, they hoped I'd grow to be a good person but I would have liked to have been a nurse, I would have loved to have been a hospital nurse and I wa
nted to be that and my mother said, well, if you're going to be a nurse I'll adopt a little girl. So I put that thought out of my mind. So I sacrificed all that for the sake of my parents. But I would - I would have loved to have been a nurse.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 You like taking care of people don't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Oh I would and - and a gipsy in Scotland told me the same. At the door of my aunt's when she was living, she said, my, she said, you've come a long way but - she said - you'd have made a splendid nurse, she said, di
dn't you want to be a nurse? I said, I did. I said, but my parents didn't want me to be one, so that was that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did they bring you up to consider certain things important in life?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes, they did up to a point. They - they liked me to respect relig
ion and - God's word and - and to do that. Oh yes, they did. And I was brought up to go to I was - I was confirmed and I was - by Bishop Chevasse really - the old Bishop Chevasse confirmed me. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 What did they think of swearing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well - well, 
no, my mother never did - I used to hear my father saying a bad word to the horse when it wouldn't do what he wanted and I used to wonder what he was saying. 'Cos I used to go and meet him, you see, and he'd be cleaning the horse and going underneath it -
 curry combing and doing and I'd hear - I said, what's that you said? Oh, you mind your own business. And he wouldn't tell me but he - that's the only time. Mother never did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Would you ever swear as a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. The only thing I said once at the 
Bon Marche when I had my new job - somebody did something stupid and I just said, well - I said - blast and something else - I don't know what I said. Oh I said, damn and blast, I said. Now that's what I said. That's the only thing I - but I don't usually
, no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 When grown ups were talking were you allowed to join in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes. Oh yes, I was allowed when my turn came as it were you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 You weren't allowed to butt in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 If you did something that your parents disapproved of what would happen to you - would you be punished?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
No, well they would tell me off really. Me mother and father would tell me off - oh yes. I remember I got one thrashing only in my life and when we lived at Upton and we were going to Scotland and I had new
 boots and I wanted to wear them to go away but mother said they - would hurt my feet. Wait, she said, 'til you get to Scotland. And I worried so much she said, I'll tell your father when he come in. So which she did, so he just turned me over and he gave
 me a good tanning. Well when he was lying here before he died he said, I never thrashed you in my life. I said, oh but you did. And he laughed you know when I told him. Never forgotten it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 This was the one occasion?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Only the one occasion.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 How did you feel about it as a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well I felt I - I felt I must have been very naughty wasn't I. I must have been, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 When you had a birthday - would it be different from any other day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well I used had a little party when I was young - I had a few friends - yes, oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 And your mother would make a cake?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Yes, oh she made - and jellies and - and sandwiches, oh she was very kind like - she liked me to have a party, mother did. And mother liked to have friends in - for a cup of tea. Yes, oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Would you have had presents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes, usually I had a little useful gifts you know. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did your parents buy you a present?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Oh usually, either something that I could wear - gloves or - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Can you remember anything you did with your mother and father together on Christmas Day - what sort of day would Christmas Day have been?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well Christmas Day was a very pleasant day. The first thing we did on a Christmas Day was to go to church for communion, the three of u
s. And we'd come back and father had his breakfast, then he went on to - for Fulwood Park and then we'd get on and get the dinner ready. It was usually either a goose or a turkey and was roasted in this oven, I used to have to work and get that all ready 
a
nd mother'd do the vegetables and that was it. And then after dinner we used to have a fire in the sitting room. I used to make a nice cup of tea and take it in on a tray to me father and mother and they'd have a little doze. That was it. Then - we didn't
 
require much tea but we liked a nice supper on Christmas Day. And then we used to have a Melton Mowbrav pie from Thompson's in town. And it had a - a lovely - had an egg in the middle and it was lovely. And stick of celery my father liked - to have with i
t. He enjoyed himself - that was it - that was Christmas Day.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did you ever have any relatives or friends in for Christmas Day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No. No. But - the only time since - as the years have gone is Lena coming on a Christmas Day. I've always entertain
ed her since - when she was living - she comes for dinner and tea and supper.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 This is a regular thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did you have many musical instruments in the home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes, I had a piano and I leant to play the piano. Yes, I can play he piano
. A little bit now I can play even. I have my friends have still the - one of the pianos there. And I many a time rattle a tune off when I'm there. But - we got rid of our piano you see, that we - nobody would give me anything for it - 'cos it hadn't whit
e keys. Wouldn't give it me. So I had to give it away for nothing. Yes, that's true Mrs. Hoskinson, I gave it - the men took it out when they took my table and that, yes. No, I got nothing for it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did either of your parents play the piano?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. Me
 father was a lovely singer though. Beautiful singer. But he was very shy in - in - in - in - people say - used to say your a nice - but he - he - he never took no notice but he really had a lovely voice, me dad, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did you ever make music together as a family - when you played would your father ever sing with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Perhaps we'd - when I had my gramophone - I gave that away to a friend when I got the - wireless, I used to have the gramophone and to make mother a bit cheery I used to get up her o
n the floor and dance her up and down you know. And father used to look at me as if I'd gone crackers. He}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6570139\charrsid10566951 \rquote d}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
 say, I don't know - you're worse than your mother. I said, I'll learn - I'll learn you to dance if you'll get up dad. No. He couldn't - and he didn't play cards. He didn't know an ace from a spade I don't think. No, he never bothered with them. No.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did your parents ever play any games with you when you were a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No, no I don't remember, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Things like ludo or snakes and ladders or draughts?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang1034\langfe1033\langnp1034\insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang1034\langfe1033\langnp1034\insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No. No. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Were there books in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Yes, plenty of books - had a lovely lot of books. I gave them away - beautiful books. P. Poe and chil - and oh lovely - I gave them to different ones that had little children.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Would your parents have read books?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Yes. Mother - me father liked reading and I used to get him - I belonged to the library and I used to get him books out when he was able to sit and read and have his pipe and smoke and he enjoyed it but latterl
y he told me not to give him any more books, he said he felt he couldn't read anymore. So I never bothered him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 When you were a child did they have magazines and newspapers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes. We had the - the - the Weekly Post and the Echo. And father liked Tit-Bits. Tit-Bits. Oh he used to hear him laughing on a Sunday.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Do you remember your mother or father reading aloud to each other or to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 The only thing, if it was something important, perhaps father would say listen to this mother - I'll re
ad it to you. But not as a - he didn't make it a habit. But I used to read to them 'cos I had the People's Friend eventually and I used to tell them the story and I'd say - and when I looked they'd have fallen asleep and I'd say - me father'd come and I'd
 say, now where were we up to. Oh now let me see - oh - read a bit and I'll tell you. That was it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Do you remember a funeral in the family when you were a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 A funeral - let me think. No - me mother's - I can remember mother going to Auntie Lizzie's funeral and Uncle Bob's and me cousin Robe}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6570139\charrsid10566951 r}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 t's.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 But you didn't see much of it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. They went but I didn't go. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 What kind of mourning clothes would they have worn?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 They wore black. Yes, it was those days - you wouldn't be r
ecognised without you wore black but now you can wear anything can't you - you can go in sky blue pink if you like.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 When you were a child were you taken out visiting neighbours, friends or relations? Did your mother take you out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Oh yes, she did
. I used to - when we come back to Liverpool she used to take me over the water to Upton to see our good friends Mrs Price and their children - and Ada Alcock whose son is - Cyril Cross in the Newcomers. Yes, they lived next door to us, the Alcocks and - 
C
yril - my - Ada married Mr Cross and Cyril is one of their children and he was in the Newcomers - I just forget what they called him in the Newcomers but that was him. I often wondered - and he told me once when he was a little boy - I was going down - we
 
were going to Greasby to the chapel and he said, he was walking along, he said, excuse me but are those gooseberries. I said, what's gooseberries? He said, those. And they were my yellow beads that I'd had from Egypt. And I said, no, dear, I said, they're
 beads. A dear little boy he was. Oh he was lovely.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Were you taken shopping as a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 With your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Oh I liked to go shopping.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Would you go with both of them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes. And I've been on my own when I got a bit older
 - along Hayworth Road when we lived Burdett Street. Oh yes. Used to go to Masseys to get the cakes when we're having visitors and she used to tell me what to get. And I used to go to Tommy Hanley's uncles, Mr William Hanley, just near Chetwin Street. He 
h
ad a grocers shop he had - a lovely shop he had - and you could get all the sort of groceries there if you wanted them instead of going to Park Road and there was a fish shop at the top of Uurdett Street called Smiths. And - used to get Finnan Haddies the
r
e for mother. And she liked that when she'd not been well. She used to take terrible bilious attacks my mother. Until the change of life came on her - and it was a new woman, but she used to have terrible times with her head and biliousness and she - you'
d think she was going to die. But anyway -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did you ever go out with just your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Yes. Oh yes, he did he took me - when on the ships were on the river to see those all the people you know on the - you know, when they - they used to come into 
one of the docks. And that was when he got his purse - me mother's purse stolen out of his back pocket. Yes. We were - they got you in a - so many and you had to follow the steward and he was telling you this and father never felt anyone in but he had one
 
of those navy suits with a split up the back of the coat - anyone could get their hand - it was a pickpocket. Well when he come home he usually took his jacket off and mother went up to change and we had relatives staying, that's why we took them really, 
f
rom Scotland. And he - I could see him looking very worried, I said, what's the matter father? And he said, oh you're mother's purse, I can't find it. It's gone. She had - in the purse she had about one pound eighteen or something but she'd left the other
 money in a - in the house, some money she was saving up for insurances or something and - odd coppers and things and her dresses and things. And a nice purse it was. Anyway it'd gone.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Do you remember any outings with your parents - Bank Holidays for instance?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
We didn't go out on Bank Holidays much - may have gone to the pictures in the evening, or I might have gone and told father it was a nice picture and they might go the next week, but not as a rule we went on a holiday. No, we never liked Ba
nk; Holiday travel}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6570139\charrsid10566951 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 ing. No, we didn't. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did you ever go away for a holiday - you mentioned going up to Scotland?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Oh yes, we went - we went when we were at Upton to Scotland, travel}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6570139\charrsid10566951 l}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 ing by night that was, then -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 This was when you were a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes. And then - father and mother had a holiday on their own af}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6570139\charrsid10566951 
ter - when father was with Mr W}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 ilson. He hadn't had a holiday for many years and Mr Wilson said, oh Southern, don't tell me it's all that time - you must have a holiday. So he had a
 holiday but I didn't go. I had - I was at business you see. Yes. So - they went and had a -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did you go regularly as a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 I used to go - when I grew to that certain age I went often to Scotland. Travelled alone, yes, on yes. Used to change a
t Carlisle, then you had to change at Dumfries, and in those days you could get another train on to Kirkcudbright and then from Kirkcudbright you got a bus into Gatehouse and along the countryside but now there's no trains run through to Gatehouse or Cret
on or any of those - you have to go across Dumfries to the Sands and you get a bus there. Takes you right through.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 So your father and mother wouldn't have come away with you often when you were a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No. But father - I always remember he e
njoyed that holiday after long years not having one and - I always remember he made us laugh, you see my father was very fond of horses and he saw a man in Exchange Station waiting for a fare and before he'd take a taxi - took this man with the horse. And
 they trotted along and I thought they were awfully late coming home. And here they arrived with this horse and - oh, I said, father. Oh he said, the poor man, he hadn't a fare, he said, I thought poor soul, I'll give him a fare.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Can you tell me how you spent Saturdays as a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
As a child? Oh well - I did me little jobs first and - the sep and the brass and the outside lavatory and that and then I did any messages mother wanted up - just at the top of the road and then I was allowed after me dinner to go out and p}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6570139\charrsid10566951 lay a little bit. Perhaps a hoo}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
p or hopscotch whatever, up and down. And mother used to say to me, I'm going to buy you a pair of clogs because you - you will play hop-scotch.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 You liked that did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Oh I liked that. And Lena used to come and play too. Oh yes. Oh yes, had grand fun. And then -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 How about Sundays - did you have different clothes to wear on Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Oh yes. Oh yes. Well I got - a nice clean overall you know and that. Used to wear overalls in those days 
didn't they, I had to keep it clean too. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did your parents think it wrong to work or play on Sunday at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No, no. But on a Saturday night sometimes in the summer father used to take mother and I to the park when the police band would be
 playing and we would watch the bowls there in Sefton Park. Oh it was lovely - oh very pleasant it was. Often on a Sun - Saturday we did that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Your parents didn't mind you playing games on a Sunday?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 NO, I - well Sunday seemed to be pretty well - I'd perhaps go to church with father in the morning. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Which denomination would that be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Church of England. Yes. St Michaels. And I was christened at Christchurch though, Linnet Lane. And I was confirmed at Linnet Lane although I was p
repared here by Mr Cresford Jones. He was now - he went to be a Bishop eventually. And I always said, well, perhaps there'll be a third event for me but there hasn't been yet. And there won't be. Oh dear me. Makes me laugh when I think about it all.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Would this be a regular thing, the Sunday church in the morning?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Yes. Then after - after dinner my father at one time belonged to the Bible class - St Michaels Bible Class and he used to do a lot of good work - help put the books out and do that with 
Mr Belwood who was a great worker there. I got a lovely hymn book that was presented to me dad for his work there. Sankey and Modies, you know, and they play the hymns. Yes, and then I used to go to Sunday school. In the afternoon. And then every certain 
Sunday it would be church Sunday and we'd march from the church room to the church for a service. And then in the evening of course we all went to church again. My goodness.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 And your mother would come in the evening?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Mother - oh yes, mother always went in the evening but not in the morning. No. Yes, she'd be getting the dinner ready. That's right.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Were there any Sunday school outings that you went on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well - yes, there would be, yes, let me think now. I just forget - I think they used t
o go to Sefton Park or somewhere like that. It wasn't very far I don't think they'd go. Oh no. No. Oh no, used to have little place - things in the church room many a time you know, for the children. And - when Arthur Askey was living and we used to have 
concerts and that he used to be the - the light of the - of the concert. Oh he was clever.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 You mean as a young boy he used to do this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes. He - he'd be higher than me at school, Arthur Adkey I think. Oh yes, I - he'd be older than me I think, Ar
thur in those days, I don't know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 What other social activities organised by the church did you take part in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well I used to belong to the - Band of Hope concert thing and they used to have it once a year you know. Flora's Almanac. We were in it 
for three days. There was Harold Goldstone and - Jack Hanley, Tommy's brother, and - two more - Jim Leather and another boy and I was the banner bearer stan}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6570139\charrsid10566951 d}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 ing behind with the banner for August. August is my nature and August is my name. I am a jolly farmer and reap the golden grain.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did you belong to the choir at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
No. No. No. I was very fond of singing mind you but - I wouldn't have joined - I was too shy for that sort of business. They had a - quite a good choir though.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did the church run any temperance club as far as you know?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Well that I couldn't just say - no. There may have been, I wouldn't like to say, but there was the Band of Hope for the youngsters you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did you belong to any other club organised by the church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Was grace said at meals when you were a child?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes, when I was - thank thee O Lord for what we are about to receive, make us truly; thankful.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did you all say this together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No, I just said it - for all - I said it usually, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Were you taught to say prayers at night when you went to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 I said me prayers at the bedside.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did your mother teach you this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes, she taught me to say me prayers and ask God to take care of me and she always used to com
e in and see I was all right - I liked a light though, I was - I didn't like the dark very much. She left a light until she come up and then I'd be asleep and then she'd take it away. But I was a bit nervous of the dark when I was a little child. Yes.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did you ever have family prayers together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did your father take an interest in politics and do you know what his views were?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well - he - when his brother come round, Uncle Will, they used to talk because father had a big photo
 in the old days there of Hewitt Gladstone - me father was really a Liberal}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6570139\charrsid10566951  at heart and me uncle W}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
ill Southern, his brother, was a Conservative. And he used to say to me father, you ought to take that picture down, George, he said. Father said, I'll do nothing of the kind, he said, he said, and besides I'm not b}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6570139\charrsid10566951 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 gotted like you - you're very bigotted - and that's the way they used to go on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Why do you think your father was a Liberal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 I don't know but - he - I think he liked the way Mr Hewitt Gla
dsone - behaved and - I think he admired his manner and - he was a great man me father used to say, so I never - I used to just listen to him when he talked of - to me uncle or to friends when they were here but - I never bothered. I'm a Conservative - I 
vote Conservative. I - I think they're very good people, the Conservatives. But I think Mr Wilson'll go in again if there's another - another meeting. Do you think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 What about your mother - did she take an interest in politics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No, she didn't bother. No, she couldn't be bothered with it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 What would her views have been do you think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Never - she never - never - what father said was right, you know. Yes, she was guided by him. Yes, oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did your parents talk about any issues or if 
they had any views about who should govern the country or if they thought the working man had a square deal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
No, she - the only thing my mother used to say was that the rich people try to keep you down. They - if the - keep a poor man down they will,
 they won't give you the money to get on a bit. That's what she used to say. She used - I quite agreed with her then when I was a youngster because - they didn't give very much money in those days. Now my father was with Stevens and Jones' and they were v
e
ry kind to us in every - many ways but he only got twenty-five shillings a week. His clothes mind you. He had his coachman's clothes, well they reckon all that you see. But - of course Mrs Hoskinson, twenty-five shillings in those days wax a lot of money.
 And food wasn't as dear. You could get eggs and bacon very much cheaper.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Do you remember your parents voting in a general election before 1919?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. That I wouldn't like to say.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 In some places at that time men felt they risked losing their 
job or their house if they voted differently from their employers - do you know if your father felt under any pressure?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No. I don't think so. No, I don't think so, no, he just voted the -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 How he felt himself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Was your father a member of a political party?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
No, but he belonged to the Tontine. A tontine which mother - he paid in - it was held in Lark Lane and if he was ill he would get - so much like from the tontine it's called. And he'd have a visitor to com
e and see that he was getting better or better and he'd get a little help from it, yes. And usually at Christmas time I think they got a little money put out to each member, as far as I can remember. That's as far as I can remember, yes, that's right.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did he ever work for the Liberal party?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No. No, never.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 So they didn't take part in any political activity?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No, only when he was - when the election was on, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 When your parents were not doing their work how did they spend their time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Well - me mother used to be - she used to mend and do and - she used to like to have a little sit down in the sitting room and have a little sort of - take it easy sort of thing and father was the same, really. Before - he used to have a -
 he used to be glad of the rest really to be quite honest, yes, he did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did your mother have any interests outside the home at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No, she used to belong to the mothers union, that's all. Belonging to St Michaels. Used to go every month and the
y used to have a - somebody would speak and every nice too it would be and then - they'd have a cup of tea handed round, I don't know if they paid a little towards it, I wouldn't be sure about that. But me father after he retired - she still went to the m
others union and she used to make him laugh. She said, well you have the tea ready when I come back father, and what would you like? He said, she said, make some nice toast. Right you are mother. So he used to make the toast.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Apart from going once a month to the mothers union did she ever go out to enjoy herself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
No, only to the pictures with father and she never went to theatres - she never liked them, no. Me father was very fond of the theatres when he was young but he never bothered after he was married. No. I used to go to the panto's and things like that.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Your father would get home between five and six in the evening?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes, yes, that's right, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 How many evenings a week would he spend at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Oh every night, he never went out. No, never.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Never went to a pub or a club or anything like this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No. No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did he drink?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. He wasn't a teetotaller but he never - no. The only thing, before he died he longed for a glass of beer and I went up to Lark Lane 
to that place and I was terrified because I'd never been in the place before and I bought - mother told me to get two bottles of Whitbread's - and I got this, three of them. He only took a - just about that much off my - and he never bothered any more. It
 was just a fancy he had. Yes, just a fancy and he passed on just about a week afterwards so - yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did your father take part in any sport or attend the races or place a bet?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 None of those things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No, no. Just used to go -
 we used to go to the cricket field - we used to get a ticket - a - a key to go in the cricket field and watch - them play and - yes, bowls or anything, that's all. But he never entered it himself, No Mrs Hoskinson.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did your parents belong to any savings clubs, such as boot, si}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13122499\charrsid10566951 k}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951  or funeral clubs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
No. They - mother had some money in the savings bank which I started at school and then it was put in the Park Road savings bank. And then she thought she would like to draw it out and I - she took me an
d I just put Amelia Southern and the gentleman at - behind the counter said, haven't you got another two names? I said, yes, Margaret Ross Southern. Well he said, may I give you a little advice, he said, if anyone leaves you money or will leave you any mo
ney he said, that - you must always give your full name. He said, people are very foolish, she said, A}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13122499\charrsid10566951 m}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
elia Southern wouldn't do, there's plenty of Amelias perhaps but - perhaps isn't a Margaret Ross Southern. So I took always his advice. Put the initials if I don't put the full name you see. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 As a child who did you play with - the children around the neighbourhood?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well we had very good neighbour - one side - there was - was a Miss Williams in Burdett Street who - no relation to my Miss Willi
ams - but she was the buyer at the Bon Marche and her aged father and brother and the other side was Lena and her parents.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Where would you have played with the children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 In the street or - just near the school we used to when I was in Burdett Street, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did you ever go into other children's houses at all or did they come into yours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Sometimes but - Irene Brown's over the road, sometimes I went into Rene's. But not often. No. I - they always had - seemed to have plenty for me to do or - keep me fully employed or something.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 You mentioned you played hopscotch as a child - what other games did you play?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well I played with a hoop and I played skipping rope, yes. And - played Shepherds really, where you got one and you had to get
 all the rest and catch them in a big string, they called it Shepherds. It was really good fun. Went all round the block. Round - Neilson Road and up St Michaels Road and round Broadhurst Street and back down to Burdett street.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 All be han}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13122499\charrsid10566951 g}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 ing onto the string?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Oh it was - yes, you had to hold on to each other's hands. There was a boy called Charlie Lumberg, he was an only son and he lived up - halfway up on our side, and - we used to have great fun, Cahrlie and there was Leslie Godrey and his sis 
- brother and they had a young sister. And we'd all get together you know had a real good time.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Were you allowed to get dirty when you played?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well - no, I don't think I got dirty, no. And if I got a bit soiled mother never said very much. We just used to -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Were you free to play with anyone you pleased or did your parents discourage you from playing with certain children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No, I - I was very discreet really when I was little. I - I was funny, if I liked a person or anybody young - I li
ked them and if I didn't I never bothered with them. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 But you don't remember your parents saying you mustn't play with a certain child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No. I don't, no. Mother didn't like me mixing with anybody rude and that sort - rude talk or anything 
like that - she didn't like that at all. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did you belong to any youth organisations as a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did you have any hobbies while you were at school - did you keep any pets?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. The only thing we used to have at school was a -
 when we had domestic economy, you know, there was the - the cookery mistress, well she'd give you a - demonstrations one week and the next week you'd have actual work and that was very interesting, I liked it very much. Yes, that was the only thing I lik
ed and - but that was all to do with school you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 You had no hobbies at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did you do any gardening?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No I was never fond of it. NO.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did you ever go fishing or walks or bicycling as a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No, I've go
ne plenty of walks and I've gone walks on my own - walked miles - I've walked from here, this house, when I was older. I've gone right along and through the park, right along into Long Lane, Garston and round and back - come back - and never felt it. Now 
then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did you take part in any sports as a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. the only sports we had was belonging to the U}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13122499\charrsid10566951 p}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 on Marche and they had them - different times of - up at Aigburth - off Aigburth Hall Road there - they have the sports ground there I believe sti
ll. Well I won a set of carvers through tailing the pig. They put a scarf round your face and they put this thing in your hand and they say go. And you stick this in where you think the pigs tail is. Well I was the}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid13122499\charrsid10566951  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 nearest to it and there was dozens went in for it. And I got a set of carvers. I've got them in the cupboard there. Lovely set of carvers.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 You said you went to the cinema whilst you were a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes, now and a -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did you ever go to any concerts or music hall?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well I belonged
, as I grew older, to the - St Andrews Society and the Scotch Society and they used to have their meetings - St Andrews was in Bray Street up Kensington and then they had their dinner once a year and then a dance. And the other was held at the Adelphi and
 that was the year that Sir Frederick Marquis came one year with his wife. But - they sat at one table, all the big peop}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13122499\charrsid10566951 le you know, then there's sp}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13122499\charrsid10566951 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
ching. There was no dancing then. But we had an - another meeting during the - the next fortnight and we had dancing and - friendly talk. It was very interesting. Yes. I liked that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 But you didn't go to theatres and concerts a great deal as a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No. Only been to the Philharmonic when we had the Scotch concerts - occasionally.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did your parents give you any pocket money.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes. When I was getting - growing older I got - from a sixpence to a shilling and - get a little bit more and told to put so much away.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 What would you have spent your pocket money on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well I liked sweets t
o be quite honest and truthful - I did. And when we lived at Upton I - a penny would go a long way you know Mrs Hoskinson. And I used to go to a certain - not to Mrs Price's shop but another shop that sold chocolate bar - ice bars - chocolate bars - there
 was pink ones and white ones and chocolate and they had coconut in them. Oh and they were lovely. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did anyone outside the home help your mother look after her house or family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. NO. The only time when she wasn't very well in Burdett Str
eet and had been having her teeth out, one of her nieces came in and just did a little bit for her, just - was just sort of - done for mother's sake really. That was the only time - nothing else, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 If she were ill or confined to bed - this would be the only time you could remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
No - no, many a time she had just a very bad bilious attack, she'd stay in bed for a day perhaps, or day and a half. Then she'd get up in the evening and I had to stay at home from school - and look after her, 'til m
e father came in and got his dinner ready. Yes, oh I had to do what I was told I can assure you. And then she'd send me up to the fish shop for a fin}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13122499\charrsid10566951 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951  haddie. And I'd get - cook her just a very little bit and make her a little bit of toast and take it on a
 tray and she'd perhaps that'd be her first morsel. And she'd get better then. She was very pale my mother. Very pale. Very pale, no colour whatsoever. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did your parents have any relatives living nearby?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. She had a sister lived off Park Ro
ad. Then she had another sister lived off Oakfield Road. Auntie Lizzie lived off Oakfield Road and auntie Maggie lived off Park Road.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did she see much of them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Oh yes, she saw them - used to visit them both very regular.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did they come and visit her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Not often, no. They had - one had a very big family and she couldn't come very often but she used to send the - the girl sometimes to see mother and if mother wasn't well she'd say, well let one of them help you Jane. My mother's name was just Jane.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 What about friends - did your parents have many friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well - a few but not a great many. There was - the Mrs Price over th}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13122499\charrsid10566951 
e water and there was - Uncle W}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 ill Davis, another cousin of me father - lived over the water and Auntie Fan. And then there was Lena's mother and father next door. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Would they have seen much of these friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Only occasionally. No, not often. But father had a very old friend at Bromborough and he hadn't seen for years and I always remember he said,
 I'd like to go to Bromborough mother for a little change. So mother said, yes, we'll go father. So they took me and - this lady, her name - married name - was Mrs McMillan. I forget her surname when she was single but her name was Ellen and me father wen
t
 down the rake and the knocked at the door and this lady came to the door and me father stood for a minute and he said, do you know me? And she looked at me father, and she said, it's John George Southern isn't it? So - that was it. So we were invited in 
and she made us a very nice cup of tea and she had a son and a daughter. Well they're all passed on now. I think the son's still living but I don't think anyone else is.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Would you say your parents shared the same friends or had separate friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Yes, they did - they were influenced with one another, father and mother, yes. And - I think my father was really guided by my mother because she was very wise you know and he often used to say, wished he'd met her many years before because - yes, she - s
he had that way of - she had a way of guiding him the right way you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 He used to depend on her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes, that's right, so that's what - she always said I made a man of him really. That's how it goes anyway.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Would friends be invited into the home and when they were would they be offered anything to eat or drink?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Oh yes, usually a little refreshment. A cup of tea or anything but - we didn't supply drink and that sort of thing. Only perhaps at Christmas time be a little of something when 
the Barnards came they'd perhaps be offered a little sherry or - if Mr Barnard perhaps I think took a little whisky if I remember rightly, but only very little. And father always used to give it to him when he thought it would be good for him you know. Bu
t not otherwise, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Would friends call in casually without an invitation?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes, oh yes. I've seen them coming from Bootle and me Auntie Florrie - me mother's friend and - them just trotting in. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Would neighbours do this too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No
. No. No. No. It was only an elderly lady that lived lower down Burdett Street - her house went into - into the side road, a Mrs Lunt her name was. And she was a dear old lady and she used to come and knock at the door and - she used to love to have a cha
t to my father and mother. Yes. So we always give her a welcome when she came. Yes. A nice lady.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 And your parents would occasionally go out without an invitation themselves to see friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes, they might just go for a little run over the water a
nd take a flask of tea and some sandwiches and just sit at the prom there but - yes. Just for a little outing you know, but that's all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 People often tell us that in those days they made their own amusements - what do you think your parents did when th
ey got together with their friends and neighbours - did they make music or play games at all or just talk.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
They generally talked really I think, as far as I know. It was only when I got older that I played cards and used to have a game of - you know - Newmarket or rhummy or whatever they call it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 You used to enjoy cards did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Yes. We used to have games when Elsie, my Scotch friend from Speke you know, she - she was a great one for cards but - I don't think I could play cards now. NO. I've forgotten all how - how they go. Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Many people divide society into different social classes or groups. In that time before 1918 did you think of some people belonging to one and some to another?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 What class or group would you say you belonged to yourself before 1918?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Oh - now - oh I wouldn't - you're tired, I wouldn't -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Can you think of what class or group you'd put yourself in before 1918?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Can you think of the people who belonged to the same class or group
 as yourself? What occupations would you have put in the same class as yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
No. I used to travel up and down in the train with quite nice lot of people really and - used to - different - some were in offices and some were in - the same business as myself you know but - I never classed myself any - any of them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 You don't consciously think of it at the time do you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No, you don't no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Can you remember being bought up to treat people of one sort differently from people of another?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Well you have to be pretty discreet about that haven't you Mrs Hoskinson, because - you might be in a - mixed company and there might be different religions. Well I think you want to be very discreet and not to - not to - to talk or say anything that wou
ld offend anybody. I wouldn't for the world. Because we're all going to the one place aren't we. So I wouldn't do that for any money. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Were you ever told to curtsey or show respect in some way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes, I was once told I had to curtsey and my fat
her said, I'll curtsey you if you curtsey. It seemed it was a certain lady my father was - coachman to and the gardeners people - children used to curtsey to them. And my father said, I'll do the curtseying but my child's not going to curtsey. And he said
, if I find you curtseying I'll give you a good thrashing. So I hadn't to curtsey. No. Wouldn't allow me - no. The gardeners children used to but me father wouldn't allow me to do it. And there was never no more about it. NO.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Was there anyone you called Sir or Master or Madam as a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Well when I was in business if I - went down to fit I always addressed the customers as Madam or, if it was a gentleman, the husband with them. They never said very much bit if I had occasion to speak I would say 
Sir to them but it's usually to the lady I would be addressing, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Do you remember anyone showing respect to your parents in these ways?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes, quite a many. Mr Wilson was very c}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13122499\charrsid10566951 o}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 urteous to my parents. Especially when we stayed at Fife Fulwood a
nd - he hadn't met me than and - he'd heard a lot about Southerns daughter so one morning I'd started me holidays and I was busy washing the dishes in the back kitchen and me mother had gone up to make the beds and he came and he shouted are you there Mrs
 
Southern? And I looked, from the thing, Oh it's Mr Wilson, I said, oh good morning Sir, I said. No, mother's upstairs. Making the beds. He said, oh, he said, so you're Miss Southern are you? I said, yes, I'm - Miss - father's in the garden Sir if you want
 him. So he went away out to me father and he said, I've met your daughter at last Southern. She's a fine big girl, he said. But he was an awfully nice man. Oh lovely man.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 And he would show a lot of respect to your parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Oh he did show great respect, I think. Much more than the lady did. She wasn't very - no, no.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 In the district where you lived who were considered the most important people up to 1918?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 It's a long time back.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Who do you think clergymen would have been friendly with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Well - we - we've been very lucky with the different clergymen. There was Mr. Cresford Jones when he was Vicar and there was the curate Mr Horman. And - they had two curates at St Michaels at one time and they were all very nice and hospitable an
d then there was - there was a Mr Williams and there was a Mr - who else was there - was one that wasn't a very good preacher though, you nearly went to sleep when you listened to him. I had to pinch myself. I used to come home, I thought I'm - I used to 
s
ay - quite blunt - I used to say I'm not going to church any more. Doesn't it put you off. Well I never go now but I can offer me prayers just the same, because I can't kneel and do so I just - and Mr Barrows is very kind, he has been to see me, a very ni
c
e gentleman he is and he told me any time he'd be very pleased to give me communion if I wanted it but I haven't - haven't asked him yet. If I wanted it. He's an awfully nice gentleman. And of course he was born in this district, Mr Barrows. He said, I wa
s
 born in St. Michaels, Miss Southern. I said, how lovely. And he - he's - he's a real - he has no family and he once said to me, the next time I come I'll bring the wife, he said, and we'll have a cup of tea. You've often - often offered me a cup of tea b
ut I'll bring - but he hasn't brought her yet. No. But one time I'll meet him, I'll say, it's a long time you bringing Mrs Barrows.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Who do you think the teachers would have been friendly with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 The teachers? You mean the schoolteachers? Oh - there
 was - was a very nice teachers - a Mrs. - Miss Jones, she was a - she lived in Burdeyt Street and then there was - another teacher. Mrs Goldstone's wife - Miss Bolderstone, she was nice. Mr Goldstone married her. He was a - the gentleman teacher in one o
f
 the schools. And he married Miss Bolderstone and the years went on and I met them with my mother in the car one day, and I saw this man looking very hard at me and I - I fropped my eyes. I thought it was very rude looking like that. So I dropped my eyes 
and - then as I was getting up to go out he said, excuse me, he said, aren't you Amelia Southern? It was Mr Goldstone. He remembered me - I said, once seen never forgotten. Oh dear me, what a life.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 What sort of people would you say went to the church that you attended?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Well very nice people and very friendly at the side. There was Miss Lennon, that lives in the old vicarage now and her father and mother and brother. They used to sit on our side at one time and then there was Mr Lee and his family 
- Mrs Lee and - od different ones.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 What sort of occupations would they have had?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Well - I think Mr Lee had a very good job and Mr Lennon had a good job. 'Cos that was a big house - I believe his brother left it to him after he died and of course
 they're both passed on and Miss Lennon was a - she's a retired teacher now from - one of the schools so she lives there - she told me one day, I met her in Aigburth Road, oh Miss Southern, how nice to see you, she said. I said, have you retired now Miss 
Lennon? She said, yes, I have and quite enjoying it. I'm going up to London to see my sister-in-law. Her brother died I think, rather suddenly, so she goes to see her sister-in-law, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 What sort of people would have gone to chapel - would you have known about chapel?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
To chapel - well, no. The only thing, mother used to like occasionally to go to the Scotch Church, Sefton Park Presbyterian Church, being that she was Scotch. And father went with her, and I've been there too and I've had communion 
there too. But they give it you in a different manner than they do in - in the Church of England. They come round - a pew - alternate pews you know and they give you the plate to help yourself and then they come round with the goblets and they give you th
e wine. Very nice. Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Was there any friction that you can remember between Catholics and Protestants?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No. No, I can't, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Where you lived in Burdett Street did all the people in the working class have the same standard of living or w
ould you say there were different groups in the working class?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Well - in Burdett Street there - there was some in quite good positions. Like Lena's father had a much better position than my father. My father was ;
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 What would he have been?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
He was - in the dock board offices - he had a very - one of the clerks in the dock board and - different ones higher up the street that had good jobs you know. 'Course me father was just what you'd call a working man - my mother always said he was just a 
working man. Which he was but - he come of a very good family, me father, and - right respectable, yes, yes, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Were there any people you felt weren't as good as you for instance?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No, I've never thought - no. No, never. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Do you think that some people felt superior to the rest for some reason }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13122499\charrsid10566951 or
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951  other?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Oh some do - yes, I think I've seen a few of them that have tried to throw their superiority.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Why do you think they would have felt they were superior?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well - 
perhaps they had a better position than - than we had or that. 'Cos some one once said to my mother - my - well you're husband's only a working man. My mother was very hurt about it and she saw sort of - so and so and so and going on all the different peo
ple, what they were. So my mother said, well that was very rude I think of that person to say that to me. She said, I'm not asking them for anything, she said. And some people, they don't think before they speak do they. They're very rude really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did your mother and father have the same attitude to people in different classes? Did they think alike in this way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Well - usually - yes, I think so. Father was very wise in that way, oh yes - he was pretty - he could see quite a long way in front really, father, oh yes. Broad minded too he was, very broad minded man. Yes, oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Do you think your mother saw herself as belonging to a particular social class?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Was it possible at that time to move from one class to another and can you remember anybody who did?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Do you remember anyone being described as a real gentleman or a real lady?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Oh there was several dear.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 What would they have to have been like to have been referred to in this way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well - sin
cere manner and kindly disposition I think. Yes, that's - I think, if you're sincere well it all - mounts up to the same if you're a - got a sincere nature will you wouldn't tell a lie unnecessarily would you. I wouldn't at any rate - I wouldn't like to, 
I wouldn't like to be found out telling stories. I like to be straight if possible and when the time - yes, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Do you remember seeing a policeman around where you lived as a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well there was a policeman came here not long ago. Mrs Sparkes
 next door lost - they lost their little grandchild, he wandered away, little }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13122499\charrsid10566951 M}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
ichael, the middle one. and - poor Joyce was in a terrible dilemma, she said, oh Miss }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13122499\charrsid10566951 S}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 outhern, I don't know where Mich}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13122499\charrsid10566951 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 el's gone. I said, I - oh I am sorry. I wonder where he c
ould have gone. So she went away up through this entry to look and by this time I saw a police car coming up the - stopped and I - he knocked at my door and he said, have you any little - have you lost a little boy? I said, I haven't but, I said, the ; la
dy next door has lost her little grandson. So that'd the only time -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 What about when you were a child - do you remember having any contact with policemen or seeing them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Only Sergeant Alec when he brought me the bag of fruit.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 When you were naughty as a child did your mother ever say to you I'll call a policeman?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
No, she used to say I'll give you a good smacking if you don't behave yourself and I'll tell your father when he comes home. Well that was enough for me. Yes, and father never said anything really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 How do you think police treated people in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Well I think they were very good. I - I used to honour a policeman, I used to think they were fine men. Look up to them - but now they don't seem to look up to them much do they. Oh good gracious no. They seem very - insignificant some of them don't they.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Was your home rented in Burdett Street?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes. Six and - eight and - eight and six a week I think it was. Eight and six a week I think we paid.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did you see anything of your landlord?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No, not - only the agent that came. A Mr - a Mr Williams - another Mr Williams. And he used to collect the rent every Monday. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 What did you feel about him as a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Very nice man, my mother found, because -
 we got that house through a friend of me father's who was leaving, he'd been a coachman and he was leaving the district and me father wanted to get in Burdett Street so that's how we came to get - through this gentleman friend of father's and - he used t
o collect the rent, this Mr Williams. So many houses - some people owned them but most of them were rented. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Do you remember feeling that your parents had to struggle to make ends meet?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 They did at first. They did at first. 'Til}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13122499\charrsid10566951 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951  mother sort 
of found a way to help to - father to get - make a little money and she took in a boarder and that's how she did and - she didn't take much off them but it was just something to help. Yes. And me father didn't believe in insurance in those days when mothe
r was married and she said, well that's silly father. She said, say anything was to happen, she said and there's nothing behind? So - she talked to him and he saw mother was right. So of course he got insured. Yes, so that was right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Can you remember what you felt about it, if you were aware they had to struggle at first - what did it do to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Well of course I don't think I - I think I was lucky, I didn't get any of that they just sort of they didn't - they didn't - yes, they didn't - I got - se
emed to get everything I think they - like as father's worldly goods concerned I think they never stinted me in any way. The only thing me - me father was very strange about. He didn't like perambulators or these prams and me mother said, well if there's 
a
nother baby, when she was expecting her second baby which - was - died you see, they got a pram, well it was no use you see. She said, if there's any more babies we'll have to have a pram father. And so father got her a pram and the baby was dead born you
 see. So you see it doesn't do to prepare too much. So that's the only thing.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 What difference did it make to the family when your father was ill or out of work - you mentioned he wasn't out of work a great deal?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No, well - he was generally very 
lucky. They usually - they paid him his money, like, his wages, yes. Yes, and - yes, Mr Wilson was very good - his last - last place that - he always got his money. And he got always a good Christmas present off Mr Wilson, always, yes. And my father was a
 good man. He never - whatever he got he always gave to my mother. He never kept anything to himself. Oh he was good. You do what you like with it mother. Never queried it really, no, never.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did you ever get help from the Guardians or the parish or any charity?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
When there was someone in the district whom the people disapproved of very strongly was there any special way in which they showed it - do you remember anyone being made to leave by rough music or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang1034\langfe1033\langnp1034\insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang1034\langfe1033\langnp1034\insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No, no dear. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No, I'm - I haven't to go -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Were you given lessons at home or did you go straight to school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Just straight to school - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 How old were you when you first went to school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 I would be about - six I should think, six, yes, oh yes, five or six. I was quite young when I went to school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 When you first started what time of the morning did you go and when did you get back again?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well when I first started school in the first place we lived at Upton and I went to the
 church school there - Mr Jones was the headmaster and - it was usually nine o'clock for starting school but was there usually about a quarter to nine. 'Cos I hadn't far to go - just from up the way and along and I was at school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Who took you when you first went?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Oh - well - I - I think - May - Ada Alcock and we all sent together and she used to knock at our door and - that's the one that's Cyril Cross' mother you know. She married this - David Cross.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 It was quite close to you your first school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Yes. And - yes it was lovely. I liked Mr Jones and - his wife used to teach in the school. And there - just another young teacher but they hadn't a lot, because we were only small. But there was the convent school at the top and - my father had 
to do with the bus that run - used to run from Mrs Hanney from Upton to Birkenhead because there was no station built at - that moment. And the - one of the nuns used to come and pay the bills for the bus or cab when they - young people used to go away. A
nd she wanted me to go to the convent school but me father wouldn't - said I wasn't to go. He said, I've no - thing - I think they're very wonderful people but, he said, you've been brought up Protestant and you must keep to it. Yes - yes, that was all.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did you go for all day when you first started?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes, all day, yes, morning and afternoon.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Where did you have your midday meal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Oh at home. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 You liked school or you didn't like it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well I liked it very much. There were cert
ain subjects well you know you don't like. I - I liked arithmetic, I liked geography and I liked composition when it came to the - when I was older - when I was at St Michaels here. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 How did you feel about the teachers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes, they were very n
ice at Upton and they were very nice at St Michaels only there was just one who was rather hot tempered and - she didn't have much patience with little children or - growing children. Her name was Miss McDonald and one time she come behind me and - someth
i
ng didn't please her and she had the - signal, you know, that you go click, click with it - and she give me one rat-tat-tat on the knuckles and I really nearly jumped off me seat and I - I told mother and mother said, well if she does that again for no re
ason at all, she said, I'll go to the headmaster. But she said, we'll just wait and see - but she never did it again, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 This was a shock when you were not expecting it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes, it did. There was no occasion for it I don't think.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did the teachers at this first little church school emphasise certain things as important in life, such as manners and tidiness?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well Mr Jones was a rather good living man, he always stressed religion I think on us. To - to be good and to do the right thing you k
now. As far as I can remember, and - that was about what I was - sort of instilled in me you know. Yes, and I was interested in, yes, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 If you did something that the teachers disapproved of at this church school what would happen to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Well - I - well I never remembered seeing the cane being used at the church school but I do see it - remember it at St Michaels the cane was used. Oh yes. The boys used to get the cane.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Was it a mixed school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes. Mixed - you sat with the boys.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did the girls never get the cane?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Oh - well I - when I - I'll tell you, I just interrupt. Once I was caught for talking in - in a - in the class and the teacher - I forget her name now - she said, if you speak again, Amelia Southern, she sa
id, you'll go and get the cane. You'll go up to Mr Horfield. So Amelia must have spoken - she caught me speaking so off I had to go. Well I watched the boys and they - they used to pretend to go up the stairs and come back blowing their hands as if they'd
 
had the cane. So Mamie did the same. I came - and do you know I was terrified after Mrs Hoskinson, I would never have done it again because - we were in the classroom and didn't the headmaster come in and I thought he's come to ask if Amelia's a good girl
 now, not talking.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 But the girls weren't caned as much as the boys?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
No. No, they weren't no. No, they were more advanced - advanced and - and we had a Mrs Robson, she was a very nice lady and she used to talk to you and - give you advice. Yes, yes. That's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did your parents show an interest in these first school you went to - did they ask you what you did at school or ever visit the school?

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Oh yes, they did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did your parents show an interest in your schoolwork?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes they
 did, they used to ask me questions, they - yes, and father used to tease me and say now, tell me all about what you've been learning at school. Yes. Oh he liked to know, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did they ever visit the school or - meet the teachers at all, can you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Only when - they were at the - at the church. Mr Jones would come in, you see, and his wife, would speak to mother and father.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 And say how you'd been getting on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes, oh they were very nice.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did the other children come from similar types of homes to your own or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Yes, they were all nice - there was the farmer's people - Wil - Wilkinsons and there was Frank and Agnes Price and Lena when she was living - Lena Price, she died of diphtheria - was an outbreak of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid13122499\charrsid10566951 diphtheria}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951  in 
Upton when I was a little girl but I didn't take it. But Lena Price took it and died and her - her brother and sister took it but they got better. Yes, oh they were all nice children really round there And the Alcosks and there was people down Solitol Lan
e and - oh they were all nice Mrs Hoskinson, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did the teachers single out some children for different treatment from the others?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No. No - Mrs Jones was very - very discreet like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Were there any gangs or groups in the school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No, I don't - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Were there any children who were left out of things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
I think it would be only if - only if they were - not - were dull or something - didn't sort of - no, yes, there are some children there - they - they wander don't they and when the - the time comes they don't know what they're doing -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Which would have been the next school you went to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Oh it would be St Mich}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13122499\charrsid10566951 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 els in the Liverpool.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 How old would you have been when you went there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well - I'd be about eigh
t I should think, eight - yes, and - yes, I was getting older you see. And then I took Lena to school - the diabetic friend you know, yes. And - she lived sixty-one Burdett Street and we lived sixty-three.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 How far away was the school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Oh just al
ong Nielson Road Mrs - now, if you were to go along Byonstone Road you'd come to it you know and - the girls side are this side and the boys is - the other side - the half of St Michaels Road. It runs into Burdett Street.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 So you were always close to school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes, I was, very.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Was this a church school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No, it was - what do they call it - St Mich}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13122499\charrsid10566951 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 els - was it a council school or - yes. Yes. Wasn't a posh school. It was just an ordinary school.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 But it wasn't attached to the church in any way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang1034\langfe1033\langnp1034\insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang1034\langfe1033\langnp1034\insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No, no. No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Where did you have your midday meal there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 At home. No school meals in those days. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 What did you think of this school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well I liked St Michaels school always. I liked it always, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 How did you feel about the teachers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Yes, they were all but that Miss McDonald - I didn't care for her very much. I liked Miss - I liked Miss Bolderstone that married Mr Goldstone and I liked - Mrs. Jones, a widow lady and there was a Miss Jones I liked, And I 
used to listen to the little infants coming out to play and there was an awfully nice lady, a Miss - forget her name now, but oh she was awfully well liked. Tall lady, but of course I was in a higher grade than the - what they call the juniors. That's it.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 And she used to take care of the kindergarten did she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Oh yes, she was lovely though. I - I liked St Michaels - always have. The only school I went to after leaving Upton. 'Cos I left when I was fourteen, I went to business Mrs - to - to serve me time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did the teachers here emphasise certain things as important in life, such as manners, tidiness, punctuality?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes, and to regard - your parents with, you know, kindness and do what your parents tell you really which I think is correct mys
elf. And I think if you're guided by them - they may - it may sound a little strict but really - as time goes on and the years roll by you thank them really for all that - yes, I do really, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did your parents show an interest in your schoolwork at St Michaels?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Oh yes, mother did yes. And - mother used to give me - I used to join the - the bank like and put something in you know. A small something.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 This was at the school?-
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes. I used to give - get it and then it would go into the savings bank eventually you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did they ever visit this school or meet the teachers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No, they never went, no. No, she never had occasion to go.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 People didn't go as much as they do now?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No, I don't - they go.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did the other children come from similar types of home to your own or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Yes, the ones I knew in - I had - the friend - two or three friends lived round about Burdett Street and Broadhurst Street. There was Isobel Thompson in Broadhurst Street and there was Irene 
Brown in Burdett Street and - I had my little friend Lena which I thought the world of and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Would you say they were all roughly the same type of child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes, they were -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Were there some rougher or some more respectable?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well - the on
e - well, Lena was the youngest of all but they were all nice - homes and come out of decent - from decent parents, oh yes. Or me mother wouldn't have let me go with them. Very - strange like that mother. She used to say, well - I don't like you mixing wi
th so and so you know, not - no, she wouldn't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did the teachers single out some children for different treatment from the others at this school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No, I never noticed, no. No, I've never seen any favourites. No, I think they were very just in that 
regard. Only when it was a cookery lesson we used to get - you know - having a bit of talk and fun, Miss Mackson would give you a demonstration one week and then the next week you'd have actual work and I used to worry mother to give me money to buy perha
ps it would be - fancy cakes or beef steak pudding or that sort of thing then she'd give me the money, just something to please me I suppose really. That was all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Were there any gangs or groups in this school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No I don't think so. Not - not that I can remember. NO.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Were there any children who were left out of things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No. No, I can't Rns Hoskinson.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 You were fourteen when you left school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Would you have stayed longer if you'd had the opportunity to do so?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 We
ll I daresay I would but - I suppose, I - there was an opportunity for me to serve me time at the millinery then and I went up to a gentleman who had a shop in Aigburth Road and one in Park Road but you had to serve your time in the Park Road shop - Wiedo
wson was the name, Mr Widowson and he had - head milliner and he had an under milliner then he had a - young one.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 How did you get that job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well - my mother heard about it and she went to see Mr Widowson and she took me with her and - he seemed t
o quite - and so he said I was to come on the Monday. So Mamie want. Well I was there until I had a nervous breakdown and I was ill for quite a while. I don't know whether it was nerves or what it was but - I was very}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid13122499\charrsid10566951  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 poorly with me nerves for a long time, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 How long were you there when you became ill?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Oh I was - quite - I was near - I was past me time, you know. But - they kept the improvers on sometimes you know for a little whil}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15206755\charrsid10566951 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 . But I got better eventually but it was a nasty thing - the nerves. I think I was just at that age when -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 What sort of things would you have done at this first job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Well - oh well, if you were work - you had to work for an assistant really and she'd perhaps tell you to - get some wire and perhaps you'd ha
ve to learn to make a shape for a hat because in those days hats were made with wire shapes. They weren't like now, you can buy a hat already and you've only to be trimmed or what}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15206755\charrsid10566951 e}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 ve}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15206755\charrsid10566951 r}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
 you. But those days you had to make them and even at the Bon Marche when
 I went to the Bon eventually I went there to the millinery first before I went into the dressmaking. Yes, I did. And I was an assistant to - to a lady and I had to help to make wire shapes and - and make - get the little folds of tulle to go round, there
 
was tulle hats with rows of tulle - ooh they were lovely those days. Ooh they were lovely. We had - three tables at the Bon of milliery. We had the hat table, the toque table and the children's table - all for different hats. And I was at the hat table. A
n
d I was under a Miss Brown whose father had a tennis shop in Bramwell Hill. Yes. I can remember that. And Miss Brown - she did not like putting birds or things on hats - she was - she didn't - she thought birds and those sort of things should not be kille
d to trim people's hats. Ooh she was very strange about that. But she had to do it being that she worked for her living.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 But she didn't like it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No, she didn't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 What year would this have been when you first started in Park Road?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well 
I'd be about - fourteen when I started, yes. When I left school. It didn't query your age at school you know. No. And he said your daughter's been at the millinery hasn't she? And my father said, yes Sir. Well I could do with a young lady to help. So I we
nt to Mr Akeridge and I was in the workroom and part time in the shop when they were busy. But I was only there just about eighteen - twelve to eighteen months and I went back to the Bon. But when I went back to the Bon I had to go into the dressmaking.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did you attend any part time education after you left school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No, no, nothing at all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Do you have any regrets about your education?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well sometimes when I look back I would have liked perhaps a little further - I think it's very essen
tial really to both men and women as they grow older. But - I suppose circumstances alter the - the mother perhaps felt she couldn't have afforded perhaps all the money. You never know. But she wouldn't have said anything but - they tried to do, I know, t
he best, you know, Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Do you think you benefited from attending school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Yes, I think so, mind you I used to suffer with me chest a wee bit Mrs Hoskinson and I had - sometimes would be off for a - perhaps a week or so with - yes, I had bronchitis and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15206755\charrsid10566951 inflammation
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
 of the lungs when I was quite tiny and they thought they were going to lose me and of course - Doctor Steves was then our doctor - Doctor Taplin and - he said, well it - twelve o'clock will be the critical time. And me mother was very up
set so me father said, don't get - upset yourself, he said, do what the doctor tells you and I'll watch her and - had a steaming kettle and I turned the tide at twelve o'clock. But I always had to watch that chest.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Your mother went with you to get this job - to Park Road?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes. Widowson.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 You were there for how long before you had this nervous breakdown?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Oh - oh I was - quite a while. Because I used to come to the Aigburth Road shop and help them sometimes. And Mrs Widowson lived at the 
Aigburth Road shop over the shop you see, and her husband. And she had - I think two girls if I remember rightly, yes. Two daughters I think. ;
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 What hours did you work when you first started work there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Ooh - it was - forgotten about hours at al
l - no. From nine o'clock I now is the start. But - I don't think it would be much after - it wouldn't - it would be before six o'clock I should say - about half past five to six. Maybe I wouldn't like to say so - no, no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Were you expected to work on Saturdays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes, work on Saturday. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 On Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No, no Sunday, no.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 All day Saturday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes. 'Cos they were open til}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15206755\charrsid10566951 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951  after four o'clock you know the shops in those days, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did you have a half day in the week?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did you have any holidays with pay?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. If you took a holiday you had to be the - your own - your own loss.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 What were you paid at this first job - can you remember what you got?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Oh - only a very few shillings. Because I only g
ot four shillings when I went to the Bond. I would be less than that, oh yes. They didn't give you very much. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Can you remember how you felt about it - do you remember thinking it was a fair wage or not at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well, no, I didn't and I 
- I suppose with me having good parents they were good in that way to me. But I always think when I - when I got the four shillings at the Bon, I thought, oh that's not very much money and I've got to pay my rail fare and me contract - but they made it up
 but I was always glad after when I got bigger money, I was able to give mother more money. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Would you have given all the money to your mother when you first started work or did you keep some for yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well I generally gave it her fi
rst and she give me a little back. But when I got older I was allowed to have - my own way. I remember when I got - was at - when I got the pound a week for - when Mr Levy said we could have a pound but I don't say it'll be any more - when the strike was 
o
n. Well I gave my mother twelve shillings then and I kept the rest and I had to put that away to save up for to buy things for myself. Shoes and that - mother said, you must learn now to put money away. And then if I wanted anything extra she would give m
e and help me out. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 How did you get on with the other people you worked with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Usually fairly well, yes, yes. Yes, I did. Touch wood and whistle.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 How did your employer treat you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 They were all very nice but there was once chance when I was moved from one table to another -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Are you talking about your first job now?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Oh - oh no, no I'm talking about - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 What about the first one?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Oh no. There was nothing like that, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 How did he treat you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Mr Widowson was very nice - oh yes. He was a fatherly man, you know, kind, yes, oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 How did you feel about the work when you first started work - did you like it or dislike it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well I - well I was a bit bewildered really to be quite honest, just leaving
 school and - starting where there was millinery and all sorts of things and then you'd perhaps be called on from the workroom to the shop to get something and you didn't know what you were doing really. Yes, it was strange.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did the job alter your attitude to school in any way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No - But I often think now I'd have loved to have had a little longer at school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 You were ill then you went to the Ban after you recovered?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes, yes, oh yes. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 How did you come to go to Bon Marche - how did you get that job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Well - when we lived in Burdett Street, Mrs Hoskinson, at sixty-five a lady named Miss Williams lived there with her father and brother. Well, she was the buyer. On the second floor, she had a very good position and she 
was always very nice to my father and mother and she offered always that if I wanted to go I could go into one of their workrooms. So instead of going to the millinery I went into one of their workrooms. And I had to just pick it up. I wasn't learnt dress
m
aking or anything. It was all alterations. And we had the - walls stuffed with work and our boss was a Miss Garner and my word, she went - made you go through it. My word she did. And we hadn't even a telephone in that workroom, we had just a whistle that
 you used to blow. And it'd go phew. I nearly got blown off my seat sometimes. Oh it was funny.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 What hours did you work at the Bon Marche when you started?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 We worked on Saturday - oh we worked on Saturday 'til - supposed to work 'til - one o'cloc
k but many a time it was two and more - 'cos our boss used to be - always a bit late with the things. I remember one Saturday one of the floor walkers came up and he knocked on the door, are you all out? And she did - she said, don't you answer. And this 
m
an came in and said, you working here? My goodness, he said, if an inspector was to come in you'd get fined. So he must have told Miss Williams and she came up and she said, whatever you're doing - I don't care what it is and who wants it - put it down, p
u
t it away and get home. And she wouldn't let us do another stitch. No, she wouldn't. It - she was quite right. It - it - so after that they had to be very careful. But she - she would not get the things in order to get them finished on a Friday that we co
uld start Monday's work on a Saturday. That's what I believed in when I got to be a second fitter. I believed in forwarding your work and keeping in touch with - the day ahead sort of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Keeping ahead of yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes, that's right. And I - that's what I always tried to do anyway.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Would you have had any half day during the week at all at Bon Marche?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No, no, we didn't get any - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Any holidays with pay?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Oh - oh for many years we only got one week's pay and then after 
- as the years rolled on they allowed us the full fortnight's pay which was very nice for me. By then I'd lost me father and it was nice to feel if I needed a little extra my mother could have it you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 You were paid four shillings were you when you first started there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
That was the first and then six. And it went up gradually 'til I got to a pound when the strike was on. And then they said, he said - Mr Levy from Broadmead, Aigburth Vale said it wouldn't be any more - well we all looked at one
 another, we just said thank you, sir. But then, you see, he had to give us more and my money before I left the Bon to - to look after my mother when I retired was about two pound - two pound five the full money but there'd be a little taken off for insur
ances and that. Then I was allowed me food which I had never had before. So they take that into consideration so that was very nice.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 What year would you have retired?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Oh - now - you see it tells you up there how many years up on that -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes, thirty-five?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 So it would be 1960 then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Oh I must be - oh I'm sure it would be quite that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 How did you get on with the people you worked with at the Bon Marche?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well - very well really, yes, Mr Crabbit our manager of the wo
rkroom was a very kind man. He'd been a police man and he - then he turned to this when the policemen went on strike, he couldn't get the money so he went in our place and he got on remarkably well.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 How did you feel about the work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Oh I liked th
e work. I worked very hard when I was in Miss Williams's department in the - all the sewing. It was pretty - difficult you know. But when I got to be a fitter it was better because I could go - when I went down to fit I couldn't - I can't - 'cos they had 
t
ime sheets, every girl, and you had to give your time sheet in on a Friday before you got your money then you got a clean one for the next week. But when you're a fitter, second or first of course you have - can't account when you're going down you're - s
o they - give you that so much leave you see, yes, they allow that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 You're not tied down so much?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 In 1924 - in 1911 we worked out that you'd be twenty-four years old.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 What would have been your job title in that time? Would you have been a fitter then - a second fitter?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Oh no, no, no. I was - well, just say I was ; just an ordinary worker Mrs. Hoskinson.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No job title really?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No, no, just a worker at the table really, you wouldn't - you're not reckone
d anything else really. No, you see there's skirt hands - there's skirt hands, there's coat hands and then there's a table that does all blouses and all that sort of thing. But sometimes we had three - two - a piece of three piece - sometimes we had diffe
r
ent things. Ladies sometimes just had odd skirts. That sort of thing. And I was very good with skirts they told me. And I had to make many a skirt for a certain lady who would rather have them made than have them - than buy them, so - then of course I wen
t
 down to be a fitter, well, it was different altogether, but I still had to work mind you. Yes. I did me fitting and come up, left it at the door to be marked in. It was put on a - a - a thing and then so much for all - for workroom - so much for another 
w
orkroom. There's different workrooms. And then you had to sort them out in the morning and see what's what. Sometimes you had a fitting, perhaps you had two or three fittings for a certain time. But my late boss, Miss Garner, she thought that you could do
 
fitting and all the rest of it and still do your ordinary job. Well you cannot do that. Which I told her very straightly one time. I said, well you cannot do it. And certain, she said, certain one's don't work. Well, I said, certain people can't work as q
uick buy they do the work and job's done just as well and perhaps better and I said you can't complain about that. Neither can you. No. But she never took that into consideration.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 So really in 1911 would you have called yourself a seamstress do you think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well most probably I would, yes. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Apprentice seamstress really?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 You haven't done anything else have you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang1034\langfe1033\langnp1034\insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang1034\langfe1033\langnp1034\insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No, no. No, no, no. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 I retired from the Bon when Miss Wilkinson was the buyer. She was the buyer - like the head one - the head manager.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did it seem strange after all those years?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Well it came that I had to do it because my mother was getting so frail. And then I had to take her away to Scotland and I had her there for quite a while 'til I brought 
her back again. And she was quite happy going to Scotland. Though we had a terrible time here in the blitz. And - and the minister used to walk round the church there to see there was nothing thrown. We had a bomb quite near here one night. I was quite te
rrified really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Would you have preferred another type of occupation from the one you had?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Yes, what I said I would love to have been a nurse. I'd have loved to have been a nurse. And I - I just - oh I often think how lovely it must have been to -
 to look after the sick you know and - it would have been lovely. Never mind. I had to do something else, oh yes. ;
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Would you say that you served an apprenticeship or training period for any of your jobs - would you say you were apprenticed in the dre
ssmaking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
No, well - I don't know what they would say when I went in Miss William's department 'cos I'd been at the millinery quite a while you see and - with going - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15206755\charrsid10566951 having that break and going to A}
{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 keridge it sort of stopped me you see. Well Miss Wi
lliams said never mind, she said, Mamie, she said, you'll come into one of my workrooms. She said, just you come in, she said, and I'll see that you're all right. So that was it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Why did you leave Bon Marche and then go back to them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well it was
 - well father - this gentleman, Mr Akeridge speaking to him thought it would be nearer home for me and I could come home for a midday week - meal, but it didn't make much different - I - 'cos I didn't settle really. I'd rather been at the Bon and I didn'
t really want to leave really so - but you see I had to go into Miss Williams's department and she was nice, she was kind to me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did you belong to any trade union or professional organisation?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang1034\langfe1033\langnp1034\insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang1034\langfe1033\langnp1034\insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did you feel that employers and workers had the same interests or different ones at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did you feel there were divisions of interest among workers themselves?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well yes, some of them had. Some of them went in for this - what you call - getting - keeping fi
t system. Oh quite a number - they wanted me to join. I said, I', as fit as ever I'll be, I'm no - tired when I get home from work. I wouldn't join. No, no. There's quite a crowd went. They loved it, yes. Oh yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Some people say that in those days there was a great division between trained craftsmen and other workers - did you feel that or not?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Well I think there is a - a difference you know and - you - it - it's a treat really to work under somebody that's fully - fully qualified. I do. And you
 learn also if you'll just watch and listen and not be so - think you know all. I think it's such a mistake. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Would you say that full time work changed your general attitude to life in any way
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well no, I don't think so. No. Because I had me 
interest, I belonged to the two Scotch societies eventually and I used to go to their meetings and their dinners an dances. Mother liked me to go to those and - St Andrews society and there was the other one. And then every year they had a dinner and - ha
d a sort of - yes, very nice it was. I liked that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did starting full time work - you lived at home after you left school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did starting full time work change your relationship with your parents at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. No never. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did you spend your Sunday any differently when you started work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
No. Just the same - I had to do me share and help mother with the dinner and - especially where - if we had anyone a living with us at that time. She'd say, well you must do the - get the veg
etables done and - do so and so - make the - oh I, was oh yes. And if the step was a bit dirty I had to do that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 What about church services - did you still go?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Oh well of course - when I was younger I went regularly. Yes. Yes. But I didn't go so
 regularly when I was able to be a bit a freer, you know, I didn't - I'd go always in the evening or to the - the Bible class in the afternoon which was a Bible class not Sunday school then. And Miss - Miss Oliver, Doctor Oliver's daughter was the head on
e of the - at the Bible class. Oh yes, she's a nice lady.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did you take any interest in politics in your young working life?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 No. Never. No. Never interested me. But I was - I'm glad now as the years have rolled on I'm able to vote you know. Yes, oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 And you continued to spend your spare time in the same way as you did at school? You joined several societies, Scottish societies?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Now? Yes. Well the only thing I did in the evening - I didn't go out in the - in the week time but on a Sat
urday usually my Scotch friend who comes from near where my mother belonged, she - we used to go out for a sail across the water perhaps to Brom - to Eastham, it used to be sailing to Eastermore. Perhaps have a ride away over on the Upton side and all tha
t. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15206755\charrsid10566951 J}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
ust that - just a wonder round. Have a - and I've seen us meeting at the Pierhead occasionally from - when we had one o'clock Saturdays and go walk to Barnstone and walk across the fields and have our tea at Heswell or somewhere like that. Lovely. Then 
come back by bus. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did you make any new friends when you started working?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Oh well, Eslie Crosby was a Scotch friend - she didn't work at the Bon. No, she worked in a private house, she was a dressmaker but she worked in Anfield Road for for 
the Miss Reynolds's. Yes. And no - no, I never made any - at work. There was crowds of - we were all friendly together but after business well I came home and that was it. No. But I used to know crows of young people going on the train you know.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did you ever bring friends home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Let me think now. Oh yes, there was one lady, a Miss Wil - Miss Wilkie. She was getting on and - she used to - she came to our table when I was up there and she used to say - I'd say, come on - give me your needle and I'l
l thread it for you. She - her eyesight was wandering a bit and - and I'd perhaps thread her two needles a time and that helped to get on. And I told mother about Miss Wilkie and she said well ask her to - come and have a cup of tea or she can come and ha
v
e her dinner if she likes. So I asked her to come and have a bit of dinner. And she so - she was so pleased. Yes. I've got a music book she brought me when I used to learn the piano. She thought it would be interesting. She's dead and gone, poor miss Wilk
ie.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 But she would be the only sort of person you brought home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Well that's the only one I can remember at the moment - I don't - there was another girl, Peggy Bromalow - her - she married Mr Littler, he was a farmer out at Nosely way and - Peggy 
- once asked me her advice about - she was in - whether to go with this young man or the other. Well, I said, you've got a conscience Peggy, I said, do what is right. I said, never do anything that's wrong and be nasty to a person that's done nothing to y
ou. Anyway she decided on Tom Littler who was much older than the farmer. So - she came to our house once and then she came after when she had her first baby. Little boy she had, she brought him here to show mother the baby.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 So really your friends didn't meet your parents - you didn't bring them home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Only those - no, yes just Peggy Bromolow and Miss Wilkie - I don't remember any -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did they expect to know where you were when you went out in the evening when you were a young working person?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Well I usually used to tell them when I came back where I'd been. But sometimes - sometimes when we got down to the Pier}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15206755\charrsid10566951  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 head we wouldn't just quite know but when I was going rambles, well yes they would know. Yes they would know then because we wouldn
't be home 'til later you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Did you have to be home by a certain time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
Yes, for - up - for some years I had 'til I asked for a key 'cos I though it was very unjust because I - Having to be in a certain time and I couldn't just do it. So I sai
d to my father and mother I said, I think it's time I had a key. I said, you know where I am and, I said, you know father and mother, I said, people don't always make their supper as early as you do and you just can't be rude or else come away without my 
supper and I didn't want to do that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 How old would you have been when you had your own key?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Oh - that - I was getting - oh, I'd be getting on then. I'd be -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7290649 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 In your twenties?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2511297 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 Oh I'd be lot more than twenty - oh my goodness yes. Oh - I wouldn't like to say
\par }\pard \ltrpar\ql \fi-461\li461\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid7290649 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5012086\charrsid10566951 
\par }}