{\rtf1\adeflang1025\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\adeff0\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang2057\deflangfe2057{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}{\f38\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f39\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f41\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f42\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f43\fbidi \froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}
{\f44\fbidi \froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f45\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f46\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f48\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}
{\f49\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f51\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f52\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f53\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f54\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}
{\f55\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f56\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden 
Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs20 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}}
{\*\latentstyles\lsdstimax156\lsdlockeddef0}{\*\revtbl {Unknown;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid3690258\rsid4990543\rsid5453887\rsid6820256\rsid7765216\rsid8795008\rsid10105119\rsid10166099\rsid11211013\rsid12342286\rsid13249535\rsid13831216\rsid14891508\rsid15409448\rsid16264700
\rsid16328850\rsid16482240}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 11.0.0000;}{\info{\title Information about interviewee}{\author PRASAD3}{\operator lhorto}{\creatim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min7}{\revtim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min7}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}
{\nofwords32254}{\nofchars183851}{\nofcharsws215674}{\vern24613}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 http://schemas.microsoft.com/office/word/2003/wordml}{\xmlns2 urn:schemas-microsoft-com:office:smarttags}}
\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1800\margr1800\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0\ltrsect 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\donotembedsysfont0\donotembedlingdata0\grfdocevents0\validatexml1\showplaceholdtext0\ignoremixedcontent0\saveinvalidxml0\showxmlerrors1\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace180
\dgvspace180\dghorigin1800\dgvorigin1440\dghshow1\dgvshow1\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale90\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\splytwnine\ftnlytwnine\htmautsp\nolnhtadjtbl\useltbaln\alntblind\lytcalctblwd\lyttblrtgr\lnbrkrule\nojkernpunct\rsidroot13249535 \fet0
{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}\ilfomacatclnup0\ltrpar \sectd \ltrsect\linex0\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ltrpar
\ql \fi-461\li461\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid8795008 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\ul\insrsid8795008\charrsid16072257 Information about interviewee}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid8795008 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid8795008\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\ql \fi-461\li461\ri0\widctlpar\tx2057\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid8795008 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8795008\charrsid16072257 Date of birth}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid8795008    \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8795008\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8795008  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5453887 1879}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid8795008\charrsid16072257 
\par Gender}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8795008           \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8795008\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8795008  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5453887 F}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8795008 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8795008\charrsid16072257 Marital status}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8795008 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8795008\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8795008  
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid16328850 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8795008\charrsid16544153 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8795008\charrsid16072257 Occupation}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8795008 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8795008\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8795008  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5453887 Linen keeper}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8795008\charrsid16072257 
\par Geographic region}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8795008 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8795008\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8795008  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5453887 London}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid8795008\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\qj \fi-461\li461\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid8795008 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 What's your name?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 My name? Mrs - now - Mrs Beck.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And your address?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 42, Kilravock Street, Queens Park.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And you are }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16328850 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 ?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Yes, my maiden name was Hetty Morris.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 What year were you }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16328850 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 ?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - 27 - {\*\xmlopen\xmlns2{\factoidname metricconverter}{\xmlattr\xmlattrns0{\xmlattrname ProductID}{\xmlattrvalue 1927. In}}}1927. In
{\*\xmlclose} 1927.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And what year were you born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 I was born in 1879.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And where were you born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And
 I was born a 2, Tolson Villas, St Marks Road, Hanwell and about two months ago a friend of my daughter took me down by car to see that house - I've been wanting to see it for years. My sister and I went once and took a Mrs Kidd - a friend of ours - died 
since - er - and we went - built up area now - but I met with a man - er - first put it in Ethel Street.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 How many years did you live in the house where you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Well, I was there about six - I was six and a half - but mother and dad had liv
ed there I think about eight years and yes because I don't think - I think my brother was quite small - my brother George was quite small when they went to live there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Where did you move to then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 From - from Leyton - from Hanwell to Laycock Stre
et - that's in the next street here - the same number and we stayed there four years but there wasn't sufficient room - it was two bedroomed house - dad hadn't realized that - until he was there ohdear, he says, it's only got two bedrooms. I've got three 
b
oys and two girls what's going to happen so they went to the estate office which was then under Queens Park Hall at the corner of First Avenue and the gentleman at the - the clerk - they had to fill in and so on - and I think the rent was seven and six a 
w
eek - now then lady I've got the rent book - that one and I've got the other rent book of this house which was eight and six a week and - er - he took the rent book down so Mr Whitlock said well, you'll have to wait Mr Morris he said but when there is a t
h
ree bedroomed house you shall have it. So that came on then four years after and we came here - I suppose I'd be about ten then - a little more than ten and - er - I'd be the youngest one - my brother George - he was a few years older than I and then my s
ister and the two elder boys. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 What year was it you moved into this house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 1890. Er - yes that's right - 1890 - I had to think for a minute - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Why did the family move from Hanwell?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Well, because my eldest brother - and afterwar
ds my second brother were - um - at Desmond Park school which was outside Desmond Park Station - it was a - more or less Secondary school really - my eldest brother was there and then my younger - second brother Frank - that was Alfred - er - Frank was my
 
second brother - and he by accident - getting out of the train at - I believe as Desmond Park or else at Hanwell - er - caught a lady's hand in the door - he had an accident - so my father said oh well, we'll - we'll look for a house on that little estate
 that they've built at Queens Park he said then the boys won't have to go by train they can come up - they can walk up to school. So that was what happened until of course - well they left there, I suppose they were - well I don't know how old.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 How many brothers and sister did you have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - three brothers and one sister. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 What order were they born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - they were - Alfred was the eldest then Frank then my sister - Nellie, who is - who would be Mrs Gilchrist if she was alive - then
 George - my brother George - there's a little history attached to George - um - well to his school life and his business - er - and then myself.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And how much was there between them do you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh not much - no, I think, no there wasn't muc
h altogether I think because there was only eight years - I think only about eight years between Alfred and me - the eldest one and me so I suppose there'd be what on average - er - two years or so - yes, in between.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 How old was your father when you were born, have you any idea?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh that I couldn't tell you. Oooh, how old was my dad when I was born - ooh.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 You don't remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 No, no. I can tell you how old he died - yes, when he died - he died in - um - 1921 and he was then seventy-nine.
 And when mother died two years after - in this room - er - she was also seventy-nine - she died of cancer. My sister and I looked after her - she died of cancer - but my dad died rather suddenly - at least he .....
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Where did your father come from?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Where he came from - he came from Watton in Hertfordshire.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And what was his job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
His job - his work - well he was - right in the very first place I think - there's history there - er - I think he was working in a teashop. Now, I can't lay ha
nds on this book - I tried this morning - but I have got a book - it must be upstairs that - er - would give you the history of my dad - he was a very methodical man and he kept account of all the jobs that he did and what wages he earned. Yes, and he was
 
in the - the grocery side - now I'll find that little book - I don't think that I've - I don't think for a minute that I've lent it to anyone because I'm not likely to - er - but I've lost things like that before. Er - yes - that - yes, I'll find that - I
 
think - I think when I went to - er - St Leonards I think I locked that up in my big cabinet. But I'll have a look for that so that you can fill that in later. Er - but - I know that he was in the grocery trade because he gave up a little teashop - I thin
k it was at Foxton - I think that she was the story of it -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13249535\charrsid14891508  he had a little tea - er - groc}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
ery and provisions shop and his mother - he always used to grumble about - about his mother - er - about how they - er - when she would cut the bacon she always took 
out the bones - oh yes, she didn't sell the bone with the bacon you see and this is - of course you didn't get - er - you didn't get the cutting machines then you'd got to cut it all by hand but he - he eventually saw that leaving mother in the shop wasn'
t - wasn't quite profitable so he finished up. He had the opportunity of going on the Metropolitan Railway and so he gave up his little tea shop and he went on the Metropolitan Railway. Well, I rather think - oh no, they were }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16328850 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508  in seventy-one - I think I'm right when I tell you they were }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16328850 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508  in seventy-one. He was - must have been seventy-one then - er - was he on the Met just before he was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16328850 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
 - couldn't tell you which - bit before my time. I know they }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16328850 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508  at St. John's - Stanwell - that I
 do remember. Because mother was a very - needlewoman - er - and looking after an elderly lady name of Lewis - she was - had two daughters and it was from this little house, Rose Cottage, where they were }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16328850 
Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 . Um - now then - er - I don't know where - w
hich station he was at when he first started - still I could find it in the little book I expect. At - um - he was thirty-six years on the Met. And he finished his last twenty years were at Swiss Cottage station. The top of Belsize Road and that would be 
in - now - shall we get it right - would be 1905 - mm -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 But you said he stayed on the Metropolitan Railway?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 He stayed on the Metropolitan Railway thirty-six years. And ......
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And what was his job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 He was clerk in charge - er - on the 
Metropolitan Railway up to Wilson Green coming from Aldgate and Camden Street and coming into Baker Street - he was on that part - on what they called the St. Johns Wood line - then up to Wilson Green they were called clerk in charge - they were on - in c
h
arge of the station and the office - upstairs were the booking office with the two clerks and then - er - after he leaves Wilson Green - from there down to Aylesbury which was the end of the Metropolitan Railway at that time - at least at the time when it
 
was extended to Aylesford - er - it - they were then called station master and took over the - the er - name of station master but the - it was just a - an equivalent. I remember he had and as far as I know my - brother eldest son has got the watch - the 
s
ilver watch that was presented to dad - and I was there - in there - mother and I went with him - to - er - Ruislip - where they were - where these silver watches were presented because dad was not quite the beginning of the - of the - opening of the Met.
 
It was - I couldn't tell you how many years but - within a few years - but I know that he was one of - er - what was called the City Fathers - there were six of them - I've heard him say that there were six of them known at the City Fathers and - er - one
 in particular was a man that used to come here quite a lot - a Mr Ted Street and - er - I think he came here practically until he died really and - er - no, dad died in - dad died as I said in twenty-one - 1921 and he was then seventy-nine.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 He wouldn't have any part time job or casual job as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Oh no, oooh no, his job was - he was at the station - his last twenty years - I think I told you - his last twenty-years was at Swiss Cottage well his job then would be from seven - er - from nine 'til 
about six - er - unless he did any of his - er - duty days for his two clerks for them to have their day off - when they were working on Sundays.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Do you remember your father ever being out of work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Never. No. At least, when I say never - not - not since he - er - not since he was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16328850 Married
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
 because as I say he was on the Met. So that when the - when he finished with the Metropolitan Railway he was home here and the only little job that he did were - was his books - grocers books - from Langleys in B
aker Street - in Belsize - er - not Baker Street - in - er - Langlays in Belsize Road - there were two brothers and there was one shop in Belsize Road and one in - I believe is still in Clifton Road. Er Percy Langley - I believe that shop is still there. 
I've been going to - when we've been up at - er - near my house I've been going to have a poke me nose round and have a look see, see if it's still there. And he used to do the grocer - grocer books up. Right until he died.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 How old was your mother when you were born - do you remember that? Did you ever know?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Perhaps I didn't - I couldn't tell you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 How old were you when she died?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 How old was I when mother died?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 No, how old was she?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 She was - mother was seventy-nine.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And that was in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
That was two years after - she was in - she died in 1923. Tenth of August, 1923. And - how old would I be. How old would I be when she died - about forty something.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Where did you mother come from?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - mother came from Bunting
ford. Buntingford or Baldock - and that is in Bertfordshire - yes. Now at the present moment, my nephew has got a little concertina that I've heard my mother play and my dad - 'cos it was here for some years - my grandfather used to play - when she was ye
ars old - she had to be sat on a chair and I've heard her sing about it. And that come into mother's - er - well dad's possession because he could play it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did your mother have any jobs before she was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16328850 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 ?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - yes, she was a dressmaker - she was a dressmaker.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did she have any jobs after she was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16328850 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 ?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 No. She never went out to work - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 No part time jobs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh no, no, nothing like that - she never went out to work - I never remember my mother going out to - in fact I kn
ow she didn't - ever. She had enough to do.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Which was the house you lived longest in - that was the .....
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 This one.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 This one? Before you left school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh no, it was six years in Hanwell, four years in Laycock Street and then into here I'd be ten.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 How many rooms were there in the house at Hanwell?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Er - well I think there were only three bedrooms - actual bedrooms. 'Course there was no bathrooms in those days - er - I believe there was an upstairs toilet - I'm not quite sure of
 that though but - um - there were three bedrooms in that house. But they were - it was a bigger house with a garden - bigger type of house and - er - they weren't actually terrace - they were only two you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 You had living rooms downstairs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 O
h yes, yes, you'd got your front room and your back entrance and that and a lovely long garden which overlooked - I've heard my sister say it - speak of this - since she was older - whether he had been a clergyman in his younger days or not but he was in 
clerical garb - and - er - he used to be up and down with religion - he had religious mania.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did you have a kitchen and dining room in this house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - at Hanwell? Oh I couldn't tell you - I should say so.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did anyone else besides your parents brothers and sisters live in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh no, no. No, none lived in those houses at all - anymore than I think they do now - they're just the one family house.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did your mother pay anyone to help in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 No. Well - on the later years she had to. Oh not when I was a child - oh no. Oh no, no.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Do you know if the washing was done at home in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Yes. Rather. And so it was here and I've still got the old copper - got the old copper in the scullery.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did your mother or father mend or make the family's clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Er - no, I don't know about the boys - oh - no, no, no. That would be - they would be bought. But - mother would make frocks for the - and of course my sister was apprenticed - I was an ordinary dress-mak
er - I was an ordinary dressmaker - oh she used to tell me that right 'til she died - well I was - you was only a dress-maker - I was a court dress-maker - she was too - my sister was apprenticed for I think two years - at - a place - um - Madam Alders in
 
Baker Street - York Place, Baker Street and she used to go from Wisson Park Station to Baker Street the same as the boys did when they went down into the City when they got older and - er - she was a - what they would call a bound apprentice - I suppose r
eally, in those days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Your mother made your dresses then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - yes until I got old enough to make my own - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did your father mend your shoes? Or anyone else in the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 I don't think dad did - no, I don't think dad - I don't think dad would - could hold a hammer that far.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Were your clothes new?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Oh yes. Oh yes, we didn't have other people's clothes, oh dear no, not in those days. Oh no, my dad was - no we - we got on - er - he got up to that standard. Oh, no, no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Do you remember where you used to buy them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 That I couldn't tell you. I don't know - well I suppose it would be the Harrow Road - er - I don't know, I'm sure.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Do you remember when you got them - did you get them for special occasions?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 We
ll, I suppose so - yes - because - um - oh at Easter time - yes - and not very long ago - at least, while I was in Leicester - my niece showed me a phot}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13249535\charrsid14891508 o}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508  of - er - myself and her - and her aunt - er - in our bridesmaids attire and there was a photo of my brother - that was when my second brother was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16328850 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508  - but that frock I made myself.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did your father help your mother with any of the jobs in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - I don't know that he did a great deal.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Like cooking - washing up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh yes, he did - er - yes - dad always did the washing up on Sunday. He always did the washing up on Sunday - oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And did he help with the fires?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh yes. But mother was really the - she was the housekeeper and she - she was - er - and she was spotless
ly clean - oh yes, my little mum - there wasn't much of her - but what there was there was. Well, when we came into this house - er - of course it was kept in order - I think about once in four years they reckoned to - er - paper and - um - when we came i
n
to this house - the house was the same in Laycock Street but possibly we didn't have any work done in Laycock Street because when we came here I remember one occasion - when we - we hadn't been here a great while but that - um - it wasn't going to be done
 
all in one day. You had about - you had to - go all your rooms ready - your beds had to be in the middle - or those that weren't taken to pieces and laid on top of another and that sort of thing - and they started in the big bedroom upstairs and when they
'd finished they finished at the Lower Street end stairs.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 This was the estate people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
This was the Queen's Park estate people - mind you they were jolly good workers and as one - er - one man did his bit another one followed on and did his bit.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 So your father didn't need to do any decorating?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh no, dad didn't - my dad, no. Didn't do anything in that line.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Repairs and improvements to the house - did he have to do any of this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - no, as I say the estate did that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 When you were young did he ever dress or undress you or bath you things like this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 No, I think that was mother's job - I think that was always mothers job.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did he read to you or tell you stories?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Yes, when we were quite little children - oh yes, and mother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did he take you out with your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh yes, we often used to go out as a family - oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Or look after you when she was out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Yes, oh yes, yes, yes. But one thing I can tell you of my father which I have got now - in tha}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid13249535\charrsid14891508 t cupboard - a book of acrostic}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 s - of - er - writing and - they're of interest and I would like to see - the Mayor of this min}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid13249535\charrsid14891508 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 ster to see it - the book is a bit dilapidated at the moment but I would like him to see it because - er - as I say, dad would 
sit down look in the fire in the next room there he'd sit and he'd be writing something - presently you found that it was an acrostic on something - er - the one - and then eventually he wrote them all in a big book and I've got that book in that cupboard
 
now - er - all in his own writing and more about it than that - at the back of that book are the original letters - who he had - the one - one of them that stays in my mind was - um - Queen Victoria's Jubilee and then Queen Victoria's Diamond Jubilee - th
e
re's - er - and then the letters that were - that came to him - 'cos dad always had them printed - any - thing of any value like that he would have printed and - er - then he would send copies to various people and these letters in return - one is from Gl
a
dstone - I've got one of Gladstone - er - and one from Queen Victoria's secretary - and - I believe secretary of the Prince of Wales - I believe so because they would write on - he was always - he was always sitting - um - he'd sit down - he'd sit down an
d
 write on anybody's birthday and - er - you know - an acrostic as you know - would remember - comes that you start off and that - well we'll say the word week - w - e - e - k - the first line would be the W - the last line would be the K. But I've got, th
a
t book in the cupboard and I would like the Mayor and minister to see this book - very interesting - because it is of value and I really don't know what to do with it. 1800. Because I have got a little Bible - upstairs - that to - in my box - so if you co
m
e again - if you'll come and see me again I'll get out that book and I'll get out that Bible and I'll try and find that other little book. Yes. Um - but I've got this one little old Bible in old calf skin and the date in it - the calendar in it is 1732. Y
e
s. Er - and - er - it's come down the ages to me - but this other big Bible was given when my dad died - was bequeathed to my eldest brother to go down in his generation, and after Alfred died - er - yes, at the beginning of the war. At the beginning of t
he war - my sister-in-law - um - moved - or the furniture was stored from their house at Walthamstow - 'cos they lived in Grove Road, Walthamstow that was - that - my boy tells me.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did you have any tasks you had to carry out regularly at home to help your mother and father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Oh at home - mother. What did I used to do? Oh I used to do her - help her do all sorts of little jobs - I remember George, my youngest brother - er - when he was old enough to go from Broot Street school to what was Queen's P
ark College - George's job was always cleaning the knives and forks and he used to do that out in the sculler}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13249535\charrsid14891508 y on the little table with his L}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 atin book on the windowsill.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 How long did he continue to do this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Well he was sitting - George - he wasn
't at Broot Street then - no George left Broot Street school when he obtained a scholarship given by Lady Dilk the wife of Sir Charles Dilk - er - because Sir Charles Dilk was apparently - he must have been our - er - member of Parliament before - you hea
r
d me speak of M.P. John Horneman didn't you - before Mr Hornerman put up - er - Sir Charles Dilk because I know that - that George was at Broot Street school when the scholarships at what was going to be a new school opened which was called Queens Park Co
l
lege and that school was held in the hall that is now at the corner of Third Avenue belonging to Queens Park church - before ever that church was bombed - time the church was being built - um - and George came out - he got a Lady Dilk certificate - um - s
c
holarship - and he came out the top of thirty-two - er - boys and girls and he was there - well I supposed from the time he was twelve to about - he was about sixteen when he had to leave because his brain gave out a bit - er - he had brain fever - it was
 
overwork. He was studying then down in one of the classrooms - he was studying then on his fourth year - he was there for four years - Lady Dilk paid for him another twelve months to - er - sit for this Dublin University but he didn't quite make it. No. E
r - he gave up }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13249535\charrsid14891508 then and - went to S}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
picers - a job was got for him that didn't need any - his finishing - er - job that he took was that he was - he went into - I don't think it was called Co-partnership Tenants at the beginning but he became secretary.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 What kind of jobs did you do about the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Er - Oh I don't know - pretty near everything I suppose really because I was - only I being the youngest one - my sister being five years older than I was of course I suppose more work was entailed than what it was with me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And did you have to do these jobs after you left school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Oh no. Er - well, after I left school - or by the time I left school - time I left Broot Street - no, er - I had an illness when I was nine - just when we were round in Laycock Street}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13249535\charrsid14891508 
. I had an abc}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
ess under my chin which kept me nearly twelve months from school so that when I went back to Broot Street school I had to skip one - er - one standard to get into the next one you see and from there I went to the Holborn Stree
t school for my last twelve months then after that - the others being out at work - my sister as I say was a dress-maker - er - George would be - er - I suppose he would the Co-partnership tenants at that time - no - with Spicers - at any rate he would be
 
- they would be all out when I was old enough to go into work that - er - I didn't actually go out I think for the first twelve months or twelve - stayed home with my mother - er - helping you know, all the jobs that was needed - me mother - I don't think
 I was hard worked at all - in fact - not if I know my mum.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Do you know what your brothers used to do in the house - did they all have jobs as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Well - er - George did the knives on Saturdays - um - yes - Frank - yes, Frank the second one - a
lways did the potatoes on a Sunday morning after breakfast and heaven help anybody that suggested doing the potatoes - oh no, that was his job.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And he continued to do it after he left school, did he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh yes, that would be after he left school - right - right the way through - because they neither of them left home until they got }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16328850 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 . Not any of them.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did the younger children help the older ones in any way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh, I don't know that we really needed to that much because you see we were getting that much older that we were more independent.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 When you were young did the older ones help you at all with dressing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh, I don't - I don't know that they - I don't know that they did anything much in that line - I think they looked - I 
think that was relied upon to mother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And did you have to help them at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 I don't know that I did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Were you expected to go to bed at a certain time in your schooldays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Well, yes, we - we didn't run about the streets like the youngst
ers do today - no - that we did - and shout and yell about - but what I do remember - er - quite a crowd of us - possibly mostly Broot Street school girls and we used to - house being about the middle of the street - we had iron railings here and the skip
p
ing rope was tied on one railing see and somebody else would stand on the other side and then we'd go off - go through the skipping rope. Until time for - er - 'til my dad came round the street and said it was time I went indoors now. With my dad - that'd
 be about half past six - that was ready for the evening meal, you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did you always go to bed at the same time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh go to bed fairly regularly - oh yes, we weren't stop outs and we none of us were - um - musical - music - hall - I mean to say -
 music-hall never fascinated anybody. Oh no, we were just - an average home family.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did your mother or anyone else put you to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh I don't know, I expect she did. I expect she did. When we were quite little children.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Do you remember how old you would be when you started putting yourself to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 No, I can't say that I would really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did you share the bed with your sister?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 With my sister - yes. With my - we two girls had the middle room - mother and dad had the ante room - w
e two girls had the middle room and the three boys two in one bed there and the elder one in a bed here - and I'll tell you another thing. er - you might laugh at this - but when this house is pulled down - if I'm not very much mistaken - when this house 
- it comes to the time this house is pulled down - under the floor - d}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13249535\charrsid14891508 own - somewhere down in this wa}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
ll is a golden sovereign - my brother Alfred hadn't been very long at work and he got this golden sovereign in his wages in he put it in his waistcoat pocke
t and put his waistcoat on the chair and when he got up I suppose picked his waistcoat up and this golden sovereign rolled out somewhere - it was never found - it was always reckoned that it went - because there was a big hole in the skirting - always rec
koned it went down there - between the wall and the skirting - er - and the flooring.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 What did you do about baths in those days -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh we had a big bath. Mm. Big - big - er - the big hip bath we used in the scullery. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And how often did you have to do this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Well, always once a week - always Saturday night - everyone had a bath on Saturday night - one after the other and we had the copper you see alight we got plenty of hot water - oh yes, we were always clean.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did you have clean clothes after the bath?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Yes, we were very - mother was very particular - oh yes, we were all - oh yes, we were - we were an average - er - well, well looked after family - put it that way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Do you remember which room you used to have your meals in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 In that room - was our - kitchen - that was our kitchen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Were there any occasions when you ate in another room?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh yes, yes. I can tell you on one occasion - when we ate in this room was in - 1913 - there were twenty-three of us - a big
 table taken from here - there was just room for dad to stand that end and - or sit that end and mother to sit that end and we had a harmonium and that had to be used as a table and I think that little cupboard - there was a little cupboard over in that c
o
rner - I think that had to be used as a table - that looks like - that sounds like my pal. Is that you May? Er - that was a celebration of - er - celebration 1914 - er - 1914 was the war wasn't it - it was the year before the war. Mother sitting in the fi
r
eplace - fire in the other room said one day - I want to have all the family here for Christmas - 'cos we had - there had been times when some would be here and some not - she said - I want all the family to be here. He said right mother we'll see about i
t
. Said, don't know where the crocks are all coming from. Well, we thought it out - at that time you could hire so we decided that we would hire, we put in this cupboard everything that we'd got of our own and we would hire crockery. And we had the photo t
a
ken by a photographer out in the Harrow Road out in the back garden. Got one of them somewhere there, I can't tell you where at the moment - don't know - I'll look for it - er - and there's the photo of the whole family - every one - every one that - yes,
 
there'd only been one died and that was my second brother' lost one baby - that was the first one. Even my sister's husband was alive then and he died in 1917 - they lived across the road. And they were all here on that days - and that was when we did hav
e
 a big occasion had to take the doors off - oh yes, the kitchen door was taken off and this room door had to be taken off and we had a real good Christmas day - as I say - the - er - photographer from - he was a Mr Wilcox - um - came and he took this phot
ograph of all the family - Mr and Mrs Morris and family. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Where did your mother cook?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Well, in the scullery.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 What did she cook on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Well, at that time we had a - at that time we had - er - kitchen an open}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16264700\charrsid14891508  
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 range in the kitchen - whic
h of course you would bake in your oven there - oh yes, this was before we had our gas stoves of course and then out in the scullery there's the opening of what - where there used to be a very neat little - er - fireplace with a trivet you could stand on 
i
t and in the summertime when strawberries were about or raspberries mother made all her own jam - always - er - the man would come along in the evening with the little pannets of strawberries - about six or seven pounds - strawberries and mother'd say oh 
y
es, I'll have one of those - right. And away this would come - and it would be - would all be - the shucks all taken off and wiped and all put on a dish and then eventually they'd go into a stone - er - saucepan - type of stone lined - er - an iron saucep
an lined with stone - er stone lined - but I know that was the one I always used to use for her jam making and the strawberries would be put down there - sugar - er - sprink}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16264700\charrsid14891508 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 ed on them and then my brother and I used to take it in turns to stir the jam round
 on this fireplace out in that scullery - was only a fireplace about that width - er - the grate - but it was always kept - er - level while mother got the jars all hot and cleaned and that. The jars would then be put in the kitchen oven so that they were
 dry. And - she made all her own jam.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did she bake her own bread?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - no. No, she didn't bake her own bread.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did she bottle fruit and vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 But she would bottle fruit - but not a lot - no, because we used to be able to get the fruit you see so much cheaper - those days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Would she make any wine or medicine?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Er - yes. Now one wine we did make. And that was from a grapevine that covered the front of the house out in the front here - over this window - not so much over th
is window because it was trained because we had ivy on this side - the grapevine was the other side - and it used to grow up and be tied - mother used to tie it to the railings on - and then the next piece would come along over to this - to this - er - wi
n
dow - and I've known her to pick a bunch of grapes - she used to - I remember perfectly well one year, her picking forty pounds of grapes and if they could have been thinned out sufficient they would have made a beautiful black grape. They were a black gr
a
pe - you couldn't thin them out sufficient to get them to their full beauty you see - if you'd had a greenhouse - in fact a piece of that - er - that grapevine did eventually go into a greenhouse. I've forgotten who had - who it was - somebody that - er -
 
cadged a bit off mother - and that grapevine stopped there until the time when the estate company decided that instead of having the gravel this side and the - r - no - gravel the other side - but eventually - and she used to make wine with these grapes. 
S
ome of them. Oh yes. And I've heard the old bottles - they'd be in the cupboard under the - in the kitchen there - and 'pop' would go the corks and shoot the - the - er - the little cupboard door open - come right across the middle of the room, when we we
re youngsters. Yes, they were beautiful grapes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did they brew any beer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Oh no. No. Oh no, no, well, we were more or less teetotalers. I think it was only when my dad was dead - he was - he belonged to the ancient order of Foresters and I thi
nk it was when he used to go to pay his club that he might have a drink, but there was no ........
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh yes, it was what time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 What time did we have our breakfast? Well - well I suppose that depended really on whether'd got to go you see because f
or the time same of - some of them started work - Alfred would have to go down into the City - Frank went down into the City - er - George would go - well I suppose he would go to the City. Or more or less, Bloomsbury anyway.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did you have breakfast all together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Oh yes. Most days. But I don't know that we did - er - perhaps from Monday to Saturday - not so much, but I well remember sitting - when George and I used to eat it one side of the fireplace and I'd sit the other - with the toasting fork 
- and cooking the toast - it was - er - swivel - one that worked on a swivel and cooking it over the - er - in front of the - er - kitchen fire.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 So they all had it separately before they went to work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh yes, working days - before he went to work, oh yes, yes. We lived a very happy family. And we never .......
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Do you remember what you usually ate and drank for breakfast in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 One thing that we were very fond of and they used a good deal of was back bacon - bacon, and dad used 
to - er - take the bones out - and I was telling you about his mother - he always used to take those - we'd have a piece of bacon like that. Because when George worked - er - in Upper Thames Street he used to come through the market and - er - from his - 
e
r - Spicers and he used to come through - he would come through the market and he would bring this big piece of back bacon - what did they call it - er - the ribs of bacon - so it was a big piece to cut from and I know dad always used to cut it. Need to s
ay how much bacon shall I cut mum. for breakfast - oh yes, we - and eggs of course - well you got eggs for next to nothing didn't you.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 You used to have this most days did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh yes, we were well fed and it's funny enough it's not long ago sinc
e I had - oh what accident was it I had - was it when I hurt my shoulder - I think I hurt my shoulder leaning over which I did - or it was since then, but my doctor - Doctor Helbein in Furness Road said to me - Mrs Beck you know for your age you've got a 
w
onderful constitution he said you were well fed when you were a child. It is - he felt my arms - he said you were well fed when you were a child. I said we were - oh yes, there was nothing - we were never short of anything - we weren't - well no one got s
uch in the way of wages that time and I know dad's wages on the Met. - well I don't think - he'd have two fifteen might have been three pound a week - it wasn't any more.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did you have anything-different on Sundays for Breakfast?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh I couldn't tel
l you - that I couldn't tell you now. What we - I know we were always well fed and there was always a good joint and I remember my brother Frank once saying - er - he was very fond of tapioca pudding - and of course there's always eggs went in tapioca pud
d
ing - yes - and on this table mother had put this very big dish of tapioca and - er - yes, mum - a little bit more please mum - he says you know mum - I was there - he said why make it in a dish like that he said I - I think we might make a bucket full an
d done with it. Mother said oh we couldn't make a pudding in a bucket because you couldn't put it in the oven.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Apart from the grapes did your mother or father grow any other fruit or veg?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh no, no. We hadn't got the - hadn't got the space no. We just had our little back garden - mother looked after.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did they buy fresh fruit and vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Yes, plenty of it. Plenty.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And tinned fruit and vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - no - not so much - because - er - you couldn't buy it in those days, oh 
no, you - er - no you wouldn't be buying anything you know, and we always had the best of tea, sugar - so to speak which was of course cheap and butter and I know that our butter always came from the Home and Colonial in Edgware Road - the tea and the but
ter - dad always used to bring that home - as he came home on Friday evening - always.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did they keep any livestock for the family - hens or pigs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh - er - pigs? Oh - they didn't get pigs out here - not here - no - chickens we had - out in the garden.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Do you remember how often a week you had meat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Pretty well every day - I think so anyway. If we didn't have meat we had .....
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did you ever have tinned meat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 No, we never had anything in tins. No, my dad wouldn't have anything in
 tins. And it was a great deal of annoyance to him when someone - er - when margarine first came out and - they said well it was cooking butter and I know I had occasion to - er - to ask someone - I think it was the milk shop - I think they - a little mil
k
 shop was there then - or it could have been in the Home and Colonial I said well look bring me up some margarine and I'll make some cakes - rock cakes. Dad said no you won't - you won't make them with margarine, he said, you'll have the butter - I don't 
want margarine - I don't like it - we don't order that cooking fat and he wouldn't have it - he wouldn't have it in the house. Of course it wasn't purified like it is today - oh good gracious no.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did you ever get some extra meat such as rabbit from poaching?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Er - no, poaching - eh - poaching - oh no thank you. Oh no. Not - er - now - not in poaching - oh no, definitely not but I had a cousin who was - um - ah - pff - Harry Burrows his name was - he was - not gamekeeper but - er - something just a
 little bit above the head of Sir Walter Gilbey down at Bishops Stortford and when they went shooting he had - not in - not in our younger days - oh no - but in our older days - Harry used to send up a pair of rabbits or a hare - they'd come up you know w
i
th a label tied round his neck. Oh yes. That's - er - off the estate - when they were on the estate and he unfortunately was killed in 1926 - that young man. No, he used to come and see us now and again - um - in 1926 when we had the - what I was trying t
o
 get out but I couldn't get it. It was a general strike - he had been up to town and was just going back to Elsenham - that was the name of the place - outside Bishops Stortford - he was just going back to Elsenham and he was with friends in the railway c
a
rriage as it drew into the station he went to get out and another train was hard on it - they were being driven by any Tom, Dick and Harry - and it smashed into it - he just had time to shout to the people that were in the train - get out the other side a
s
 the station roof came down and killed him. He didn't - didn't save his life - and he was - his widow was the first railway accident that had come out from the - um - Daily Mail I think it was - that had an insurance for railway accidents and it - and tha
t accident was the first one of a railway - 'cos it was in the paper - quite a lot - quite a lot about it in the paper at the time - Harry Burrows. That - that was - er - dad's - er - eldest sister's son.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Do you ever remember seeing your mother having less food than the rest of you so that the family could have more?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Less food? No, no, no thank you - no - there was never any occasion for anything like that. Oh no, no occasion.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did your father have more food than the rest of the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Oh, I don't ask me - he had what was needed - oh no. One thing I do remember - that on Saturday mornings - I was the youngest one and my sister and brother - George - used to go through Shirland Road to what is now the United Dairies on Saturday morning -
 
it was then Wellfords - because Wellfords were our milkman - but they didn't bring this skimmed milk round for puddings - not - you had your - you had your pint can or whatever you had - which had to be washed and put out - doors - out on the step at nigh
t
 - a pint or two pints or whatever you had but - er - this was a big can with a top to it and they used to take it and a jug up to the corner of Eldon Avenue for skimmed milk which was then sold at tuppence half penny a quart - yes - and they used to carr
y
 it all the way down Shirland Road and round the Avenue to the house to make milk puddings. But in due course we had a milkman who is Sutlands at the corner of - er - Caird Street - er - it was this Mr Sutland's father - er - they opened a - and how ordin
ary milk is today. Oh yes, every bit.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Were you allowed to talk during meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Mmm - I don't think that dad was very - my dad was not strict. You couldn't call him a Strict man - oh no - he wasn't a - he wasn't - er - he looked upon his sons and da
ughters as having sufficient intelligence that they could talk. I don't say that - I don't say that there was an - much conversation but - er - I don't know that they were - hindered at all. Oh no, no my dad wasn't strict at all - in fact he was too lenie
nt I think - with all of us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Could you choose what you wanted to eat from what was cooked or did you have to eat a bit of everything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh, I don't know. No, I don't think so. Oh I think we did - we did the - average feeding as you would do in thos
e days. As I say, we were well fed. Thoroughly well fed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Say you wanted salt or something like that - you could ask somebody to pass it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh, yes, yes. Oh yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 You didn't have to wait until it was offered to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh, well no, no. Oh no, we just lived as .....
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And you could ask for a second helping?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Yes, you would. I told you my brother Frank said well mum why don't you make it in a pail.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Were you expected to sit in a certain way and hold your knife and fork in a certain way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Er - well, I think we were well brought up - er - but we didn't get to the - to the - um - state of serviettes - we had - no - we were a homely family but we didn't come to the state of serviettes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Could you bring toys or a book to the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Er - well, I don't know - I don't know that we ever did that - no, I think when we'd finished eating - er - we all got down and I remember our kitchen table had a wide leaf to it - and we had a box up at the other end well - sort of little ottoma
n - it was up that end at the far wall and then - er - be it Nellie - I don't know who'd sit beside her - until after - until after her young man came along - er - I don't know when they would say it - with the two boys up that end.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 You always sat down together did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Always sat down together - oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And you always sat in the same places?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh yes, we all had our same places - yes. I used to sit beside me mother. Mother and dad in those days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Who served the meal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Mother. Mother always served the meals - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did she serve you in any special order?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Oh I don't know - they don't - oh I don't know quite. In that respect really. But she would - um - we - we behaved ourselves as young people. I was the youngest - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Can you remember how you used to sit before you were old enough to sit at the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Yes. On a - I had my little stool on one side of the fireplace and George the other - when we had our porridge. Always had our porridge sitting on that - er - t
hose - him one side of the fireplace and me the other - we had - we had little low stools - oh yes, and those stools went under the table when they were finished with - oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Before you were old enough to feed yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh I don't know about that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 As soon as you were old enough you joined in the family meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
We were all in the family - oh yes. That would be by the time - as I say - I'd be coming here and we come in here I would be ten - I would be ten years old then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Was your mother an easy person to talk to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 She was a lovely little woman. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 She'd show you affection?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Wait a minute - where are you - where are you mum and dad - they're down here somewhere - because I had a photo - look at that - in that box
 under there - wait a minute - if I can find that - I've just remembered I - I know I had them up - oh - don't you go over as well - that's it dear - put them out of sight - out of sight - out of mind - well, I know I've got to put them out - back into a 
frame.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Was your mother an easy person to talk to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Yes. She was a good soul too.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And she showed you affection?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 To anybody - yes - wonderful - and she .....
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 If you had any worries could you share them with her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh yes. Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And was your father an easy person to talk to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 He was very easy - he was too lenient really - in a way but - er - he was fond of all his family.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 He showed affection?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Yes, yes. We were a happy family all together.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And you could go to him if you had any worries?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Yes, he was - oh yes, if you had anything troubling you - oh yes. Oh every - where - all the way through really - right until he died.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 How did your parents expect you to behave towards them - did they have any special way to address them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 No, oh no. No. No, they were mum and dad to us all the way through.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And did they bring you up to behave towards your brothers and sisters in a certain way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 No. No. Just the - to realize you were all brothers an
d sisters and it was an open house - this was always an open house for anyone who - er - of - er - friends of my brothers or - we had friends home and boyfriends and girlfriends for that matter and - er - my eldest brother eventually }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16328850 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508  his cousin and
 - er - and his - their daughter - their eldest daughter - er - had been down to Leicester with me - she lives at Waddensdale and - but what I was going to say - oh it's gone - er - they - er - oh the - dad never barred anyone of coming to the house, I me
a
n to say, he'd always make them welcome - no matter who they were - boys or girls and we had - er - four cousins and one of mother's sisters doing service up in Hampstead - all four - all four of these sisters - their home was at Royden - in Essex - and t
h
ey always made this their home if they were out of a job - er - there was always somewhere to sleep them somewhere or other - - er - oh in the little chairs that we used to let down and - or something like that - er - if one or the other of them would kip
 
down in if we - if it were needed but it was very seldom that anything like that. But these girls used to come over from Hampstead - the four sisters - in - er - one was parlourmaid to - er - to Sir Roland Hill's brother - one and the one my brother Alfre
d }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16328850 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
 - my sister-in-law - Lizzie - er - who was also my cousin - er - she was at - er - she was in service in Barnsbury you see - but they always used to make this - er - Sunday afternoons or all day Sundays or if it was a holiday time they always come
 - always used to come and see us - oh yes - we were a united family - the whole way through really. But - er - you never had any quarrels or any troubles and I don't know that any of us got into any scrapes we certainly never - certainly no one got into 
any - er - serious trouble - any police court troubles or anything like that - oh no - that was - 'course that would have been tragic. Ooh - gracious no.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 When you were small did your parents say that if any child to hit you to hit back?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 No, we d
idn't - no not in those days - they do now though don't they - oh yes. You hit him back - go on - he hit you. They had - there was - I don't think we ever quarreled in that way because we girls used to - the girls used to play together and the boys used t
o play together - they'd be spinning their tops or running their hoops round and that - oh yes, life was so different in those days. To what it is - has been of late years.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 What kind of people do you think your parents hoped you would grow up to be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Well, my sister was supposed to have - I told you she went as a court dressmaker - but - um - my father's - one of my father's sisters was - um - manageress of Borwicks Baking Powder and she'd got - was one of those very - you know - prim and proper ol
d dears and - er - oh when Ellen - she always used to call my sister Ellen - when Ellen - er - grows up I want her to be a ladies maid - mm - my beloved sister says I'm not going to be any ladies maid, mum. She paid I want to go into dressmaking. And of c
ourse she did. She stayed in it the court - at - er - this place in Packer Street until she was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16328850 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 .
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did your parents bring you up to consider certain things important in life?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 An outline of life? Well, I don't know that they did that much be
cause it wasn't done so much - er - there was certain things that were not revealed to us in our days - fact - well youngsters talk about when they're five years old these days - but - oh no - things were kept very private - in many ways. But you learnt m
o
re when you got older and you got out into the world and mixed with other people, whatever you did really at home - which - perhaps it was best - perhaps it wasn't I feel - I'm not too sure about it. Now if you look a - er - well of course life at that ti
m
e - when we were growing up - life was - you lived a sheltered life. You went to church and Sunday - you went to Sunday school and you'd go to church in the evening. Then if you - it was summertime with his frock coat and silk hat - oh yes - and mother wi
th her - er - silk cape and that you know and little bonnet and now of course things are so different. I never - never had a photo of - I don't think I ever had a photo of mother taken with her - er - bonnet and cape - don't think so.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 What did your parents think of swearing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
No. You never - you never heard - no, I never heard even use the word damn. No, not until - you didn't know it - you didn't know those - er - any bad language much less carry on anything that was - no, no you were bought up in
 a quiet - I wouldn't say sanctimonious - no - but - er - in a quiet way of living - the whole way through.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 When grown ups were talking were you allowed to join in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - well I couldn't tell you that exactly. I don't know that there was much con
versation with the grown ups that for - because I think the too away - well you see there was so much difference between the three older ones than there was between George and I.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 If you did something your parents disapproved of what would happen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 You might get a smack then - I don't say you didn't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And who would usually give it to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh mother. Oh def - my - my dad never did lay a hand on me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Or any of your brothers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 No. I think Frank once got into trouble because he'd got
 a new suit on and he went down to the canal and - er - I don't know whether he got mucked up or he fell in the canal or whatever it was but it was something to do with Hamal canal I remember. I know he - I think dad read the riot act a little bit to him 
when he got back. But that was when I was quite a tiny little thing.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Was it often you got punished?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh no, no, I never - and I never remember mother - she might have kept a cane but I never remember her using a cane at any time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Do you remember any particular occasion when you were punished?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Er - no, I can't say that I do really - they were too lenient I think really and truly it would have been better perhaps if we had been more - but I don't think there was any need for it - I don't 
think in those days - that you lived under the threat of punishment really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Would you say that you received the ideas you had about how to behave from both your parents or did one play a more important part than the other?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 No, no, both. Both my 
parents - yes. In the fam - my dad made - he certainly made a fuss of me - er - and - well not many years ago - my sister and I would be sitting in there - in the next room - just before she died - if I was a little - er - cantankerous - er - she'd say - 
you always were a spoilt kid. You, you - well, I say I was born on my father's birthday I was entitled to be. You always were a spoilt kid.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 When you had a birthday would it be different from any other day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Yes, there was always a birthday cake.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did you receive any presents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Oh yes, there was always something from someone or the other of them - er - you know - in the home - oh yes, we always - there was always - little presents - little things that would be useful.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did you have any friends in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Well, when we were children we did - oh yes. Er - and I remember my next door neighbour that was then - not just now - but was then - er - she always used to come in to my birthday party and I would then make what - I would make at the sc
hool cookery which would be rock cake - that was one thing we were very particular about - was the rock cakes - but - er - we always kept up our birthdays up to a certain extent.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Can you remember anything you did with your mother and father together on Christmas day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Oh we always made a Christmas day of it - here - yes. Mother would be making the pastry and mince pies in the next room with the kitchen fire - er - an open grate - with the kitchen fire and then father would be over night putting up
 all the decorations - 'course he had some pictures on the wall those days. I might tell you my - my looking glass isn't - it's down there at the present minute - under that big cushion - er - why that isn't up - it's there until the men have - they have 
practically finished now out here with that drill and - er - so I'm waiting for them to be quite finished and then I'll get one or the other of them to put it up for me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 So you had a good Christmas?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh yes. We always had - and - of course we had 
brass - a big brass lamp - I don't whether that big lamp - er - used to stand. Might be - might have been in the middle of the table because we had a big round table here - and - yes, it possibly would stand on that - er - for the time when that was aligh
t
 - um - that would be put out when my father would have the biggest dish we'd got - what we called the turkey dish - with - er - yes - what did we call it - snapdragons. Which would be raisins that you would buy in those days for about - er - well tuppenc
e
 threepence a pound quite likely - er - quite a small amount and - er - I don't know what spirit he used - I think it was whisky - it had - er - they had to set those alight and they - they were what they called snapdragons - the older people would rememb
e
r them - snapdragons - and - er - my brother George was such a strong teetotaler that he always used to take a hand - he used to take a handful with the - the glow on them and go and put them under the tap and wash the whisk - and wash the spirit off them
.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 They were soaked in whisky and then set light to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Yes, they would soak in whisky and then set light to. Did you ever have them? Didn't you? Didn't you ever - oh yes, our snapdragons - yes - on Christmas night - towards the end of Christmas nig
ht after all the bon-bons and - er - presents had been taken off the tree - and we had a tree - there'd be presents taken off the tree and a little bit of something for everybody. Even to the cat - yes - 'cos we had a cat in those days and - er - there wo
u
ld be - er - presents there that would be going out to aunts and uncles - those that were probably not able to be present and we always had a turkey - during the time he was - dad was on the Metropolitan Railway he always a big turkey and we used - my bro
t
her George and I used to go down to meet him at Edgware Road station and in the - one of the booking office - one of the offices - on Edgware Road station - er - on the level - er - we used to meet dad there because it - that was where he was going to pic
k
 up his turkey and it isn't only in recent years that the nail that that turkey used to hang on over the fireplace in the scullery has been taken down. It's only been in quite recent years - I don't know why it was taken down even then but - er - it was, 
b
ecause I know I looked for it one day and I said Oh lor' my big nails gone - now after all these years and then of course - I don't know how that turkey would be cooked - it must have been cooked in the kitchen oven - must you know because we hadn't got g
a
s. Oh possibly - no - no, we didn't have gas until - we had a - a little bungalow stove was the first one and that wasn't in until about - um - 19 - 93 - 94 - 95 - about 1895 to 96 I think when we had gas because I remember my dad was very ill in 1893 and
 when he was better during the winter time - er - and that\rquote 
s what he got - he got pneumonia through - er - spouting I was going to say - er - for the benefit of Mr Hornerman - er - our - er - er - Liberal candidate that was. He used to stand at the door - d
oor and mother used to say to him, now look here, you'll get pneumonia one of these days. And of course poor old dad did - but still he got over it and while - was going to tell you that - he would sit at this window during the January or February when th
e
 - when the ice was very bad on the ground and see the gas people laying the gas that was coming into our houses - er - and our next door neighbour in 44 were the first people that had it - I think the first in the street - the first in the immediate neig
h
bourhood and dad was very - er - inter - er - enthusiastic about it - oh he said must go in and see Mrs Page when - when I'm better - when they get that gas fitted up - and too, I think we must have the gas - we'll see - if it's all right. And of course w
e
 did - the pipe used to come across and under here up here and one bracket would be there and the other pipe - er - from it would go along the mantlepiece and up there into the other bracket - when they had - where we had - er - glass - er - red and white
 
sort of globes that were screwed on and then you had - er - oh I think at the first it was like a fan shape - the original - yes a little twiddly bit about like that and a fan shape - then afterwards it got to be the incandescent light - little radiant in
candescent bulbs that if you didn't watch out what you were doing - you dropped the lot and then that one went bang and eventually it was taken away - it was taken away from the fireplace but - put in the middle of the room from over here.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did you have any musical instruments in the home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - we had a harmonium. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And who used to play it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Dad. Oh dad. My dad could. And he could play his concertina. I think I told you about his concertina didn't I.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did any of you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - no - but we used to stand all round and sing. Oh yes. And mother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 You all used to sing?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh yes, when we were younger.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 When would you do this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 This would be Sunday evenings. Sunday evening after church - oh yes. Yes, oh yes, singing together - had a singing lesson very often.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did your parents play any games with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Er - not to a great degree. No, I don't know that they did up to - no, and cards - ordinary cards were forbidden up to a point. At least, I won't say forbidden - n
o, but we never looked for them. And yet, when my aunt from Australia - er - one of mother's sisters that went out to Australia - when she came back here - dad used to come in and keep her company - because she came and lived with us for a little while - 
er - after the boys were all }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16328850 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
 and that - um - she came to live with us until she went back to Australia - when she was seventy-nine - and - er - that's where she died - um - er - my dad would come in and play a game of cards with - er - with aunt Hil
da but apart from that we didn't no - I don't think I ever - we any of us were ever taught card playing. I couldn't do much with it now - but I can do a little bit - I can - I can play a game of fence and that's about all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Were there books in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Yes. We had a plenty of books. We had two if not three rows of books on that shelf - on shelves up there - on that shelf there were three shelves - one was of small war books \endash  church-hymn books and all little books and then there were the medium 
size ones and then there were the bigger books at the top. Er - many of them were - er - were books that would come out in - er - like once a week - er - magazines that were - er - kept and then bound - er - in many cases. I know that when my brother Fran
k
 worked in the Home Words office there was a copy of Home Words I remember always came - er - he used to bring home and - er - they were bound and then there was another book or two - one was young man and the other was young woman and Frank was then work
i
ng in the office with a Mr. Atkinson - I believe he was the editor of it - Frederick Atkinson. I believe he was the editor of those two books and I've asked my niece - at least my nephew who lives round Griffin because after dad died the books were divide
d
 up - different ones some had one some had the other - I don't know whether Muriel - my brother George's daughter has still got any of her dad's books but I know that he did have quite a big bookcase - some that were our - well books from home here - and 
s
ome of his own. But I know that there were some very good books - er - bound - er - church magazine was one - er - Queens Park Church Magazine was one - bound in green and that used to up on that - er - we had big books up that end and big books up that e
nd smaller ones in the middle. Then on the next shelf there would be a medium size book and then as I said the lower shelf would be the smaller books and Bibles. Church hymn books and things like this. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did you get newspapers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - dad's T
elegraph - dad had the Telegraph right 'til the day he died. And we kept it for years afterwards until it got yellow and I don't know what happened to it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Do your remember your mother or father reading?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - oh yes, yes, oh yes, they were both o
f them very - er - very good for reading and both intelligent - oh yes, wonderfully - wonderfully intelligent.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did they ever read aloud to you or to each other?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - if there was anything - oh yes, dad would sit down and he would say mother now 
sit down come on - er - here's so and so and so and so I want to read to you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Do you remember a funeral in the family?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Well, the first funeral in the family - er - was that aunt that I was speaking of - dad's sister Sarah and then in 1916 - and
 then in 1917 was my sister's husband.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Who attended?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 We all went. We all went yes - in both the cases.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And would you wear mourning clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh yes, yes. Oh yes, in those days, you - you were - everybody was in black then for a length 
of time - yes - for a length of time, oh yes. But I always remember
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did you draw the curtain in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh yes, yes. That was a - that was a sign - yes - that there was a death in the house - yes. I always remember my sister }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3690258\charrsid14891508 Nellie}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508  - when she had - oh you must wear widow's weeds }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3690258\charrsid14891508 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3690258\charrsid14891508 Nellie }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
bought widow's weeds and she wore them on the day will was buried - he's buried next to my father and mother in Paddington cemetery - er - but she never wore them after - I don't know what she did with them - 
for this - with, this length of crape stuff - I know she wouldn't wear it - oh no, no Nellie didn't like anything like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Were you taken out visiting neighbours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 No. Not much.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Friends or relations?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh friends - but we had no relati
ons much about this way - not when we were young no. Oh no, we hadn't any relations that lived in this area. Not that time - and we would go - we would go - er - now, with mother - mother would take my - er - George, my brother and I, because the eldest y
o
u see were older - look after themselves but - er - mother would take us two into the country - we had a cousin - an aunt rather - mother's - er - one of mother's sisters who lived in Welling in Hertfordshire and - er - we used to go down there and stay f
or a - a fortnight or whatever time it was. During the school holidays, oh yes, and I ...
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Were you fortunate with your father working on the railway - did he get free passes - did the whole family get passes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - no - er - you did - yes - up to 
a point. Dad had his free pass which took him and mother or he and one of the boys - er - on these long distance journeys - er - and we were entitled as a family to a cheap travel - er - well say you were going from Westland Park to the City - we had a li
t
tle voucher - a little blue voucher and whoever went first took that little tuppeny voucher up to Westland Park Station and left it there and then we would take our tuppence for our ticket and - er - Alfred would perhaps go to Moorgate Street and Frank wo
u
ld go to - er Aldersgate or - so - I would go to Baker Street - Nellie would go to - no Nellie didn't have it - George did - er - he would go wherever he was working - where we were working - oh yes - and again I remember when we were - when we were young
s
ters - mother, George and myself - er - I don't suppose the others went - at all - going from Westbourne Park to Baker Street and Baker Street down to - Rickmansworth - er - from Baker Street to Harrow was tuppence all the way with another - another - not
 
that blue ticket it was another ticket - a longer one - that you went then - er - Baker Street to Harrow and that was tuppence. Baker Street to Aylesbury I think was ninepence. We used to go out for the day always on a Bank Holiday as next Monday would be
 
- say August Bank Holiday - we'd pack up a basket of refreshments and we'd go out for the day right out into the country and then we'd - er - knock at a cottage for a pot of tea or something like that - and make a nice day out. Er - that was until of cour
s
e until we got of an age when we were able to look after ourselves and did look after ourselves and - I don't know that we went out so much then - possibly I may have gone with mother - because I think I was a little bit - er - tied to my mother's apron s
trings in a way. Er - and than.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Were you taken shopping?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh yes. Oh yes. We used to - one or the other of us always used to go with mother. Down Harrow Road for the shops - oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did you ever go out with just your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh quite likely. Quite likely. But - er -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 You told me about these outings on Bank Holidays - did you go any other times of the year - mainly always August Bank Holiday was it?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 It was mainly Bank Holiday times - er - when we would go for those little outin
gs. Er - but at - at other times as I say you would have an outing. Here - I remember going to Hastings once. Er - on an outing and falling in the sea. A man clutched hold of me and pulled me back otherwise I should have been washed out to sea. Had to sit
 - sit round an old - er - washing machine while my clothes dried.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did you ever go away for a holiday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - not apart from my - not from - er - not apart from my family - oh no. Well - er -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 You told me you went to cousins sometimes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh, well, that was when I was older - that was when we were older - that was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 In the time 1908 to 1918 do you think you went on holidays then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh yes. Yes, yes, because I was quite a woman then, oh, I was well away then. Oh yes. Well, I couldn't t
ell you exactly where I went to - it all depended. I know I went up to Aberdeen twice. Oh yes, I went to Aberdeen - to that friend of ours that I told you lived just - moved up from Kensal Rise - er - yes I went up to Aberdeen in 1905 with Maggie and - er
 - then I went again in 1914. Maggie was then up there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And would your brothers go on holiday too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
OH YES. Oh yes, but actually apart from going on their holidays with their friends - er - perhaps to relations or perhaps to friends to the seaside somewhere they would go but apart from that they didn't - until they got }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16328850 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508  I don't know that they went about a lot. Hey - you know kept each other's company and friends - with - they always had their friends coming in - into the house.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 How did you spend Saturdays? What about Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Sundays? Between 1900 and 1918? Well, mostly I - I'd - I didn't always go to church Sunday morning but I always went Sunday evening and I went to Sunday school - er - rather to the Sunday school class - yes, right the way through.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did you have different clothes on Sundays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Oh yes. Always Sunday clothes - you didn't wear your Sunday clothes on week days - oh dear no. And on Sunday school anniversary we always dressed in white - either white or something very pale - oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 So you spent Sunday afternoon in Sunday school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Sunday afternoon at Sunday - in Sunday school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And Sunday evening?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And Sunday evening we'd go to church - and then possibly go for a walk with whoever we came out o
f church with - friends - 'cos by that time I'd made my own friends, you see, and this one friend - Maggie - er - Miss Roberts that I spoke of a little while ago that lived here with us from 1903 - er - after George was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16328850 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508  and - er - she always used t
o come to church with me - she's a Scotch girl came from Aberdeen - and - er - she used to come to church with me with her little girl - little Queenie and - now she's got - oh I don't know how many grandchildren - half a dozen grandchildren round about -
 er - right up until 1918 - yes, and in 1917 and 18 - no - 15 to 19 - I was working in the post}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3690258\charrsid14891508  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
office - I worked in the post office - er - at Paddington station - er - letter sorting and then of course at that time we'd - we would be doing all sorts of things. Er - might even be working - yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 On Sunday yes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Not so much Sunday during the daytime but we always went in eleven o'clock Sunday evening - which had started our day. And it's just recently that I've come up against a young man - no - not
 a young man rather - I've come up against the widow of a young man that I knew who lived opposite here - George Blackhall and if his wife was listening and she heard this she'd say yes. Er - and I knitted for him before he - before he was - well long bef
ore he was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16328850 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
 - for he'd be in the army - er - I knitted for him a balaclava helmet and gloves and I think socks and during the war we used to take our knitting - our big knitting - to church with us on Sunday evening because our Minister that was then
 - think it must have been Mr Butler - don't know if it would be - er - agreed that we could knit as well as listen to what he was talking a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3690258\charrsid14891508 bout and if it was the Reverend }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Alexander Butler that I think it was - er - in 14 - 14 to 17 anyway - he certainly agreed with our work - for our doing our work for the war.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did your parents go to church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh yes. Always - right until........
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 This was the Congregational church at the bottom of the road?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Church at the bottom - yes. Er - they went to church with my eldest brother - he always - he stuck to Church of England.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 How often did your parents go?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Well, morning - morning and evening sometimes - oh yes, yes. Both mother and father - oh yes. And dad would go Sunday morning even if mother didn't. Yes. She was getting the Sundays dinner - oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did you go to Sunday school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Yes, I went to Sunday school and then from there I became a teacher. I was teacher right until it was .....
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Were there any Sunday school outings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Yes - always. And what's more - for Sunday school at least for church work - there was what we called Christian Endeavour - we had what was termed a sunshine committee and there was twelve people in that sunshine committee - nine women - young women and t
hree men and the girls and myself - er - did the sewing part and we used to make garments all the year round and I used to cut them out - children garments - for a children}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3690258\charrsid14891508 \rquote }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 s tea that was held in the following January for after Christmas - the Christmas pa
rty for the poor little kiddies that many of them hadn't got hardly a rag to their backs. Let's see we were up to what was it - oh our sunshine committee - and our children - and we used to collect for them to give them a good tea in the January and every
 
child had a garment - we used to collect sufficient every now and again - do all sorts of things - make coconut ice to find a few coppers and sell it to the girls at work and they used to say ah Miss Morris what have we got this week. Well, I've got some 
c
oconut ice. All right, or else it'd be well now - er - er - you got your wages this afternoon? Yes. Come on I want a penny from each of you. And I'd got a friend - Alice Keeble - who was one of our girls and she'd say yes, well we're going to buy a little
 
girl a pair of shoes so we want the money to buy them with - come on. Well you've got - you've got your wages - well give me a penny out of it. And they'd all give us a penny out of it and we'd take it - I know we had a case with one little girl who wante
d
 to buy a pair of shoes because there was an outing - we'd got an outing in the June or July and mother said oh Katie can't come because she hasn't got any shoes - and that was over the other side of the - er - bridge - in the very poor - what was then th
e
 very much poorer part to what ours was considered and - er - she hadn't got any shoes and by the way don't talk too loud because behind that picture there's a big hole and the woman next door if she saw you come in would be listening to what your saying 
a
nd then she'll come and want her children to go. Well that was in the very poor - what was then the very poor part - Kensal Road. Yes. And so at all events Katie had her shoes because we got sufficient money and we took Katie to the - the little old shoe 
m
an - little shoe shop and - er - bought her shoes - but I brought away the little old rubber shoes that she'd got on when we took her - er - if I hadn't probably the leather shoes would have found their way to the pawn shop on the Monday morning - quite l
i
kely and Katie would be back into her old rubber shoes, you see, but - er - that was our work for the children and we did - we used to have a hundred to a hundred and twenty and every child had a garment - whether it was a girl or boy - my sister Nell use
d
 to make the little boys - er - knickers - because they couldn't get anybody else - nobody else'd take on the knickers that had got the flies - that had the - er - flies in - they'd make them with a little hole - yes they'd do that one but they'd do that 
pair but no, not the bigger ones and then we had a tailors shop - it's - I think it's Burtons the tailors at the present moment - it used to be Alexander}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3690258\charrsid14891508 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 s. Er - we had a tailors shop - Prince of Wales in the Harrow Road and he used to save me all the littl
e bits that we could make boys knickers of - yes - and he used to give them to us and - er - then I'd go across to Bradley }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15409448 &}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
 Perrins on the opposite side there by the Prince of Wales, that's gone now, er - and - er - when I say it's gone - yes, that's righ
t it is the - shut up - er - and I used to go and buy rolls of flannelette - striped flannelette or shrimpy pink flannelette and cut out the garments - I used to cut them out on my bed mostly - I'd say to mother in the morning - mother I've left some thin
g
s - some - er - things on my bed - don't bother about making it - I've thrown it back - don't bother because I want to cut them out when I come home. Well, I - while your getting my supper. Mother would be getting my supper and I'd go up and the old sciss
o
rs'd be going round the pattern 'cos I wanted to take these things down to the meeting, you see, for the girls and it - and I think that of the people that were with us then - actually the nine workers that were in that sunshine committee I think there's 
only two of us left. I don't think there's anybody else.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did you belong to the choir?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 No, no. No, I wasn't a singer.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did the chapel run any temperance club?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Yes. All sorts of things.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Were you a member of that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - I went to Band of Hope. Went to Band of Hope with my brother. With George - oh yes, he and I went to Band of Hope with him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did you have any activities associated with that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - I don't know as I did much at that time - no. In fact - er - George did bu
t I don't know that I did - because he was that much older than I was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did you ever belong to any other club that you can think of organized by the chapel - Sunday school - Band of Hope?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - sunshine committee - Band of Hope - no I don't know that there was much more. Oh yes, I think we did our share of it really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Was grace said at meals in your family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Who said it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 My father. Dad, oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Were you taught to say prayers at night?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And did you ever have family prayers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Er - not so much family prayers - but we - oh that's coming down the chimney - means we're going to have some rain - er - it was with mother - when we older - with her - us younger ones.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did your father take an interest in politics in their period?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - yes. Oh yes, yes. He didn't - er - he didn't forget his politics. He was a Liberal right the way through. Right until he died.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did he have views - definite views on - did the working man have a square deal - do you 
think in those days - did your father think that the working man had a square deal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Well, I don't know - I don't know that I thought much about - it really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did your father talk about it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Although - well - as a working man I suppose he did
 up to a point - I know one thing that did used to bother him that he didn't consider that the wages that the men that were on the station at the time where he was - when he was a Swiss Cottage - that the work that they did - er - not the men on the platf
o
rm - but the men in the signal box was dad's chief worry. He did not consider - I don't know what the - what the wages were at all - that was never - well of course that didn't interest me - but I know that he used to say that with the work that they did 
i
n the signal box just in the tunnel - he didn't consider they were paid sufficient for the responsibility that those men. I know it did - dad did used to bother a good deal and I think he spoke his views a good deal when he had occasion to go up to - er -
 to Baker Street to head office.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Was your mother interested in politics at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 No. No, mother was - had enough to do to look after her home - she was - her home was her little treasure.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Do you remember your father voting in a general election before 1919?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - before 1919 - quite possible - yes, quite possible before 1919.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 There were elections in 1900, 1906 and 1910.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - yes - oh he would do if there was - if it was at all possible. Yes, I don't think - and I don't think th
at he was so far invalid - er - up to 1919 and he died in 21 although he didn't go out much but I expect if there was an election he was there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Women got the vote in 1918 I think - did they - do you remember your mother voting?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh well, I couldn't tell you - I don't remember mother voting - no I don't remember mother voting.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 How old were you then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh I was - oh I'd be - thirty-five - I - I was thirty-five in 1915.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Do you remember voting?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh I expect I did. I expect I did - I
 expect I did. Quite likely. I know that I've voted ever since - that time when I've had the chance. I remember I remember going in 1924 - I was working in 1924 - I was working at the Sudbury Hall school for girls - um - er - at Sudbury and my brother - F
r
ank - yes Frank was - on the go at the time - he was determined that I should vote - although I - I was living here but I was working there at that time and - er - he was determined that I should go so he - he sent somebody in a cab to fetch me on conditi
ons that they - er - that they would wait for me and take me back again. I got my vote and he saw to it that I - that I was going to use it too - oh yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Were you interested in politics at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Not a great deal - not a great deal. I had enough t
o do I think to do - to make ends meet in a way - you know - look after things and that because - um - yes by that time - 19 - 1918 - er - 1919 when - um - I was in the post office from 1915 to 1919 - and then from 1919 to 21 - no, I think I was at home h
e
re - I was at home with mother and dad. Er - no I wasn't - no I wasn't - no - er - no I did twelve months of - er - 'course during those - during that period - I did twelve er - at least from the Easter to the September - er - teaching dressmaking to unem
ployed women - up at Harleston - mm. Under the county council.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Some people felt in those days that they risked losing their jobs or their homes if they voted in a different way from their employers wanted them to - did you ever hear your father speak about this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 No, I don't think so.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 You don't think your father ever felt himself under this sort of pressure?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 No, I don't think so.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 He wouldn't be - working for the railway - would he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 No, I don't think that would be .......
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Was your father a member of a political party?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Yes, he was a Liberal. Oh yes, yes. Yes, he was a Liberal.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And do you remember him working for one of the parties at an election?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Yes - Liberal - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 This is what you were telling me before, about him working for Mr .....?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Er - Mr Hornerman - yes - helping John Hornerman until - and then after that - oh yes - if there was anything on he was always with him. Oh yes, and we always - we always had the vote for so and so hanging on a bo
ard out - outside and I remember - er - they would be Conservatives - the people that lived a little further up the street named Nudick - and there were some sons there and - er - they came and took our board away - at night - mm - at night when the - whe
n the - er - the - er - elections was on. Oh yes, the feelings did run high then - at that time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 But your mother wouldn't be a member of a party?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 No, mother wouldn't - no, she wouldn't - no. No, no. She was indoors looking after her home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did your parents take part in any political activity other than at election time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Well, - er - for the - for the Liberal party - oh yes. Oh yes, yes, he was a staunch Liberal. All the way through - apart from elections.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 When your parents were not doing there work how did they spend their time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Well, I told you how my dad spent his time didn't I - doing that and mother'd be doing a bit of sewing. He would be doing his acrostics - yes. This'd be his book. Now then - I - I don't know whether tha
t gives a record on that front - on that back page there - no - not back page - that's - on that outer page - does that give a record of index - that's the index to it. And - er - and I - oh - as I say I've got the old boys photo but I haven't got the - u
m - I can't find this envelope. I've looked and looked and looked and I've always think that went down behind that chest of drawers and got swept up. Certainly he can - if he'd like to - if he would like to come along.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 This was your fathers hobby?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 That was of course was his hobby - oh it was his hobby - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did he used to read them to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Oh yes. He used to - he'd sit by the fire in the next room. Oh he - he kept - he had everything just at his fingertips. Oh yes, all the time - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did your mother have any interests outside the home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 No, not a great deal - oh no, no, not really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did she ever go out to enjoy herself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh yes. She would go down to the church but - er - if there was anything on - bazaars and all things like that but not to make any - er -

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Who would she go with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Oh she'd go with me - oh yes. Er - when we got older and that you see we would go together - I used to go about with her quite a lot and with dad - he would go down. In fact there'
s one in there on one of our church bazaars. Yes, well that one - er - and that was told - that was made up in - er - in leaflets and that and were sold, see, for a few coppers - oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 What time did your father get home in the evenings - do you remember - when he was working?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
When he was at work - when he was on the railway - about quarter to seven - I think he left at six - he would get home about quarter to seven.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 How many evenings a week would he spend at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 About every evening - oh yes. He was a home}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3690258\charrsid14891508 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 bird.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Unless there was something on at the church or with the Liberals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Er - more to the Liberal party or if there was anything on at the church - oh yes, if there was a concert on or anything - um - or any political meeting - you'd never find him anywhere else.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did he go to any clubs like the reform club or pubs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
No. No, he didn't go any clubs at all and he wasn't a man for drinking. Er - the only time when he would go - well what you could call a club - 
he belonged to the Ancient Order of Foresters and he would go over to - um - I think it was Dalston - I think his - er - club was - was it Dalston - and he would go over there and - well - pay his club money I suppose once in three months or - was it once
 a month or was it .....
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did your mother go to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 No. No, mother was - mother was just - er - that was a man's job.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did your father take part in any sport?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - not a great deal - not a great deal - really, not in - not to go - not to go - er - out.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did he attend the races?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 No - oh no. Racing was out of his category - oh yes. He didn't bet - ooh good gracious no. Oh no.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did your father and mother belong to any savings clubs like boot clubs or sick, funeral clubs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 We
ll, we belonged to a medical club that provided us with a doctor for a little bit - I think tuppence each I think a week - which would be about a shilling a week - er - all together - er - and that provided us with out doctor - that was paid down at the c
h
urch - oh yes - that was held at the church. But the - now what did we used to call it - sick and benefit club was it - or medical club - medical club probably - and I remember that - at that time - when that was in existence we had quite a - oh a dear ol
d
 boy as our doctor in Furnett Road - Doctor Adams - and - I don't say it's about twenty years ago now that his son - er - passed the - passed the - er - work over. I don't know what became of the son but - er - that - the doctor that I've got now is still
 
in the same house. His still at the same - in Doctor Adams - in Doctor Adams house - who is Doctor Halbein - he's not a bad sort of chap - not over - over keen on him but I know better. I met - I met one there - when I was down at Leicester that I like a 
good deal better but - er - still, Doctor Halbein's all right - if you're really ill }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3690258\charrsid14891508 he\rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
s on the spot - he would be on the spot - as soon as his car - er - his daughter's car could bring him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 How did you get on with your brothers and sisters?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Get on with them? Oh we got on all right. Yes, there was no squabbling.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Was there one you felt particularly close to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - no, I don't think so - no I think we were sort of - hung together. We just er - just a happy - er - old fashioned family then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 As a child who did you play with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh as a little girl - with George - my brother George - oh yes, because ........
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did you play with neighbours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh yes. Oh after - er - well when we came to live in this house I was then ten. Oh yes,
 then I would play with my next door neighbour who was - er - that was living there then and we'd tie a piece of - we had railing along here then - and we'd tie a piece of rope on there and go right across it and there'd be about ten of you - you know, sk
ipping, skip, skip, skipping - or else you'd have your single skipping rope and you'd go up and down or you'd got a hoop and the boys had their iron hoops - oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did you play in other peoples houses much?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Very little. No, I was saying - er - l
ast night or this morning - no I think it was this morning, I was talking to May when she came in - and she was sitting here and I was saying how many times that I'd been into our next door neighbours house I don't think that I've ever had above three cup
s
 of tea in that house - in 44, actually, we weren't in the habit of going into other peoples houses unless it happened to be a child's birthday - on our birthdays we did - oh yes, very few neighbours then as children from the school. But we didn't run in 
a
nd out - oh no - and as for the house next door but one here I think I've been into that house all the years that we've been - lived here - I think I've been into that house twice. I think I can have been in that house twice and - I don't think I've been 
i
nto Mr Lawton's above twice. But next door - oh yes, I do go in 34 because my friend in 34 - in the ordinary way on Saturday evenings - er - I go down to her about half past six and - er - when I'm - when I'm all right - or when she hasn't got any visitor
s
. If she has visitors or anything that happens that she's very tired and that and - er - then I don't go down. But - er - other than that I go down on Saturday evening and have a look at her telly with her husband - with May and her husband and enjoy ours
elves and have a natter.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Can you remember any other games that you played other than skipping?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Oh, had our skipping ropes and our hoops and - er - oh I don't know - all the rest of the children's games - er - touch and all the rest of it you know
. Or - what's the other one - rounders - rounders and we used to play rounders with the with the soft ball - one from one corner to the other sort of business.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Were you allowed to get dirty when you played?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh well, I don't know. I suppose you got dirty - you got told off very likely.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 It wasn't so easy to wash things in those days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 No, no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Were you free to play with anyone you pleased?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - oh.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did your parents discourage from playing with certain children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 W
ell, they were - we - well, I don't know that we ever bothered to play with any other children than we just associated with. Just immediately near - oh yes, I think so mostly.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 There was no distinction made between children as far as you can remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Well, nothing - no - we were all much of a - much of a crowd really you see this street at one time was mainly - what it was built for in the first place - or what the estate was built for. When Earl Shaftesbury suggested the building of Queens Park 
Estate it was to be mainly for postmen, policeman, railway servants and - er - well, - er - social type of people - they were not - it wasn't considered to be a rough quarter - he wanted - it was to be for people who just brought up - they were family hou
s
es - from one end to the other on the whole of the estate - the family houses and as family houses they were kept. It was Lord Shaftesbury who started the - Queens Park estate in the first place. Of course - yes, and when you come to think - to consider t
hat these old trees were the original trees that were built here you know with one or two exceptions - where ........
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 In 1882 they were built?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - 81 - er - yes 81 - this house and this street I think was about 81 all through but - er - the begi
nning of the estate in first and second Avenue and in Caird Street where they've just began to - well, they've just pulled all down - you saw that at the bottom - where they pulled all down there and - um - a little bit I think in Third Avenue and into Dr
oop Street they were beginning to build round that part in the late - er - 1870's - right in the late 1870's until they got to this bit and they - the house where - '81.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did anyone outside the home help your mother look after her house or family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Er - well, yes, well sometimes mother had an old lady - was - old up to that point - that used to come in and help her do her washing. Oh yes, because there was so much washing - there was seven of us and - er - you know, an old lady - a Mrs Woodley - use
d to come and help her - do the washing - oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 She came fairly regularly?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Er - she used to come by - once a week probably. I think she used to get about as far as the end of the - er - of the coloureds and that that - er - I think it got to s
heets and pillow cases and the copper - copper full of washing I think that was got down to about mother's time. Used - to come round and help - help mother do the wash - well - er - take the things out of the copper and rinse them up and all the rest of 
it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did you go fishing, walks, cycling?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - no. Not - er - not a great deal - no. Er - Nellie - my sister - had a bike but I didn't.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did you go for walks?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh we used to go for walks. Oh yes, we used to - one walk that we used to have
 was up over Kendal Rise station to Wellsford - was one - it was a good distance}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid3690258\charrsid14891508  and - er - when we were quite}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
 youngsters we had chickens in the back and mother used to walk over to the - a little farm place and I believe the old pub is still there where t
his little row of cottages were - I believe the old pub - I'm - not so many years ago - not long back rather - er - someone told me that they thought the old pub was still there but of course it's built all round - er - where we used to go through the but
tercup fields over Kensal Rise station there was - er - a path - a wide path and a pond and then on the right}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16482240\charrsid14891508 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
hand side the buttercups fields and where my nephew lives now was the field where the cows were - that - er - that Wellfords had their dairy - thei
r farm - er - for the - er - dairy that provided our milk. 'Cos there was a farm over there. Yes. That was up by - er - actually - er - I don't know what it comes as now - I have heard Stanley call it - call it by name - but I know that the farm is at the
 bottom of - well, what remains of it is at the bottom of their road - the bottom of Herbert Garden.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 So you didn't have to go far to get to green .......?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - oh no, about a quarter of an hour. And - um - and you were in the country part then an
d - in Kilburn Lane where Higgins Dairy stands now - er - the - the cowsheds - er - or what were the cowsheds where the - what housed the cows in those days - er - I believe still stand but you know as sheds - I don't know what they use them for now but I
 
- on the opposite side where now stands the Odeon theatre on the one corner - on the corner and then I think it's a bottling factory a bit this side of it there used to be a bridge that went right across the railway out into Harvest Road - what was then g
oing to be Harvest Road and - er - the cows when we were - er - quite }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16482240\charrsid14891508 k}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
iddies - the cows used to come across the field and - er - put their heads over the - over the little railway bridge - over the little bridge as you went across - and they were the cows 
that were housed in Higgins - er - sheds - the man - the man would bring them out from the field and just take them round down past the shops and that shop was there then so that must be very old - really - Higgins Dairy and it's still a dairy shop too. I
t
's opposite where I go for my pension. It's still there. Yes, that shop must have been built - one of these days I'm going into the shop and ask - when I think of it - er - oh yes, I don't go up for my pension myself very often - which I haven't been up f
o
r a good long time now - er - um - my home help, Gladys, always gets it for me but I have had more than one thought of asking them what year Higgins Dairy was opened. How many years that shops been standing because I know that when we used to go - I told 
y
ou I think about going up into Shirland Road for milk - er - and when we didn't go there we used to go up to - we used to go to Sutlands first at one time and then at another time we would go to Higgins - er - and fetch milk for the skimmed milk. That's -
 
er - and that was how we came to know - um - oh, I know - was going to tell you that we had the buttercups on the one side - we used to go over to Willesden to fetch eggs with mother - to fetch eggs to sit the hens on - when we were - yes, when we used to
 have chickens on - we used to have chickens on that one side of the - of the garden - not many - about four perhaps half a dozen - not so many.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did you take part in any sports?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Not when - not a great deal. 'Cos see I wasn't all that strong and -
 until I was turned ten - oh no. And I don't know - George did and my brother Frank did - Frank was - er - well he was in - my brother Frank was one of the original - er - I'm not certain that he was the first meeting but I know that the two men whose nam
e
's familiar to me - the brothers named Wallington - who were the instigators of Queens Park Rangers and they used to hold their meetings - these two boys lived in Third Avenue - they were friends of Frank and they used to hold their little meetings in - w
e
ll what is now Green Patch - but in Lansfield Street in what was called St Jude's Hall. Not to be confused with St Jude's Institute because that's round here - that's where the club's - the - er - the Tuesday club is kept - but no - the original St Judes 
H
all that was round there and that's where they used to hold their meetings at the first start off and that was really started right from St Judes Church boys - er - and these two brother Wallington were the - er - I believe were the actual starters of it 
-
 if they were not the actual starters they were there at the time that Queens Park Rangers was - was started because Frank was in it - I know Frank was in it. Oh yes, it is - oh yes, it belongs - it did belong to Queens Park estate right and proper. Oh ye
s, they were quite - they were estate boys - oh yes - they were right in the neighbourhood in those days. But when you tell people that they - they -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 They don't believe you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh no, they - they look at you and wonder where your - er - coming or g
oing - you see. It's quite all right I know all about it. And then - er - after the Rangers Frank joined up with the Queens Park Harriers and he did it really unbeknown to my dad and he used to race a good deal in Paddington recreation ground with the har
riers and dad got to know it - dad would be at - on the - on the railway at the time because it was one of his booking clerks that saw him and he couldn't make out why Frank was going so thin - before he was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid16328850 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508  this one - why he was getting so thin and
 he - he was all right - in good health and that - but he seemed very thin - dad didn't like the look of it quite and he'd spoken to the doctor about it and he said all right well he said bring him up - send him up to me I'll see what's the matter with hi
m
 and of course he was a young man out at work - he wasn't a kid at school - oh no - he was a young man out at work and - er - at all events this man happened to be standing round in the circle - and he saw Frank going to these - er - running - on more tha
n
 once occasion running with the harriers and he said to dad something about it - did you know Frank was - er - oh Frank did well in the harriers or something. Dad said I didn't know he belonged to the harriers. Oh well, he said, you go up one Saturday or 
c
ertain time - see you'll fine - you'll see him up there. And of course when dad went up and Frank caught sight of his father - he didn't run and he never ran for the harriers after that. It was - it was - er - it really was not doing him any good - he was
 
getting too thin, you see, was a case of getting thin and agile oh yes, all right, but when you were getting too thin and - er - it wasn't doing you any good - he thought it was time to stop and he - of course his excuse was that he liked to run with the 
o
thers and all the rest of it but right until the day Frank died he kept up with the harriers. He used to watch them, ooh - I was going to say he would do now if he was alive, I dare say. Right until he died. That when he died they sent him a most beautifu
l
 wreath to his home - you know - they were living in Mount Street and - er - they said for an old friend because he kept up with them and used to go there and watch the men play - sons of the men that he used to know and that - they'd all meet together th
ere. 'Course he was - he was quite a - he was - he was the only racing one in the family and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did you go to any theatres, concerts, music-halls, cinemas while you were still at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 No. No. No. No, we never went into anything that was - I don't think I ever went into a theatre 'til I was about twenty or more.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did your parents give you any pocket money?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh well, yes. You couldn't get on with - you couldn't get on very far without. I - I don't know what I had - I couldn't tell you
 now. I couldn't tell you - but I know what I earned - that when I started work about the first or at least the second job that I had was in waistcoat making and I had four shillings a week. And out of that I'd got railway fare - at least, I got out of th
at, but dad had to pay my railway fare - had to go to Baker Street.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 When you were at school do you remember any pocket money?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh, I expect so. It's quite likely that I had to have pocket money to get me to go to school because I - er - being - er
 - delicate and having to take cod liver oil - and not cod liver oil and malt either - it was cod liver oil plain and simple with - er - orange juice top and bottom of it - as I went to school and then another dose at dinner time and another dose in the e
vening well - I think I wanted something sweet to - to - push it down a bit.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
If your mother was ill or confined to bed how did she manage? Do you remember what happened - you didn't have any younger brothers and sisters so you wouldn't.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 No, I di
dn't have any younger brothers and sisters. No, I expect if mother was ill my - well between the - between the family I don't know that mother was until practically the last. And then of course it came to Nellie and myself to look after her. And she was p
retty good in - er - what tummy trouble she did have really was more or less the old fashioned type of indigestion you'd call it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did your parents have any relatives living nearby?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - well, not immediately near. No. Not immediately near. No, I think most of our relations were - were country people.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 How much did you see of them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
The country people? Oh well, they used to make this their home if they wanted to come to London and - anybody come to London - go to aunties - oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 You'd see them a few times a year would you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh yes, oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did you go and visit them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Yes. Oh yes, we would go and visit them. Especially mother's relations - I don't know that we did dad's so much.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did your parents have friends that you would visit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Well, yes, plenty of friends coming in and out.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 They'd come here to visit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh yes, yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And did they share the same friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh well, yes. I don't know that mother did so much - er - had - mother had one par
ticular lady friend who lived in the next street. Yes, Mrs Smith was an old lady that lived just in the next street here and - until she died - I don't know which died first - she or mother - I couldn't tell you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Where did they used to meet?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh 
she would come over - she would come round - come round the houses but - er - when I wanted to go over to Mrs Smiths to play with her daughter I used to go over the wall - yes - go over the wall.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did your father have any friends of his own - special friends of his own?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Well, I don't know about special - we were all - we were all friendly - all friends together they were - oh - oh Metropolitan Railway friends - of dads that came now and again and that and - er - I don't know - unless he was ill - 
that any of his Forresters friends came much to the house.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 But were friends ever invited to the house formally?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Well, I suppose so really - mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Any special occasions?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh yes, oh any special occasion - oh yes, yes. Then you were well away.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Would you say that the friends invited in were usually your mothers friends or your fathers friends?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh both - both - both together - yes. There was no secrets in our family.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And friends came in casually without an invitation?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh yes, without invitation very often.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Neighbours though - you tell me that neighbours ......
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Not so much the neighbours - no. Oh no we weren't - er - we weren't interested with - er - with neighbours popping along - er - that - er - what neighbours we did have were very good and very friendly in our older days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did your parents ever go out to visit friends or neighbours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Well, I don't know about neighbours - but friends - I don't know that we had all that number of friends - er - outside.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 People often tell us that in those days people made their won amusements.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 We made our own amusements.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 What do you think your parents did when they got together with their friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Dad might play a game of cards - oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did they make music?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - they might have done - yes, they might - he might take his concertina - I told you he'd got a concertina - he might take that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 When they came here did he play the harmonium?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 He would play - oh yes, he would play the harmonium and he would play his concertina - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 While your father and his friends were playing cards what would your mother do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh - she'd be inside darning the socks I expect - more than likely. Or doing a bit of ironing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Many people divi
de society into different social classes or groups - in that time before 1918 did you think of some people belonging to one class and some to another.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Well, yes. Not very much really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 What were the different ones?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - there was - well the
 people that had the money didn't want to know those that hadn't got it. Very often. Yes - I had - er - many instances of that - of folks that belonged to the church. They were just a little clique together and they knew each other and they were - er - we
ll very friendly but if you don't - just weren't in that party - er - you used to stay outside the door. Still that didn't bother me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 What sort of classes in the country do you think there were in general?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Well, people that had a bit more money t
han other people didn't what to know the - those who was - who were a little less fortunate. Or - or if - or in other words who didn't want to spend their money that way, you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Which sort of group would you say you belonged to yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Well,
 you wouldn't call us exactly middle class - we were - we would be the upper working class - and upper working class - oh yes, definitely.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 There would be the working class?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 There would be the working class then the lower - then the lower paid working class - oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And the upper working class and then there would be the middle class?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
The middle class. Yes - er - as I say the middle class people as they would call themselves would be a little bit - er - just a bit above you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And what would you call the ones above them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Above them, I don't know. Never thought about them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 What sort of people belonged to the same class as yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Well, people whose parents would be working in much about the same - er - yes. All sor
ts of things - business people or carpenters or - er - working - working class people.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Can you remember being brought up to treat people of one sort differently from another? Like were you ever told to curtsy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Show respect in some way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Well, no, I don't know that we came up against anyone that - that we would need to do -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Was there anyone you called Sir or Master or Madam?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Well, not until you were cut to work - then you had to call them Sir - it was Sir then all right
 - the boss. Or maybe - if - if - if you were in dressmaking - oh yes, we had - we had Madam all right - when I was in dressmaking.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Do you remember anyone showing respect of this kind to your parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Well, I don't know as I do, actually, not ......
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Who were considered the most important people in this district?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Well, mostly the people that went to church. And they were people who, in those days, if you went to church well then you were regarded as someone of - er - certain amount of importance - because ......
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 You mean church rather than chapel do you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Well, church or chapel - oh no, no, no - to chapel. To - er - to people who really looked to the serious side of life went to church or chapel or Salvation Army or for - churc
h army we had church army neighbours next door - who I knew for some time and - er - you would consider then that they were people that you would - er - deal with and have a good deal of conversation in common with really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 What about the shopkeepers - who did they associate with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Our shopkeepers - well, I couldn't tell you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And clergy and teachers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Um - well, er - well our - our church Ministers - Ministers that we had of course at the Congregational - er - well, they were always very 
nice to everybody - oh yes, yes. But you'd be the - the people with the money or the people who hadn't got so much money.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And teachers - did they - who did they associate with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Who do you mean? School teachers? Well, I only know of one school te
acher that I had a great deal of - er - feeling and liking for - she was a Miss Everton - when I was in Droop Street school and I was very fond of her and she was very fond of my mother and she used - she lived Empress Avenue with her mother until she was
 }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16328850 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508  - well at least after she was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16328850 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508  for that matter, see 'til her mother died - and - er - she used to come round here on her way home - walk home with - oh two or three of us hanging on her arm and come in and have a cup of tea - mother knew jus
t what time we would be home and there'd be a cup of tea and a piece of cake - home made cake - and this with Miss Emerson - and afterwards she became a Mrs Harris and - er - oh yes, and she was very friendly - not only with me but with the girls - oh yes
, no - there was no favour}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16482240\charrsid14891508 itism. Oh no, there was no favou}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 ritism.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And no class distinction?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh no, no. No class distinction at all - but she was ......
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did you ever notice anything about farmers - who they associated with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Farmers? No, I never had much to do with farmers.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And employers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Well, they would only be the - in what way employers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 People who employed you for instance - who would they mix with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Well, all depends on which job it was - that does really, in a
 way, yes. Well, now - er - yes - I'm afraid I changed my jobs so many times one way and another - er -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Was there any social difference between the people who went to church and the people who went to chapel?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - not a great deal - no. Er - the
re was at first - when we first came here - there was a certain distinction between the Church of England. Er - that was I think due to the - er - Vicar of St Judes. St Judes was a very low church and the Vicar there I think thought that everyone ought to
 
go to his church. Well, when the Congregational Minister came to Queens Park my - 'course I was born - I was sort of bred and born in Church of England - I was christened in - er - Church of England and my father and mother used to go to Church of England
 
before we came to London you see. But when we came to London the - er - mother didn't care about St Judes and she didn't care about listening to the - the old Vicar and it finished up that my sister was going there to Sunday school and I suppose I was too
 
but it was Nellie that the query was with and she got a little girl friend that went to school with her - that she went to school with - er - and this child had not been christened. And Nellie wanted her to go to Sunday school with her to St Judes and - o
h
 no, said Mr - Mr Sidney Bott - oh no, he couldn't have her in the Sunday school because she hadn't been christened. So Nellie came home weeping that - er - whatever the girls name was couldn't go to Sunday school with her because they'd been to - er - an
d
 had been into the church - er - church - er - Congregational and that but - er - she couldn't go - she couldn't go to Church of England to St Judes because she hadn't been christened. So my dad said oh, like that is it, well, common come with me. So with
 
these two girls and himself he goes round to see Mr Sidney Bott. See, we've come to live in this district and my daughter wants to go to your Sunday school. Oh very good, yes, very good, quite good, yes, but you didn't ask me one question. What's that? Ha
d
 she been christened. And he looked. Dad said - because this other little girl - you have told - er - them - that that child cannot come to your Sunday school because she hasn't been christened. Oh no, no, he said, I couldn't have any children that haven'
t
 - my children must all be christened before they join our Sunday school. Dad said, very good then, thank you, Mr Bott in future he said, my daughter will go with her little friend and they'll join - join in the Sunday school at Queens Park Congregational
 
Church. From henceforth on. And they did. And Nell - Alfred was the only one that used to ever go to St Judes. The eldest - my eldest brother. No, Nellie hung on and my sister Nell - when that church was built - her son found this out a little while ago -
 
a few years back - Nellie collected the most money to buy the most bricks of any child in the Sunday school and - er - when Stanley saw it - Eliza Ellen Morris - why he said that's my mum. Oh good lor'. And then they were - were looking through some of th
e
 records belonging to the church - he said that was my old mum, I must tell her that when I got home and so he came in straight away and told her. And she said yes, I know I did, she said, I collected the most money and I don't know what she got in return
 for it - I couldn't tell you.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Was there any friction between the church and the chapel?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Er - I don't know there was any friction but I - don't know that there was a great deal of love lost - not with that particular man. Because he was - um - a
lthough he was very low church - but he was not - um - er - he wasn't - I don't say prejudiced - but he just - er - I don't think he ever associated with Queens Park. And the other church - St Johns up at Kensal Green - corner of Kilburn Lane and harrow R
o
ad - that was a higher church altogether and the further on it went the higher up it went. That is very high church. As far as I know - I haven't been in it for a good many years but - r - it is - but - er - there was that - I don't say that there was any
 
prejudice but they just didn't - er - if you went to one you went to one you stuck to it you see. And then of course we had a Baptist church at the top of Gilbert Street, well then that we did associate with and - er - well the place it is now - er - ware
h
ouse - used to be a primitive Methodist church - one of the old fashioned Primitive Methodists - what they called the Bible thumpers - er - sometimes the children used to go round there - used to all go round there - er - to Lantern Services. They would h
a
ve a lantern service in the church or else in the class room down below for the children and that but we used to go round there you see. But - er - then we had another little church that - well what we call Hoepoors - just this last few years been rebuilt
 
and - and to this day I couldn't tell you what the actual religion of it is - no. We never could seem to fathom quite what it is - er - their certainly not Jehovah Witnesses - oh no, long way off that. Er - but whether - and they're not Methodist - they m
ight be of the old fashioned Plymouth Brethren but - er - oh I have been to this - er - just - er - well, a little sort of hope Hall and it was just an ordinary little Sunday turn.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did all the people in the working class have the same standard of living - or would you say there were differences?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
The seem - no, just the - I should say - well, as I said, er - those of us that considered ourselves - well - I don't say above everybody else but - er - you were all of a like.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 What about the lower working class?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh we only had a few - very, very few. I think - they - they - well they would be a bit lower - oh yes, but I don't think we had many.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 I remember you told me about a little girl who didn't have any shoes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh yes, they, were -
 oh that was not in this neighbourhood - that was over the bridge - oh yes. Oh yes, well that was a lower class neighbourhood altogether. Er - well I suppose it's altered a good deal now but where they housed these people I couldn't tell you. Er - over in
 Kensal Road - over in that part really belongs to Kensington - over the ha'penny - what we call the ha'penny bridge. Belongs to Kensington.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Do you think that one group felt itself superior to the rest?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - well yes, yes, up to a point, yes. And
 then we had another seat - or section of people that were down the Harrow Road - over what we called Loch bridge - it was just past Paddington Hospital - you know where Paddington Hospital is - just on the brew of that hill - you that - on ei}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16482240\charrsid14891508 ther side now a tall block of f}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16482240\charrsid14891508 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
ts aren't there. Well, immediately you got over the - that you got over the bridge the slope of the bridge you had a very low quarter on that side - Brindly Street - you had - er - Clarendon Street - Winchester Street - Celia Street - o
h and I couldn't tell you the names of the others that were at the back - I never went down any of those back turnings - but those turnings - until you got right to the level of what is now Royal Oak Station - out in the Harrow Road - you wouldn't know it
 
- that being - it being - er - told to you, but all down to that part were the lower class all together - very lower class - working class. They would be on the same level as the other people over in Kensal Road - yes - very much lower class of people - a
lthough - er - now and again you would meet people that were quite nice but they lived under very hunched up conditions. Oh yes, in many, many cases.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Do you remember a distinction of this kind between craftsmen and labourers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh yes, oh yes. The
re would be a distinction. Yes, a craftsman was a craftsman and he - he let you know it but - er - a labourer would be a man who - well, say a dustman as it was then - the old dustman that would - er - come with the van - the dustcart and his gee-gee and 
h
e'd go up the steps and he'd empty your dustbin - no, it wouldn't be your dustbin - it would be a basket - they would come through the house and where my coal cellar is now used to be - er - was a brick built coal cellar - er - dustbin and they would lift
 it up and take the dust through. But they were considered - they were lower paid - very much lower paid. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12342286\charrsid14891508 Now}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
 the people that I lived with - er - in Bravington Road before I came to live with Nellie. Er - Mr Bonnington's father was a dustman and he used to 
say how nice it was to come round some of the streets and get a bit of social - people would be sociable with you - even though you were the dustman you see - oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 They lived differently?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 They did - their life was quite different - oh yes. Er - in fact - going over the bridge - when - er - I told you about the children}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12342286\charrsid14891508 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
s outings and - and - er - parties that we had - well, in many, many cases we were not allowed - although we were grown up women - we were not allowed - when I say not allowed i
t wasn't considered right for you to go into some of those lower class places with your tickets for the children}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12342286\charrsid14891508 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
s parties - but our business - belonging to the church would take them - because the chances were if you were a stranger unless you'd got a Sal
vation Army bonnet on you might get something thrown out the top floor window instead of them emptying down the lavatory they'd throw it out the window.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And did this actually - this sort of thing happen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Well, well, oh I know - so the story goes
 - I - and I think it was true - oh yes, I believe it was true at times if you were a complete stranger or if you looked a bit different - er - you looked a bit better off than what they did. Oh yes I believe that was the case really - both over there and
 
over in Kensal Road. Yes. They were very, very rough some of the people, mm, I don't say they weren't honest they might have been honest - oh yes - I wouldn't take a persons character away - they might have been honest but they - know and considered thems
elves in a - a far lower grade than what you did. Because when you finished up with these children}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12342286\charrsid14891508 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
s tea and outings and all the rest of it - er - well, during the war - in the first war - you found that many of those children's parents - the father and brothers would be away in the war - mother hadn't got them to keep - mother would be working on \{
ILLEGIBLE\} - good luck to her - and all the daughters would be working on something that they could earn a good wage at where the majority of us - or many of us -
 er - were people who didn't earn a big wage - I know I was only earning about sixteen or seventeen shillings a week as a dressmaking for Derry and Thoms during that time - during 1914 to 1917 - no, no no - 19 - no wait a minute - 1912 to 1915, I was earn
ing about sixteen to seventeen shillings a week as a dressmaker - I was not - our first hand only had a pound a week. And so then we decided then that these munition people were earning more and didn't need the amount of help - so we packed up children}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12342286\charrsid14891508 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 s teas and dinners and parties.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did your mother and father have the same attitude to people belonging to different classes or group?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh yes, oh yes, yes. Yes they were all - everything was just - just homely and ...
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Do you think your mother saw herself as belonging to a particular social class?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Not all that much - no. Oh no. She was quite - I don't say that she made a great deal of fuse with many of they people in the immediate neighbourhood, but - er - she was very much liked. Very, very much liked - until - right until she died.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Was it possible in those days to move from one class to another?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Well, if you were getting up in the world a bit then of course you did. And you moved away then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Can you remember anyone who did?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Oh yes, we had several people in this street - yes. Several of our folks who got a better job - moved away - oh yes. Didn't come back anywhere near to see you. Oh - went up in the world - oh yes, many people really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Do you remember anyone being described as a real gentleman or a real lady?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Well, no - well - not in the average people - no. Now there was one lady that I did associate with who was very kind on Paddington - she was on Paddington Borough council and she lived at Paddington - some
where by Paddington station. She was a lady of quality - she was a Miss Katherine Bruce and if I'm not out of the question I think that the nursery at the top of Albert Street is named after her - I believe that children's nursery is name after her - as M
i
ss Matherine Bruce - I believe that's what it's called. It's either Katherine or it's Katherine Bruce Center. Er - and she was very kind - er - and always sent me a pound for our childrens outing right until our children - until we packed up doing our chi
ldren}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12342286\charrsid14891508 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 s outing - and she was quite a lady - oh she was a sweet person very, very nice.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Do you remember seeing a policeman round where you lived?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Policeman? Policeman? Yes, they always come round here. It's only just of late years that we haven't had our policeman.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 What did you think of him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 He was - they're a novelty when you see one now. Say what do you come for - do you want me?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 What did you thing of him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Well, I, I .....
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 When you were naughty did your mother ever say I'll call a policeman?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Oh, I don't know that she ever did that but - er - well you always - you know - the boys and the girls - I must say that - as far as I remember - as youngsters - er - you had a certain amount of respect for the policeman. You k
now what the policeman's duties were and I'm not going to say as - as life went on - whether - whether the boys got a ball that they shouldn't be playing with - that they didn't just lose that ball somewhere or other in the meantime if they saw a policema
n coming but that wasn't right - er - in my very much younger days - oh no. We used to play with our ball and if by chance a child had an accident and the ball went through somebody's window well father paid for it. It was put in and father paid for it.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 How do you think he treated people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Our policeman. Well I think that they - well I don't know that I think I - he looked - looked upon it as his duty to look after the welfare of the neighbours - of the people. If there was any trouble well - a pol
iceman was always - would always be on the spot - he wasn't far away. We had a bit of trouble here while I was away. Family up this street.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Was your home rented?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Yes, this one - oh yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did you see anything of your landlord?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er 
- well it wasn't rented from a .. ours was not rented from a landlord it was rented from a company - it was the artisans company you see and your - er - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12342286\charrsid14891508 r}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 ent man came from the rent office wherever it was - mostly in the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12342286\charrsid14891508 N}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 arrow Road and ....
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 What were they like as landlords?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Oh, as the company? Well - er - the artisans company you see you paid for your - in your rent - you paid for all normal repairs if you wanted anything done - if you wanted a fireplace set in - a new fireplace set in or there's
 a chimney broken you fill up a form and that went up to the estate office because there was an office that I believe still there - at the top of - er - Albert Street - er - and they would take note of it - er - chimney stack - er - or chimney out of orde
r
 or chimney broken or gutters - guttering is bad and you would - er - the workmen would come down within a day or two and repair it - the same as they do now. That goes - that stands just as now. Oh yes - oh they're quite good - er - as the artisans but o
f
 course it belongs to Westminster now but - oh yes, yes all belongs to the council - but I suppose the Westminster - er - the artisans and general dwellings as they used to be called - er - I suppose they're all bought up I couldn't tell you. I couldn't t
ell you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Do you remember feeling that your parents had to struggle to make ends meet?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 No. I don't think they ever did really. Not in my lifetime. I don't know what happened before I was born.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And your father was never out of work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh, no, no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Nor did he have to get help from the Parish?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh good lord no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Were you given lessons by one of your parents or a tutor or governess?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh no. No. But dad - dad would always help me with my sums in the evenings - if I was
 a bit stuck and - er - if I was - you know - bit - thinking of what I hadn't done then I went to bed with that on my mind - what would very often happen you'd see me sitting an hour or two afterwards on the stairs working out my sums on my fingers. Dad'd
 
say here listen - he says there's that girl on the now come along, up to bed - and I'm still talking about my sums - and up to bed - he'd settle me into bed - goodnight - give me a kiss goodnight. I'd go off to sleep - forget - the next morning he'd say n
ow what was the matter with that sum you couldn't do last night. Oh I don't know dad. But I suppose I did it. You did it sitting on the stairs. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 So he was able to help you quite a lot?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Yes, he did with his - yes - but - er - when I was ill
 - er - when I was between eight and nine and I had these abscesses I think I told you about - er - I think that perhaps as I see things now - if dad had - er - if they had arranged at the school that dad put me through what they'd been doing the day befo
r
e at the - in the school - in Droop Street school - that - er - I should have picked up things that I otherwise lost so that I had to go back into the sixth standard again - when I got my sixth standard certificate it was either go to the Holborn Street s
c
hool and take a chance or - er - go back into the sixth standard again and - er it was decided that I should do better if I went through the sixth standard again because I wasn't proficient - sufficient you see to go really to go to the seventh standard s
o
 when I went to - to the Holborn Street which was our finishing school instead of going into the seventh standard then I went into the X seventh. Because I was that twelve months older and I went into the X seventh. Er - but I think if we'd have - if I'd 
have had the bit of schooling in the evening - perhaps it was thought that I wasn't well enough - because I was ill - I really was ill - oh yes - with the abssesses - that wasn't in this house - it was in the next.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Because in those days it was very serious wasn't it?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Oh yes because - oh it hung like - great big lumps and the doctor wouldn't have them lanced from the inside - he wouldn't let me go to the hospital and have them lanced - said no he was going to cure me and they - there's this one fi
lled up - that one was - er - er - coming through - great loosely plastered round your head-horrible. Week in and week out.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 How old were you when you first went to school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Now I don't think I went to school at Hanwell - well I must have done - o
h yes, because I was six and half when we come up here so I must have done because we would go to school in the ordinary way at five, so I expect I did twelve months at - er - Hanwell - er - Hanwell - um - church school where the others went to and then I
 
came into Droop street because I didn't go into the infants - so possibly I was in the infants there at Hanwell and then when I came up to here - up to Queens Park I went straight into the first standard. 'Cos I can always remember those were - at least I
 
was looking at them the other day - when I passed there on Wednesday - I said that was the room I was first in when I came to Droop Street school - I said to the lady that was sitting next to me. She said - you remember. I said of course I remembered - I 
said and I remember the teacher I had too - it was Miss Emerson - oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Of course these people were very important in your lives weren't they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh yes, they were, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Can you remember what time you went to school in the morning and what time you came home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Nine o'clock.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 This was when you first started school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Oh yes, yes. Yes, well, when we would go to - when I would go to Droop Street and you would hear that old bell ringing and I hear it now sometimes - well, when they start - they'll be starting next week - you can hear that tell go just before nine.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And what time did you come home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - now we did longer hours - then - I think it was half past four. Well, nine to twelve - it would be nine 'til twelve and then 
we went back at two 'til half past four - yes, I think that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Do you remember what time it was when you were at Hanwell?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - no, I wouldn't remember much of that - I don't remember much of - er - of there at Hanwell - not all that amount
. Although as I told you the other day, I - I remembered the house when I saw it a few weeks back. Stanley was amazed when I told him that. I said you know Bessie took me down to - er - to St Marks Road. He said well I couldn't find that St Marks Road whe
n
 I was looking - when I was round that way the other day with the car. I said you jolly well didn't look far - I said if you turned - taken the turnings - there's May - I said if you'd taken the turnings that I told you - you'd have found out where it was
.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 You've already told me it was a church school you went to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh yes, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 This one here's a church school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 No, this is council school. This was - um - well it became council - it all went council after - oh what did we used to
 call it - a board school. Board school - yes, that's it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And it was a day school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Day school - yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Was it mixed - boys and girls?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 No. No, it was the girls downstairs and boys up - oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 You were kept separate?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Yes, well - er - our training - with our training we were all - um - girls down - stairs and boys up.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 You didn't mix at play times?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 No, I think our playground - no, I think the girls had the back - playground at the back - now they have half of this - i
n fact I don't know what they do actually at there now. I couldn't tell you what they do because it might be a mixed school even now. Quite likely.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 How long did it take you to get there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 About five minutes I dare say - running.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Who went with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Well, no one - no one with us no. When I was - when I - well, when I'd be six or seven - you know - I - I'd go to school on my own - and on the foggy - er - you got foggy days when you couldn't see the other side of the street and didn't know 
whether the other side of the street was a field or whether it was - or whether it was houses. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11211013\charrsid14891508 W}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 e did have some smokey fogs.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Where did you have your mid-day meal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Home. I came home from school. Yes, and when I came home from school I got dosed u
p for a long time with - er - cod liver oil. When I went to school I had - I'd had me dose of cod liver oil - oh for quite a long time. Horrible stuff.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 What did you think of school - did you like it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh - I liked my school - I liked Droop Street
 school - yes - very much - yes. We had a little person was - that was our governess and she always used to take the French lesson as we got older - she was always took our - Miss Burton. She used to take the French - the French lesson, but I just hated t
hat old French - give me English I can get on with it but give me French and I can't get on with that. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 How did you feel about the teachers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 The teachers were all very nice. Yes. We had ones - one was a Mrs Walker, one was a Mrs Bedford - I think they were both - would both be }
{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16328850 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
 ladies - by being a Mrs - and then there was Miss Emerson - Mrs Harris as she became. But - er - they were always very good. And it's not long ago that I was talking to someone that apparently was in the school a 
little bit younger than myself but that was in the school at the same time as I was. But she would be in the younger class coming up you see - at Droop Street - oh yes. But there are not many of the old ones left now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did the teachers emphasise certain things as being important in life - such as manners?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
I don't - manners? Oh well, yes, oh yes. If you didn't have behave yourself you went into the governors. You knew what the governors meant - the second time into the governors it meant the cane. 
But - er - unless you were - had done something that - er - well wasn't just - much - but .....
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And tidiness - did they emphasis tidiness?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Well, I suppose so - about as - as they would naturally.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And punctuality?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh yes. Oh yes, yes. We used to - got to be in to school on time. Run like billy-o.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 How about ways of speaking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
In the way of speaking? Well yes, of course, it would be - what - looked upon now as old fashioned but - er - well, we always - we were taught to behave ourselves always and to be truthful and they got the truth out of us all right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 If you did something the teachers disapproved of what would happen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh I don't know - I expect you got the cane then. Well, you were warned quite possibly, I - I wouldn't know - that's .....
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Would the girls be treated the same as the boys?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
I wouldn't know - no the boys were upstairs. I apparently was there part of the time with my brother 'til - George - George would be upstairs because I was thinking yeste
rday that he didn't leave Droop Street until he was twelve - he was twelve rather when he left Droop Street - I was two years younger so I'd be ten so I had then about three years in Droop Street with him but that was when he left - I think I told you tha
t
 little bit about the - um - about him going to what was called Queens Park College - I think I told you about that. I know I've got to talk to the - I've got to talk to Mr Cummins or to the Mayor of Westminster about that little lot - when he comes - if 
I
'm lucky enough that he comes along sometime I'm hoping to see him because I want to show him that book and I don't want that book in the condition that it's in - er - to go out from the house - no. Because I must get Suey my pal that's been in the bookbi
nding trade - er - to try and do something with it for me - she did say she would some time ago but it didn't get done but that book must be attended to.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did your parents show an interest in your school work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh yes. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did they ask what you did at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Oh yes, I expect so, you know, and say - most parents that had got a bit of time 'cos dad was - dad was particular about his children - er - having a good - reasonably good education otherwise he wouldn't have sent the two boys t
o the better class school because the school that the two elder boys went to - er - Alfred and Frank - er - was Westlands schools which was on the level of our - er - Grammar schools would be today.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did your parents visit the school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Well, that 
I couldn't tell you. I don't know that they ever had occasion to. I couldn't say that they ever had occasion to - mother - if so it would be mother - it wouldn't be dad. Would be mother - but I don't know that she ever had occasion to. I was - except at t
h
e time when it was the change over that I should stay back to Droop Street because I'd been ill you see, she probably was asked to come and see then, oh yes, quite likely, come and see the governors because you see they wouldn't put me back into that clas
s a second time without consulting your parents - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did they meet the teachers otherwise do you know?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Er - only the one - the one - Miss - er - Miss Emerson - the one that used to come and have a cup of tea with us before she went home. She was very nice - expect she's gone long before now - I don't know what became of her in the finish.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did the other children come from similar types of homes to your own?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh yes, yes. As far as I know - er - as far as I know we were all - nice - what 
we would call respectable - young people - I don't know that we had any of the rough or - no I don't think we did - not as far as I remember Droop Street school.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did the teachers single out some children for different treatment from the others?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - that I don't know. No, there was never - you weren't consulted on anything really much.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 You didn't notice them sort of making more of one child than another or less?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh no, I don't think so. No, I think we were all - oh no, no. So long as 
we all behaved ourselves and that I think we were all treated on a level - oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Were there any gangs or groups in the school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 No, not that I know of. No. I think we all trooped in - trooped out - er - at playtime and then we'd go back again a
nd come off at dinner time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Were some children left out of things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 No, I don't think so. I think not. Not for any reason.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And then you went to another school after?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Yes, went to Beethoven - one of the - now it is a training school at 
the present time - they've made a training school of it for the - er - students - students - more or less a miniature training college - well, there's more - I think it's more commercial - mm. In - er - sort of Technical - mm - er - on a small scale becau
se I don't think there's many of them there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 How old were you when you went there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Well, I'd be about thirteen I suppose - thirteen - and I did about twelve months - twelve - thirteen I suppose round about that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And what were the hours there - were they the same?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh yes. Same - oh yes, they were all the same.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And what was this sort of school called?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11211013\charrsid14891508 Beeth}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 oven school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And was it a board school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh yes, it was just the same - it was the same as Droop Street but there
 was just a little bit higher - the classes went up a little bit higher. You see. Er - and there - er - there were just that much in advance of Droop Street by reason of the fact that on the walls of that school until the last few years - were hung the ho
n
ours board - an honours board and they'd go right the way round the school they did - went right round the school on the walls and anybody listening to that would corroborate what I'm telling you. You - all those for that year - what they'd done and what 
t
heir qualifications were - I know one - I can remember the name of one boy - I can't pick up the others for the moment - but I remember was the nephew of one of the teachers - he was Willie Richardson and I can see that boys name in gilt letters up there 
w
hen he'd gone up from the X seventh and finished his name was on the honours board. And it's only a few years ago that those boards were taken down. When my sister and I went round there before Nellie died - it would be about the twelve months before Nell
 died 'cos I know our next door neighbour took us - Robert - er - to do our voting - I said lets go and have a look at the old school because Nellie used to work there - she worked there for twenty years you see - er -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 How did you get to Beethoven school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh the same as Droop Street - just round the corner - about five minutes walk.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And you went there how long?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Beethoven Street - oh I was fourteen - thirteen fourteen.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And where did you have your mid-day meal then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 My meal - yes - always come home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 What did you think of this school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Well, of course it was better than Droop Street. Oh what I was going to - what I was telling you about the honours board they were there until - um - the last time as I said when my sist
er and I went round to do our voting and we went in to have a look at the old school and looked up - said to the caretaker what have you done with the honours boards? Oh, he said they scrapped them years - some years ago. I said, scrapped them what did th
e
y do - where did they put them. Oh yes said, scrapped them. I said - ooh I think some of those young men and the girls that must be getting older that were at Beethoven at that time - I expect - er - to know they'd gone up in flames I'd expect there'd hav
e
 been some trouble about it. Yes, they should have kept them - the school was there and those honour boards should never have been scrapped. What on earth - of course it's used as a training school but that doesn't matter - let them be up there - because 
- er - I think Beethoven Street was opened before Droop Street - I'm not sure but I think that was the - I thought I could hear the old school bell going - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 How did you feel about the teachers there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh our teachers were quite good - we had all men teachers. They were all men teachers there - during that twelve months.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Was this mixed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Er - yes. Yes, it was - we were mixed - yes, boys and girls to each - er - seat. Oh yes, yes. We had the boys with us. I don't know anything special about them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 How did you feel about the teachers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh our teachers were all right. I think they only actually - there goes my postman - how letters have you brought me this time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did the teachers at Beethoven Street emphasise things that were important in life like manners, tidiness?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Well, well, yes I think they would because you see you were all just that bit older - leaving school - and I think you then had things drilled into you - er - yes, - er - punctuality and what you looked forwar
d to when you started out to work because you see you would start at - in our time you would start work practically as soon as you - as soon as you finished school - at that - er - summer session - you would finish and you would get into a job or - if you
 
went into work straight away, but I think I didn't - I think - I'm almost sure that the first year - if not the two - first winters - that I was at home with mother. You know, helping mother and that - because they didn't bother with me - er - getting a j
ob immediately because I know I must have been about sixteen - um - when I got a - when I was put into a job which was waistcoat making - off Baker Street - which - for which I got the noble sum of four bob a week.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 If you did something the teachers disapproved of there what would happen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Oh I think you went up to the headmaster then. Er - and got just told off - er I forget who our headmaster was at that time because I think old Mr Tait had left couldn't tell you who the headmaster was then - but 
at any rate I remember there was a gallery which I believe is still there, where he would be and the school choir, the violins and so on up there in the morning - for the morning session - and - er - anything happened in the meantime - during the morning 
y
ou had to go upstairs or you thought that was tragic - but I never had to go upstairs. I never went up to the headmasters room at all. And - er - had no occasion for the length of time I was there - you see I would only be there a little over the twelve m
onths.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Were the girls treated the same as the boys?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh yes. Yes, yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And punished the same?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh, I expect so. Quite possible. I think you were old enough - old enough then that you - well you tried to behave yourself I think as w
ell as - there wasn't the hanky-panky that there had been of late years with the boys and the girls - oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did your parents show an interest in your work at Beethoven street?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Well, I suppose - they did much about the same as they did at Droop Street really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Do you remember them visiting that school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 No, they didn't - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Or meeting the teachers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Once I went to - no - once I went to Droop - er - Beethoven I think they just took a little bit of the - about the twelve months 
and then I was finished. Er because I know that I - I know that - um - I think I went to stay with my cousin at Hampstead for about a month when she was - er - parlourmaid to Frederick Hill I told you - that's Roland Hill's brother - er - and I think I we
n
t to stay with either with my cousin Tilly as we called her or else it was that Tilly had gone home - er - for this month and I stayed with the cook. I don't know which it was for the minute. Because I know it was - that was really the fact of me leaving 
s
chool because - er - a bit before the actual school holiday - because they knew that I would be finishing within a week or two you see and it was - er it was satisfactory then that I should finish to go and be with this person. I don't know which one it w
as - whether it was Tilly or - er - Jenny the cook that was - um - away for - er - for someone being ill. I don't know - that was me - the finish but - it was quite happy there - oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did the other children come from similar types of homes again?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Oh yes, yes. In fact, one or two of them were a little bit higher degree - er - in - er - in their schooling - oh yes - the one that I was thinking of - Wil}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13831216\charrsid14891508 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 ie Richardson - he was the - er - nephew of one of the teachers - he was - well, thought to be more intelligent - we'll put it - than - er - anything going you know his had was up first - you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did you notice the teachers there singling out children for special treatment?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 No, I don't think so. Oh no. No, they were just, no you just to
ok your twelve - er - yes - you were in the top class you see - no, you just took your treatment at school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Were there any gangs or groups in this school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 No, not that I know of. Not that I ever associated with any myself.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Were there any children that you know of left out of things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Oh, not that I know of - no. I think we were just an average class - er - what they did have of course at the Christmas time would be a play - special children would be in it of course - would be allocated 
for the parts that they could take and that for the play. This school play - just the nativity - you see. Er - the ones that were good at it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 They weren't chosen for any other reason?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 For no other reason, no, no, no, they would be ......
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And when you finally left school how old were you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Well, I'd be fifteen - or nearly fifteen - between fourteen and fifteen then where as I say I went up to Hampstead. I would be then between fourteen and fifteen. Must have been.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Would you have stayed longer if you'd had the opportunity?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - I don't think you had the opportunity. No, I think you just went straight on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Would you have liked to have stayed longer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - no, I don't know that I would. Because you see my mind was set on
 sewing because my sister was a dressmaker and I think I get the idea that I wanted - er to do a bit of sewing - oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did attend any evening classes afterwards?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 I didn't - but my sister did - Nellie 
did when she first - er - used to go to school - when she - you know - came from here - she - she - er - used to go to evening classes. Er - I think it was cooking - wouldn't be dressmaking - er - cooking I think - cookery classes, yes of course it was - 
i
t was the cookery class that was over at what is Mobile school now - secondary school and I believe that that kitchen is still there. If you looked in the front gates I think to the left - to the right rather - um - to the left is the school and to the ri
ght would be the - what used to be the cookery school. Oh yes, I remember going there for cookery - for cookery lessons - and
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 In the evening?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh no - during the school day and - yes - that would be either from Droop Street or Beethoven I don't kn
ow which at the moment and I know that we used to go for laundry work where you had to take collars - you had to take a collar to wash and then you were taught to - um - shine it, you know, glaze it - I've forgotten what you had to do with it, but I know 
i
t's not very long ago - er - oh well, in the first place I wanted - er - a round - what was called a round iron - a - a - round iron - a smooth - a smoothing - an iron that would be used for the - for the opening of seams underneath in velvet - in old - i
n
 the older days - as I got older and I remember buying that iron - a woman bought it for me rather - outside a pawnshop I think for about sixpence and it's not long ago - not above two years ago that I took that glazing iron over to my niece at Walthamsto
w
 for her doorstop - I told them that I'd got - they happened to speak about it and I said well when Stan's bringing me over at Christmas I said I'll bring that iron over for your door - front door-stop because their house is the front and the back well wh
e
n the dustman comes in there you've got to - er - when the dustman comes in there you've got to hold onto your back door and it's - I said look here I'll give you a door-stop because we've got this big thick piece of iron you see for ours and - er - I'll 
bring you my flat iron - er - my iron - not my flat iron but my - round iron and oh Alf was very pleased with it and he had it shone up and ......But that was my holiday. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Do you have any regrets about your education?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Do you think you benefited from attending school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
From - from attending school - yes - you'd - because you learnt - as you did in those days - you learnt - well, how things should be done and - when you went to cookery or when you went to - er - laundry or anyth
ing in that way as they did - used to - I don't know what they do now. I don't think the youngsters do that sort of thing now, at all. Certainly don't do the laundry part I don't suppose.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 While you were at school did you have a part time job or any means of earning a little regular money?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang1034\langfe1033\langnp1034\insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang1034\langfe1033\langnp1034\insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \lang1034\langfe1033\langnp1034\insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 No. No. No. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
No, I never earned anything. I didn't anything until I really started work and that was - um - well ...
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 What was your first full time job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 My first job was - act - as full time - the othe
r was only just occasionally - but the first full time job that I had was - er - waistcoat making.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And how did you get it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 I went to Baker Street station from Westbourne Park and from Baker Street station I walked round into High Street Marylebo
ne and I believe that the shop and house where I worked is still there. It comes on the corner of a little place like that - here's the three shops - one was Burketts the butchers - the next one was Home }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15409448 &}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508  Colonial and the next one was Krangs the bakers - 
a bakers - they had a shop there and a shop on this side of the road and then you went up George Street to a very big Catholic church - where they used to have some lovely weddings - we girls of course used to hurry out at dinner time and see these weddin
gs because the - their bride'd go in that door and she'd come out in South Street out the other door after the service - but - er - but I did about fifteen months I think.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And how did you get this job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 I don't know who got me onto that job - beca
use I was supposed to go as a dressmaker or - or training as a teacher. I don't know who put me into that job at all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 What exactly did you have to do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Learn waistcoat making - oh yes. Oh I can .....
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Were you allowed to start sewing right away?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Oh yes. You were taught mainly - er - because this lady had her - waistcoats came already cut out you see - they would be cut out by a tailor and then - er - the apprentices had to go with a black bag - er - to put - that they put the work in - I
 don't know what they called it now - they've got a name - and - er - they had to go down to Oxford Street - there were two or three shops that our firm - our lady wo}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4990543\charrsid14891508 
rked for - she was a Mrs. Groome}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508  - er - that she worked for and you had to go down - one w
ould go to one shop and one to the other - taking in what work was done - what had been done and pressed - that had to be carried on your arm in the - in this bag - then you came back with the next lot that were all - er - rolled up with the canvas and th
e lining and all that ready for you to bring back to the lady for - er - to be made up. And - er - it was all good work - one place was in Oxford Street and two I think were in Bond Street.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And you actually did some sewing though as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh yes.
 You were taught - you were taught in the sewing - oh yes, and you were taught as well as the hand sewing - because a lot of our work was hand sewn - er the finishing off at the edges was hand sewn and - er - yes - all the little stitches round the edge -
 
and then the button holes - but - oh all our buttonhole and I could tell you if you showed me a button hole now whether it's made by a dressmaker - I can tell you that's made by a dressmaker - that's not made by a tailor. Because a tailor starts - starts 
w
ork on a buttonhole in a different place to what a dressmaker does - if fact you work backwards - you go the other way round - when your working - when you're working a tailors button hole. Another thing of course - your button holes are cut out with - er
 - a clipper type of thing - er - it's got a knife in it that cuts through and it makes - pierces the hole that you work round when you're doing it - you start up there - a dressmaker starts there and works round that way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Clockwise - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - a
 dress - a tailoress works there - she starts there and she leaves a thread of - - er - oh I've forgotten what we used to call it - like a very thin corded stuff - cord stuff - you left a thread of that and a thread of your cotton up at that and for a rea
son - then you laid this gimp - gimp - gimp - you laid your gimp round there and it come up to there - you're laying that round as you're doing your stitches.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And you're sewing over this.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 You're working over - yes - so the gimp is inside - you l
ook at one of your husbands - you look at one of your husband's button holes on an old waistcoat and you'll find - because I expect they're still the same. You work with your gimp laying round your buttonhole and you come round there and up there - round 
t
his little hole and in that little hole had to be nine stitches - you didn't put ten - oh no - but those stitches - as you did them - you'd pull up like that - as you came that way you drew your thread tight there that the knot so to speak of your buttonh
o
le - the buttonhole stitch comes that way on a level but when you got to here you pull your stitch up - that way - and that had to have nine stitches round heaven help you if you put ten. Because she'd make you take it all undone again and then when you b
e
gan to go up to - up that side - you then keep your gimp tight round so that it forms that little hole you see - forms that little hole - if I could only see I'd make a button hole now for you to look at - then when you got to the top of you tightened tha
t
 so that that made that nice little - neat little hole - then your - you held on tight to your two pieces of gimp and you put your stitches across that and then your thread had to go down - but you cut off your gimp you see you'd finished with that and yo
u've done - you've made that tight with your thread and of course that thread had to be waxed before ever you started using it. With beeswax - I've still got a bit of beeswax here now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 You waxed it your self?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Yes, you've got your own bees wax and
 you had - and you had - yes, in that box I've got there - I've still got a piece of it - of that bees wax and it's not many years ago that I came up against a girl that was going into waistcoat making and I said to her have you got a still at home. No no
t
 yet she says. Well, I said, you'll want one. Now your stiletto was a piece of bone with a point - er - a rounded point at that end and this end has-got a hole in it so that - er - stiletto and your piece of wax - have you got a piece of - er - um - stour
 
tape as they called it - stour tape that went right round the edge of the waistcoat inside to keep it in form - er - you'd have a piece of stour tape - er - and that would - on one piece you'd put your bit of wax and on the other you'd put your stiletto a
n
d possibly if you were allowed you would put your small scissors but they had to be short scissors like that with round tops because of the disadvantage of having pointed scissors. Having the pointed scissors - yes - but they had to be round scissors - er
 
- one end at any rate had to be rounded so that you cut your thread dead short and dead tight. Oh they were most particular really and the hundreds of button holes that I did - er - when we were not busy - not I only - but we all - and we had to sit - um 
-
 on a platform - so that your knees were up like that you see you couldn't - you couldn't do your work working like that so therefore you had to get it so that your work was there to your level - we all - we all had a box of some sort or other - Tait suga
r box or something like - something like that more than likely. You see, and then well, if there were two of you - you would put - at night you would put all your things - your apron and your stilettos and}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid4990543\charrsid14891508  things - er - all into that bo}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 x and put them up ont
o the table when they were going to clear up at night. It was - but that was my first job. And I stayed there - er - about fourteen - fifteen months but .......
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 What hours did you work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Eight 'til eight. Eight in the morning 'til eight at night and four o'clock on Saturday and
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 You didn't work Sundays at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh no, no, we didn't work Sundays.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And you didn't have a half day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 No. Four o'clock Saturday and the apprentices had to scrub the work room floor before you came away so
 it was nearly five before you come away. I remember I had 'til five o'clock ...
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did you have any holidays with pay?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 I - don't know whether we did or didn't because I would only be there on the one lot of holidays because as I say I packed it up.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 What were you paid?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Four shillings a week. Four shillings the first year and I think I might have got to mix shillings what would be me second year - I might have got as far as that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did you feel it was a fair wage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Well, I suppose it was up to a point. Up to a point.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did you give any of the money to your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Oh great Scott no - my father had to give me money to go out to pay for my doughnuts and things that we had in a dinner time because this Krangs the bakers - er 
- as I say I believe the shops still there - they used to make lovely doughnuts with the jam in all squ}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10166099\charrsid14891508 ee}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
zing out and we used to wait for these doughnuts to be finished - er - just at the time when we had our - er - bit of sandwiches or whatever we had and
 - er - those of course you sat in their kitchen and had your sandwiches and made your cup of tea or whatever you did - I've forgotten how we got on with - I suppose we did have a cup of tea - I think we all put together - yes I think we all put together 
s
ame as we did in dressmaking and made your pot of tea between you. Er - and - er - then as soon of course one o'clock you'd have - you'd have had your bit of sandwiches that you'd taken then you'd go dashing down to Krangs and come back with your bag of -
 of doughnuts - greasy doughnuts - we used to love them - I dare say they were the most indigestible things under the sun more than likely.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did you get on well with the other people you worked with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Yes. With the exception of the husband of the w
oman. But I wasn't the only one. But he was a man that drank pretty heavily and he did the ironing in another room to where the work was being done. It was the wife's business but he was a painter and he gave up painting because he could earn more by doin
g
 the ironing - I think the presser had - would have left in the meantime - or else Mrs Groome herself did it - did some of the ironing - at any rate I know he came and he used to come and look out the window because if you were in - it was called Thayer S
t
reet, Marylebone - it's where High Street, Marylebone finishes there and I've forgotten what - I think that bit comes from there - Mandeville place I think it is - it comes - yes - it goes up towards Oxford Street - yes - Mandeville Place - and - er - Mar
ylebone Lane goes round the back that way - comes out at Marshall }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15409448 &}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
 Snelgroves - as far - it used to - I don't know whether it does now - I don't suppose it does now for a moment as I haven't been that way for so many years - er and he used to come to the w
indow and look over to see if the pub was open and then he'd say to his wife - Nell, I think he called her - Nellie - yes Nellie Groome - that's right because her daughter was Nellie Groome too - he'd say Nell, going for a drink. She'd say - well, shut yo
u
r iron off then - put your irons of because he'd have great big irons you know - so big - and they were irons that I think had those - er - how do you dos inside them - yes - I believe they were - 'cos as I say they were in the other room and they wouldn'
t
 be gas irons - oh I don't know they might be gas irons at that time - yes, I suppose they would be - yes - would have - er - they would have a block in that was heated by the gas - you that would be it. Er - at all events - and he'd go over at eleven o'c
l
ock and if you saw him back by one o'clock - er - well, if he was sober it was a wonder and he'd come in and he used to be very abusive to some of us girls. Mmm. Some - if he thought he would - if he just in that mood and I know that I kicked at it - oh y
e
s. I - I - come home and tell dad - tell mother and dad that I wasn't - so one day I said - I think I - I expect I got into tears and I said I'm not going to stand here and be - or sit here being insulted by that man - I'm going home - and I walked out. I
 
walked out - and I put my hat and coat on and I was going to see my dad. Why on earth I wasn't coming home here I can't tell you - but I know I went up to Swiss Cottage station to dad and told him me troubles - whether it was that I was nearer to the stat
i
on or how I got there - well I couldn't tell you now but I remember quite well going into the - into dad's booking office in tears. He said what on earths the matter with you sort of business. This man oh - he had to apologise. I know mother went the next
 day - with me - I had to go back with her and he apologised. Oh yes, he apologized for being rude and that and upsetting me.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 How did she treat you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh she was all right - Mrs - er - Mrs Groome was all right. She was a quite nice little woman - 
little dumpy sort of woman really. She was all right - but it was him - he was horrible.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 How did you feel about the work itself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 I liked it. Yes. And during the time - during the time that I was there -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10166099\charrsid14891508 
 er I knitted - or did the tric}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 ot - er crochet hook - I didn't knit rather - I crocheted the two fronts of a b}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10166099\charrsid14891508 
lack waistcoat - I did the trico}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 t part of it and er - when I got to the pockets the - er - I think it was the machine - as far as I remember her name was Alice - she did that part for me or
 showed me how to finish off the little bit of pocket here - the braid that - of course it was braided you see at the edge and then it was spotted with blue silk - this black waistcoat - it was lined at the back with flannel - I think that was the object 
o
f it 'cos dad had been ill and I think that was the object that he should have this woolen waistcoat. You see. And - er - 'cos I know he had to wear it - I was going to say night and day pretty well - er - he didn't leave it off at all during summer time 
and - er - at least unless it got really very hot and that but I know it was his - his waistcoat was looked upon as a little bit of gold dust}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10166099\charrsid14891508  really. But these little blue C}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 hinese silk dots that I - I did all the dotting - I know Alice set the machine - set
 me going as to how to do it having done the - er - crocheting part - I did all the crocheting I know - with her help - she put me right as to how to do or - er - leave off so many stitches when you were making the arms and all that part - er - the front 
part. And then it was - would be lined with - er - black - um - with flannel cloth - oh it was a beautiful thing time it was finished - in - in those days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 What was the next job you had?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - after that I think I stayed home for all the winter and - er - after that I would go into dressmaking.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did you start an apprenticeship again?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Er - not actually an apprenticeship. Not - er - I wasn't a bound apprentice like my sister. No, I - well, I could sew - I - I couldn't tell you exactly - no - I was what then they would call an improver.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 How did you get this second job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
That I couldn't tell you. Out of the Indicator I expect. More than that - the local paper that used to be a ha'penny, that - that came here. You'd - you'd get the Indicator. I expect that's how I got my next - oh several jobs - one after the other.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And what did you do in these dressmaking jobs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh, that would be as an improver and then you got to be as an assistant and then um - you'd leave that job if you 
thought you could better yourself and - er - get another one and no - no - er - queries as to what can you do and what can't you do - er - you were put to it and if you could do it well you did it. If you didn't well you were told at the end of the week t
hat you weren't any good. I don't think I ever come to that stage - I think I managed to carry on.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 What were your hours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 In dressmaking? Oh I don't think we were quite so late as that - not - not the eight to eight. No - and think the first one 
that I did in dressmaking actually as I say as an improver was - um - down by Royal Cak station where it's all now chopped up - all that bit - somewhere down there. Down by Royal Cak station - I don't know how long I was there - about six months I expect.
 
I did have a record years ago of all the jobs I did and how long I stayed there - like my dad did. I expect it was he that set me off doing it - er - um - really, in the first place, but - um - er - I don't know what became of it - goodness knows. But wha
t
 I did - the job that I did keep then after those one or two odd little places was - um - in - 1900 - mm - well I'd be then twenty wouldn't I - I'd be - yes - I'd be about twenty - er - of a lady who was a dressmaker - this was dressmaking but it wasn't i
n
 that sense - er - um - she was working for Peter Robinsons - they would have a model come from Paris and it would come to this lady - to Miss Rice - and - er - er - the one place she was - we were working at that I worked with her - one was over the corn
e
r of Second Avenue - she worked there. Then from there we moved to - er - Fernhead Road - just at the junction of the Prince of Wales - the first shop that was there. At least a private house up there and the work used to come from Peter Robinsons who'd h
ave one of these - er - m}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10166099\charrsid14891508 odels gowns that had come from P}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
aris - probably in black - and - er - you would copy it. You had all the - er - instructions as to - well you'd got to work out how many frills there were and how deep they were and how far apart they
 were - all the rest of it. I remember one frock being made. Er - one of these models and it had seven frills and they came up - that one came up round that - er - from the bottom and then the other one came a little further along - the other one came a l
i
ttle further along and there were seven frills - because I know that in 1903 - haven't got a photo of mother taken in that frock - but my sister and I made mother a frock in blue - royal blue - er - crepey sort of stuff but instead of having the seven fri
l
ls she had five frills - there were three along the bottom and then there was the two extra that were put in that made the flow of the long dress as it dangled down onto the ground. Was for my brother George's wedding - yes and - always remember that. Mot
h
ers dress - oh she had a copy of a Paris model - mm. And if you had that dress it would come - I think on a Thursday morning and you'd - 'cos I know I used to stay with Miss Rice to help work it out - I don't know why - why I was a bit of a favourite - bu
t
 I used to stay with her and we'd work this - er - out - how many - how far this and you'd get your - I think you had a sketch came - mm - I think there was a sketch came with the dress that you had to copy - quite probable. And then you used to have to g
e
t all out to the different measurements. And then - then the - er - van from Peter Robinsons would come back the next day - the next day - and collect up that model - but he would bring with him - er - perhaps two rolls of black and then of course there w
a
s silk linings you see or whatever lining it had - then perhaps then a roll - a roll of black and a roll of coloured or a roll of white. You see. And - er - then of course - in your workroom - oh we had about five or six of us there - working for Miss Ric
e
 - then you'd set to and - I used to help her cut them out and then I used to do a good part of the machining - while the others pinned them on and tacked them on and all the rest of it. Er - the frills - in the making. Now they would be skirts - they wou
l
dn't be bodice parts - they would be skirts because you only did skirts - but the rights of any firms - er - I - was a little bit of a blank to me really - I was - and I do remember working on these frills and I know that it was Miss Rice that I worked wi
th - er - would be from 1900 then - George was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16328850 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
 in 1903 and I think I left Miss Rice - I don't know why - it wasn't because of the work - I don't know why I left her in 1904 - and I know I went down to Westbourne Grove.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 How much were you paid by Miss Rice?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh, I couldn't tell you - about twelve shillings I think - ten or twelve shilling.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Would you feel this was a fair wage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh yes it was a fair wage as things were then - at - the work that you were doing Of course I ........
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Do you remember if you gave any to your mother?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh I expect I did - I expect I gave her some. But I suppose what I gave her she gave me back more than likely. Quite possible.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 How did you get on with the other people you worked with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh a
ll right. Yes. I don't know that I ever had any trouble with anyone that I worked with. And there's one old lady - if she's still alive - she was in - er - St Alfreds hospital a year or two ago and her niece lives down the street now and I haven't seen Ka
therine for a long time now - no - to know whether her aunts still alive - that used to work with me in that workroom - er - putting these frills and that on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 How did you feel about the work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Well, it was very at - er - very touchy type of work -
 you'd got to be so very particular with it. And - er - that you didn't dare do anything out of place - I know that - I know there's a good deal of worry. Really. I liked the work and that - oh yes. Then I went after - I don't know why - whether I left Mi
s
s Rice myself or whether it was that she closed down - er - for doing Peter Robinson I seem to think it was that - for doing that type of work. I know she was a single woman - er - she used to go to Doctor Clifford's church - she was just her and her moth
e
r that lived there in this house in Fernhead Road and - er - but - I don't remember quite - giving the job up - I'm almost sure I didn't give the job up - and - myself - not for any reason that way - but I know that I went after there - after that - I wen
t
 to - er - Wallace Tailors which was an ordinary dressmakers - er - in er - Westbourne Grove - where we did - some was made and some part was altered work - things that were bought in the shop - and - er - they came up to us to be altered to fit to the pe
r
son that they were wanted for. And - er - the - there was the two shops. One was a milliners - his wife ran the milliners and the husband ran the other shop - this - er - this dressmakers place. But I know we did a lot of quite nice work there - than I st
ayed with them until our fitter gave up - in 1909 - yes - 'cos I'd be five years with - five - yes - and four - 1904 - well between four and five possibly - er - to 1909 when I went to Derry and Thomas. And I went to Derry and Thoms ...
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 What hours did you work at this last job - do you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Well, I think we did leave there at seven - I think we got to the stage that our times would be then - no - it would be about half past eight - I think we got in at half past eight and - er - and - half pa
st eight and I think we left at seven - by that - mm - by that time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Then you worked Saturdays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Um - yes - I expect we worked Saturdays a bit - but I think the times that come - according to the factory act or something - I think we didn't work after about two o'clock - about two o'clock I think. And I think ....
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 How about Sundays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 No, we never worked Sundays. Oh, no, no, we never had to work Sundays.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Then you went to Derry and Thoms?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Then from there I went to Derry and Thom
s in the skirt room. Er - making and - er - altering - because we had alterations at the same time that came up into our work room. Well I was talking about our work room. In fact that - this bit of - crochet I was showing - I was talking to May - and I s
a
id to him - can you - can you - Nell said can you crochet - he said I can manage to make a chain - because thinking about it - before you go to - don't go before I show you some balls that I've made - big balls - now I want to show them to you - er - roun
d
 - er - I said as a matter of fact may I had my bit of - one bit of crochet that I remembered I did keep - 'cos I used to do a lot of fancy work and little mats and things but this one I remember making perfectly well when I was at Derry and Thoms in our 
d
inner time that I - I crocheted that - oh no, we used to sit - we used to go upstairs from our work room into what wouldn't be allowed today - there'd be the wash bowls there and there'd be about four or five lavatories there and we'd take our sandwiches 
u
p and our cup of - we used to have a tray with our cups of tea we'd make downstairs in the workroom and take the tray up - there'd be about six of us and we'd all sit there and one would be doing a bit of knitting another would be a bit of crocheting and 
t
hat - another a bit of sewing - a bit of fancy work - during the hour you see - our dinner hour and - er - but I don't think we ever went up there tea time because we had a break at tea time - but I know that our hour - from one 'til two would be spent up
 there and we used to work like little niggers - we used to do all sorts of things - make all sorts of things. With crochet and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 You don't know what you were paid at Derry and Thoms?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - yes. I had - er - fourteen - fourteen to start with 
and then I got to fifteen - I got a shilling and I don't think I got to the sixteen - in fact I know I hadn't - no - because Julia Harmond only had sixteen and she was the - er - Edie and Julia Harmond were sisters and they had - er - sixteen, because the
 
first skirt hand and her sister - don't know what her sister had as the assistant - but the first skirt hand - er - I think she did have eighteen or a pound - she had - er - it was the fact that when it came to 1914 the war started and between there and 1
9
 - beginning of 1915 half of us were - er - on the dressmaking part - doing what bit of dressmaking came in and the other half of us - er - according to your length of service - the other half of us were over in the other side of the work room and we were
 
doing - er - piece work - making - making - er - oh cut - er - the second hand would cut out the capes - nurses capes and you stitched them up - and we had one machine between about six of us that you had to be - er - pinning your seam up while somebody e
l
se was stitching their seam and then you shot on to the machine and stitched your bit up. Yes, and we'd only got the one machine allocated to us for this piece work - because we were on piece work you see the others and got the other machine - well, there
 
was a machinist for them you see doing their stitching all the time and - er - 'cos I remember this quite well - er - we'd sit there - and you had to sit and wait for the work and the most I earned was thirteen shillings a week. Er - we had to - yes - we 
h
ad to go on piece work and - er - tell you the capes were one thing that we made and another thing - er - for nurses - for the Queen Alexander nurses - and then there were er - sort of back and front things for the men - sort of chest protector things - t
h
at when they first started off on the - in the 1915 - it would be 1915 by then - 1914 rather - up to 15 - um - that - er - and then eventually got onto making nurses skirts. Well, this is where I came in - I happened to - it wasn't the skirts so much as i
t
 was the making of - we made - er - we had to make our skirts oh yes. They were cut out by our second hand - it was so funny - second hand - she cut them all out - big knife and all the rest of it - and she gave them over to us - well, as I tell you we ha
d
 to take our turn at the machine - I expect they had - er - I don't know whether they had a band top or whether they had a petersha top - I can't tell you - can't remember that bit quite - but I know they had to have six buttonholes down here - down at th
e
 sides and buttons. And at all event this young lady would - she would the skirts cut - the skirts - er - a skirt cut out and - er - hand it over two you - one or the other of you that were sitting waiting for work and you got your skirt - right. I stitch
e
d my own up and did all the rest of it and got down to what was going to be our buttonholes. Well, I did my button holes in my proper way - I don't know where I got hold of the bit of - er - gimp, I expect I bought it from the tailors - yes, we'd got a ta
i
lors trimming shop in the Harrow Road - I expect I bought it from there - and I made my button holes tailor fashion. My skirt was eventually put on the stand - er - perhaps first, second, last or what all as the others 'cos about six of us - and I didn't 
s
ay a word to anybody as to how I'd made my buttonholes - that I was going to make a tailor button hole - oh no - I just kept that locked up as to what I was going to do - but I knew what I was going to make - and so the skirts were put on the stand - oh y
e
s, someone said, that's a nice buttonhole - yes, she's done that nice. Which was like, you know, like a spider walking round there and er - I thought old girl you wait. Now Miss Norris - er - 'cos I wasn't Mrs Beck by this time - er - now Miss Morris - wh
a
t about yours. Well, it's going on the stand - yes - just about finished - pressed up - yes - all right - button holes done - buttons done - yes. So she looked at it - who did your button holes. I said me - I did me buttonholes. Ah I know that girl in the
 
tailors room did yours then. I said no girl over tailors room did mine - what are you talking about. Mmm - I've forgotten what the fitters name was - thought of it. She say well leave it on the stand - she was a bit curt - she said leave it on the stander
 
- Miss whatever her name was - she'll be coming up presently. So when the fitter came up - she went over to the tailor - a bit of a conflab going on - so she came over and she said - er - well, who did the button holes for you Miss Morris. I said who do y
ou think. She said did you get one of the tailors to do them. I said no I didn't - I said a tailoress did them. Who? I said me. You're not a tailoress you're a dress maker. I said I was a tailoress before I came here though.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10166099\charrsid14891508  Proofs the button holes. Marve}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 lo
us, marvelous. 'cos I had done them to just to the exactness. Well, it finished up at all events that my skirt was the advertised one that was stuck in the corner of the window. In the corner of the window at Derry and Thoms. Was this - this special skirt
 - and there it stopped. Yes. Yes. I know I was commended on that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And how much did you manage to make?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 How much on me work? About thirteen shillings a week.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 This is the most you ever made?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - there were two of us - I forget - Miss 
Wilkins I think was the other one - and we two were the quickest of the half dozen - and the most I earned was thirteen shillings a week. When ....
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 How did you get on with the other people during this time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh we got on all right - oh yes, I got
 on - oh yes, we were all right - oh yes, oh no. But my brother had got a friend who was in the - er - Paddington Post Office - the big office - the big main office that overlooked Paddington station and he was in what they called the book room - what tha
t
 entails I couldn't tell you - something to with their - um - working of the office - and at that time the Post Master of Paddington Office would not have women - he was losing all his men all his young men - going to the war - they were either coming bac
k
 invalided or it was the older men who were too old to go into the war that were having to carry on and doing - er - more overtime and work and that than what they should do really, but he still stood persistent that he would not have women in the Post Of
f
ice. Well, it came to a climax that - um - he had been told that he must have a woman - er women staff. With George in conversation - my brother George in conversation with a friend of his - this man - Arthur Cummins - that was there in the book room - he
 
told him about me. He said can you get aunt - didn't call me aunt - Hetty rather - in - in the Post Office so she can earn a little bit more and that, stuck in an old dress-making place like that on piece work and all that sort of - er - conversation I ex
p
ect went on between them. So at all event in due course I had a notice came asking me to attend at the Post Office to into be interviewed by the Post Master. And it happened to be that there were twelve of us going to be the first twelve to go into - wome
n
 - to go into Paddington Office. Well, of course I was older - by this time I was thirty - I was about thirty-three or thirty-five by this time - I know I was quite oldish - I was no chicken by any means by then. Because of course in 1914 - 1915 to 1919 w
a
s the time I spent in the Post Office. Er - er - that - um - when - er - there was the twelve of us and - that were - got in - all being either related to - or friends of someone in the office, you see, in that main office - so that they could rely upon t
h
en being efficient workers or people that would - put their mind to the job. Well, we had a week in - er - well, I don't know what they'd call it - wouldn't call it the office I know - learning the work and learning where the letters had to be put to - oh
,
 I can see myself now with a handful of letters - one would be for Reading up there and another one up there - somewhere else - Oxford up there - somewhere - you'd got to get them all in order and to know where each - because that place where you were wor
king - that case - this - just a replica of what you'd got in the office that once you'd done your week or your fortnight there you were then thoroughly efficient to go and take the work on - er - under supervision of}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10166099\charrsid14891508  course - of - er - superintende}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 nts of c
ourse and that - oh yes, they'd got their eye on you and would - could see whether you did anything wrong - oh yes, they were watching you as they went up and down the pathways looking to see what you were doing. You - you women that once you - but once y
o
u got into the job well you'd got it at your fingers end then - you know where the things went you - in fact I think I put some up in my sleep, very often I used to find myself putting one up - oh Mr Walker would come in and say come on Miss Norris - I kn
o
w it's two o'clock in the morning but what'd you put that one up there for. You know, things like that - it would be - and - er - so the er - when it came up to the Christmas they had to have more women there so they had to make four sections to go round 
t
he clock with the work, you see, and - er therefore we got what they called a retiring room - we'd got the canteen down below - where we went for our meals if we wanted - dinner tea and that whatever duties you were on - and - accordingly - and then upsta
i
rs we had a retiring room room about as big as this one and the next one put together so - oh might be a bit bigger - upstairs that you went to and - er - might make a pot of tea up there between half a dozen of you or do whatever you wanted - it was your
 
own half hour whatever time you had - er - between the dispatches - certain dispatches and - er and then you - start off again - er - putting the work - when the work came in, you see, and you - you'd get your bundles of letters and that and they were - y
o
u'd got to sew them up and all that sort of thing - and - well, it got to be that - the - they had to have four - the four sections - therefore they'd got to have someone in charge of them. Instead of having - well, anybody they had two er - I was one of 
the older ones but the - er - I think - er - two of them I know were }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16328850 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508  woman I think the other one - I don't know - no, she wasn't a }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16328850 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508  person. At all events she was getting an oldish person and she was capable of - er - looking after - keeping h
er eye on the other girls. It's - you were not in charge of them when they were in the office - no - oh no - they you came - they came then immediately under - and you had no supervision of them then unless if a girl wanted to go upstairs she wouldn't go 
to the super - superintend}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10166099\charrsid14891508 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
nt and say please Sir I want to go upstairs. She would come to you she would come to you and she'd say Miss Morris I want to go upstairs for a bit. You'd say all right but don't be long. You see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 You were like a welfare position more?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Er - well - yes - er - what we would call - what we would call section leaders. We were called section leaders you see, and you were in charge of so many women - perhaps about twenty all together.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 What hours did you work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Well, 
um - we had four duties - one would be about eight or nine in the morning 'til about five in the afternoon - was it half past seven - half past four - I think that was our early duty - this week. Then we would get the - that would be our day turn - then a
f
ter that you would get one - the next one you would have would be - er - half past three in the afternoon 'til eleven o'clock at night. Then you came - when you came out from that Post Office you had to watch out that Gerry wasn't dropping a few bombs dow
n
 overhead. Um - then - er - then after the eleven o'clock one - the next one then would be the midnight - er - what time did we go on midnight - eleven o'clock - yes eleven at night to six o'clock in the morning - yes, course it was. We had one at midnigh
t - er - night duty as they called it and then - two of eleven o'clocks and the one of - er - a day duty.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did you have any holidays with pay from there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh yes, oh yes, you did. Oh yes, well you had - your holiday time - yes. But I don't think th
ere was a lot of holidays - er - I don't think that there were a lot of holidays thought about really - not during the war. Oh no, no, no, we were ......
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Do you remember what you were paid?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 What were we paid? Yes. When we first started - that fi
rst week we had twenty-four shillings - well, that twenty-four instead of my thirteen - oh - I thought I was quids in all together. And - er - then we went right out onto the work - the following week - and really started work - we had twenty - twenty - s
even shillings. But once we got - what rises we had I couldn't tell you. I don't think there was much in those.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 When you were section leader were you paid more?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - I think I must have done - I'm not quite sure. I'm not quite sure whether we wer
e. If you were it was only a matter of a couple of shillings but I'm not quite sure that we did have any extra - I think it was merely the fact that you were section leaders over those girls.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And did you think that this was a fair wage that you were getting?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh, yes, at those time - oh yes, yes, it was quite a good wage.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Did you give some of this to your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh, I expect so. Yes. I expect I did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And what would she spend it on? Have you any idea?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh no. I couldn't tell y
ou. I suppose it went in the kitty more than likely. Or if there was anything I wanted or dad would say look here what about spare shoes, you know, something like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 How did you get on with the other people you worked with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Very well. There w
as only one person - er - a young man that came back invalided that was a bit touchy with me and he was going out with one of the girls that was working in the office and he was a bit - I couldn't tell you why - but he was the cause of me having a very na
s
ty accident. This young man - yes. Have you ever been in a sorting office - Post Office sorting office - well, I don't know what they've got now, but we had seats swung round underneath - it would be here and it would swing right round and underneath you 
s
ee, and when you wanted to sit down you'd pull that seat out to there and sit you see. But - as you were wanting to get to that end your chair - your seat would just automatically move a little you see, so if you were sitting here, if you were sitting her
e
 - er - as a fixture well you couldn't get to that side and you couldn't get to that side. It would go in a half circle - mm. And this young man put - I think I'd had to put - Ida Sammons was the girl that he was going out with - and she was one of my gir
l
s and she was quite a - I was all right with her - but I think I had occasion to pull her up - er - some neglect of something - I think it was time upstairs that she'd had - er - wanting to meet him - I think that was it - there was something connected wi
t
h this young man I know - and he thought he'd have his own back on me and - so when we're sitting very quietly there - er - one morning - it was a morning time we was on duty - 'cos I know I had to come home - I was home for three weeks after that - er - 
a
t least I had to be under the doctor for three weeks after - and he pulled the seat away from me. And that threw me right on the bottom of my back. He came - you see - collecting up letters in the course of his work - he just had his own back. Pulled the 
s
eat away from me - so I went down wallop - I know they had to carry - take me upstairs and send for the doctor. He got suspended - he got suspended - for a week or two - mm - he was pulled up and he said of course it was an accident - that I got up too qu
i
ck or something of that. I'm thinking of your time. Yes, so he - so that was - er - he pulled - clean away from me and - er - sat me down on the floor you see. And as I say - er - had to get the doctor - I was home then - I think I was home three weeks af
ter that accident but - er - I'm afraid - I'm afraid I never forgave him for it - but still - got over it in the finish.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 How did you feel about the work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh the work was all right. I didn't mind that work at all. We used to enjoy ourselves.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 How did your employer treat you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
What Paddington - Paddington Post Office? Oh well, we were well looked after - oh yes. Because - er - our - at the Christmas time of course we were all very busy - oh yes - lines and lines - sacks of letters and that 
you know all had to go through and we - er - we were - um - allowed to go on the - having sorted the letters we were then put on to - um - what did they call them - bays - on to a bay and which would be - one of mine was Windsor Road - for one length of t
i
me and you had to collect up - you got all your letters for Windsor proper here and then the others would be - well, Twyford, Abingdon - er - Shillingford - or course I - Wallingford and all that - all that - yes, because my was - the one bay that I was o
n
. And then of course you had to go to the registry office - er - behind the wire - the man behind - me hand behind the wire for registered letters that had to go into your bag and everything had to be signed for before you had it - and before oh yes, and 
before you but it into the bag - it had to go in - into a little green bag and before you tied up the - er - sack and punched the - er - the little lead seal - punched that - that fastened your bag - oh yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 How long did you stay at the Post Office?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Four years. I was one of the first to go in - one of the last to come out - in 19 - er - 1919. 1915 to 1919. And it was just about this week - it was just about - I know I've got a birthday just - that's why I told you I was thirty-five. Er - I - er -
 I got a birthday just at that time but - er - I suppose that was why it was I was one of the older ones - I was asked to be a section leader. You see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 I forgot to ask you how you felt about Derry and Thoms as employers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh they - Derrys - good,
 yes, very good people. For employers. Of course I came out from there to go to the - er - the Post Office - oh yes, oh yes. We were - er - oh we were all very happy there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 The very first job when you left school - was it an actual job - you know, whe
n you went to Hampstead - before you went into waistcoat making - didn't you go and work with this relative who was a parlourmaid?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh no, no, I didn't go - I didn't go to work there. I only went to stay with her oh no, no. Oh no, that was another matter all together.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 What jobs have you done since the first world war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Oh, since the first world war - oh - 1919. Yes. When I came out from the Post Office in 1919 I stayed home with mother and dad - see they were alive then - um - from the Easter
 - when I - I left the Post Office in the September would be - the following Easter I was offered a job that was advertised and was brought under my notice advertised in the Daily Telegraph - er - at Harlesden for the training of dress - in dressmaking fo
r
 the training of unemployed women. You had young - quite young people and you had women that were quite elderly. Er - this was in - well sort of doing all sorts of things - munitions and stuff during the war - and wanted to do something better in needlewo
rk - and there were three of us - there was a superintend}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10166099\charrsid14891508 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 nt and we other two who were - the superintend}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10166099\charrsid14891508 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
nt - I don't know who she was chosen by - I can't remember - but - er - we two that were the workers looking after the workers - er - were chosen by the
 - er - er - Middlesex County Council - the how and the why I can't tell you, but I know that I had to go to get the job - that was where the advertisement came in from - was the - er - Middlesex Guildhall - er - Westminster that I had to go to - where I 
a
ctually got the job. And I got - I got it in preference to another woman who thought she was going to get it because she was a scientific dressmaker - she was quite sure she was going to get the job - I think there were three of us in the swim. And the ot
her one I think was too old - er - I think she was a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16328850 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
 woman - she was - she was too old - she couldn't concentrate on the job that was wanted - I was single you see and - er - able to - er - put me mind onto the sewing to teach - show girls how to th
ey should use a machine and how they should sew this and do that but I never knew such a lot of blockheads in all my life. Oh. Talk about work. No more than hold a needle. Some - they couldn't hold a needle much less - er - didn't know which way to put th
e
 needle in I don't think - whether they put it in this way up or that way up. Er - much less do a bit of machining and they had twelve brand new Singers machines - brought for this - er - Harlesden Memorial Hall I think it was - I know it was right up in 
Harlesden going down Stonebridge - er - towards Wembley. Er - I remember this building was and we - we two had - er three pound a week - school hours - nine 'til five and no Saturdays - nine to five Monday to Friday - oh I thought I was quite in.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 This was good pay then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Oh yes, three pound a week, yes. And five days - oh yes. And - er - the Superintend}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10166099\charrsid14891508 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 nt lady - er - was more of a mistress - I think she'd been a headmistress - school headmistress somewhere - er - was in charge of the place. Er - I
 don't know who she was - er - who - er - actually brought her on the job but I remember we two earned it when we did start on it and - as I say - this other person - er - had - at Guildhall she quite thought she was going to get it because of - er - scie
n
tific. I said - er - no my work is practically - I've been through dressmaking and - er - I'm a practical Dressmaker and a bit of tailoring with it all helped and so that you were able to show them how to make a - ordinary dressmakers buttonhole and how t
o
 make a tailors buttonhole. I remember one woman who was very - um - she was an intelligent person and you could teach her and you could see some sense of what you did but the biggest part of them - I tell you - they didn't know which way to hold a needle
 
and they didn't know - they certainly didn't know which way to start working a sewing machine when they got down to it. And just the things that they wanted to learn - of course it is. And, oh, they were terrors some of them. They smashed up needles galor
e
. It was quite a game really. Er - that was from - about at the Easter to the September - that that finished up. They were being paid - they were being paid by the Ministry of Labour - to be taught - oh yes. They weren't doing it on their own back - they 
w
ere being paid by the Ministry of Labour to learn to do a bit of plain sewing and - er - dressmaking - course we had two or three dressmakers stands there as well as the machines - where you could fit things up and show them how to do - the only thing was
 that they felt a bit - and I had rather old fashioned ideas to what they should have done but you had to teach to their code of working, really, as I say it was a bit old fashioned some of it really how things were. But - er - in ......
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 What did you do after that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Oh and after that I was at home. I was home then, with mother and dad. I hadn't be because - um - because dad died in '21 first and then - er - we knew that mother - he and I knew that mother and got a - er - stomach trouble somewhere 
but we didn't really know what from the doctor - er - until after he died and then it came out as to what it was. Then she had to go into Paddington Hospital for a colotomy operation - then we knew it was cancer. She died in this room. She died here - she
 
- she was in the hospital for five weeks when my brother George was paying three pound a week - three guineas a week for her - for the length of time for the operation and to get better - well enough to come home and I remember Nellie was living with us a
t
 that time - she came to live with us - she came over from across the road to live mother - with mother and I after dad died, you see, and - er - er - er - when she - er - when - well when we knew what really was happening with mother and as I say Nellie 
h
ad got her furniture over here - er - packed away up in the middle room - ante room rather and I said to the sister in the ward now will it be an advantage if we have mother downstairs - make a bedroom downstairs. She said every bit because she'll want a 
l
ot of attention. Day and night. And she did too - my word she did. We had a nurse used to come in and dress this place twice a day - um - I used to - well Nellie or I - whichever one was downstairs that night would be here sleeping on the couch - mother p
ut her bed this way and - um - er - we would have to get up half a dozen times in the night. And then - then mother'd say - Hettie - or Nellie - I think my bandage has shifted. All right mum. You'd go out to the sculler}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10166099\charrsid14891508 y}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508  or out to the garden, you'd bring in
 the old bucket - then we'd have to take off the bandage the whole thing and - er - put it into the bucket put it in what was then the coal cellar out in the garden til the morning and - er - then light the copper and - er - and set light to everything - 
everything - and then washing every day - looking after her. Every night.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 So it was a full time job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Mm. Yes, she died - she was about fourteen months all together in that condition Dreadful really. It was a happy release when she died - in '23. 
Then after that I didn't go out until about - round about the February of the following year Mm. 1924 that would be - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 And you went back to dressmaking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - no I didn't go back to dressmaking - um - I went after - in '24 - after mother had 
gone - and Nellie was over here with the boys then I started out and the job that I got into - er - just temporary - was down at - um - Scott House - Eitchin - er - looking after twenty-six girls - or helping to - just temporary - helping to look after tw
e
nty-six - r - border-lone cases - and they were borderline cases too. Oh - six each of that was quite - especially in the winter time at least about February and of course I didn't know anybody in Eitchin - I've got a cousin at Stevenage and I went there 
once Sunday - I was jolly well glad to get away from it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Was it a hostel?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Er - er - a hostel - a home - a home really. This Scott House - er - was a home for girls - er - and their work that they did - er - I think they all went up - stairs - wa
s a laundry. Er - ladies in the Hitchin area used to - er - these girls would take - er - two or three of them that were capable - er - would take a pram sort of thing - er - trolley something - and fetch washing - fetch laundry from different houses - fr
o
m people that were interested in the work of the girls you see, and - er - there was a laundry upstairs and a laundress and - er - and her assistant that looked after them - there was something I think really to keep the place going - I suppose that was t
h
e idea. It - because - er - I got hold of the job through a - oh - I think it was Miss Kent Welsh of Paddington - I think it must have been her - I know I had to go to Dennison House - Victoria - about this little job - it was only - told me it was just t
e
mporary to tide over - while somebody was ill but - er - oh I was glad to get away from there. Where I went to after that - I think the next job I - had after that was - er - a little girls school down at Ealing. Off the Ealing Broadway. There I went and 
did cooking.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 How much were you paid at this job at this other place?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Scott House? Er - I don't know - I know I lived in but it wasn't much - it wasn't actually for the - for what I - I don't know what money I had really. I was there for such a sh
ort time. Then I went indoors when I went to - er - Ealing - to the little girls home at Ealing. That was nice - I liked that - should have stopped there longer but there was - um - only about five or six months I think during that summer - er - er - ther
e
 was an assistant matron - I think she was a new woman came and she made things very unpleasant for - er - those of us that were workers - there were three of us - that were workers. I was downstairs cooking and - er - um - nurse Williams was the one who 
looked after the children and I think the other one must have looked after their clothes. I think so. I know there was - well, there was three of us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Was it an orphanage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - yes - er - it was a - it was a little girls home - er - er - mortherle
ss home - yes, that's right - motherless home. It was a motherless home run by a Mr Smith of Ealing and the boys home further down in Hanwell, but this one was in Ealing. They overlooked the park - one of the parks there. It was quite a nice place and the
 
place itself and the garden and everywhere was quite nice - um - but that matron - matron had this - understudy - I think the matron left and the understudy was taking the job over - I believe that's what it was - or else it was that the understudy left a
n
d this new one took over - I know there was a woman there - she wanted the keys of the kitchen - she wanted everything and I said look if I'm in charge of this place or going to be I'm taking charge of my kitchen keys of - and - er - look after. This is m
y
 department - if I'm going to stop here then I take charge of it - I don't want anybody over me. And I think she made a bit of a rumpus and - with whatever nurse Williams was doing and so we knocked our heads together and all three of us walked - no, we d
i
dn't walk out - we just put our notice in for however long and whether we were paid weekly or monthly I couldn't tell you. I know we all - we all left her in the cart together to get on with the job. Said oh that's quite enough of that - oh no, not having
 any - anything of that thank you and - er - she had to get on with it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Do you remember what you were paid there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 No, I don't. I couldn't tell you. 'Course it was a living in job. You were you didn't get much.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Apart from that you liked it?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
Oh I liked the - I liked the work and I liked being with all these little girls and - er - my brother was living in Ealing at the time and the bigger girls - the girls that would be fourteen - fifteen - because we had one family where there were four
 daughters - four little girls had been left motherless and their father had had them put into this home together and then the older one was going to leave I think to go and live with an aunt and leave these other three younger ones behind. Er - at all ev
e
nts the older children each had a patch of ground just there by the house - always remember it - but the little ones - and the youngest one was four - the little ones were left out. I said oh no, not while I'm going to be here, not if I'm going to be here
,
 I said, no, I said there's an empty patch of garden down at the bottom and we'll get it dug over - my brother came and dug it over for us and laid it out - and we divided it all up with - er - pieces of brick or shells or what all and each child had it's
 
own little bit of garden with it's name of these little ones - the same as the bigger ones had got. And they all - and George bought the seed and little bits of plants and that he bought them and helped them put them in - I remember quite well - yes - bec
a
use I was a bit disappointed of leaving that far but - er - it was - it was the fact that this woman was too much - had too much of it. Oh and I don't know what I did after that. Oooh - where did I go after that - I think it got to about '25 - '25 or '26 
when I went to - '26 - then I went to - er - a place where I met my husband - actually - a philanthropic place in Clerkenwell - that's where I met Bob.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 What were you doing there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - I was cooking. I went there - cooking - cooking - I went down 
to - plain cooking it was - at any rate I went down - er - for the time being but I was going into - er - needlework - I wanted to go into needlework where there were children to help I was - that was my aim really because I was fond of children and I wan
t
ed to get into - not into private needlework - not ordinary needle - er - dressmakers - but no, to work where there were children and - er - I got it then - er - but this one I went downstairs for the time being until I could get into the needlework - er 
-
 of another job all together which was an approved school at West Hampstead - a boys approved school. At West Hampstead. Er - there we did the mending and - er - there was two of us - Nurse Shelley and myself - there was a person did the laundry - she did
 
all the washing at the back of the building and we two had this linen room and we kept all the laundry and the boys shirts and things - that came under the work that we did - er - we two were responsible for that - er - I did that until a person who had b
een nurse - this had been her job before she took over nursing the - er - or looking after rather - after the baby was born - the - er - superintend}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7765216\charrsid14891508 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 nts wife of this school - the approved school - had a baby - Mrs Jennings - and - er - this person - I could
n't tell you what her name was now - er took on looking after that baby for - the idea was for twelve months because the Home Office were paying her wages - Mrs - er - that came under the Home Office. Oh yes, it was run by a - or at least in some way, to 
d
o with the - er - with the - er - with the West Hampstead - er - now what was it called - it was called West Hampstead Boys School - approved school - came under the Home Office but it was to do with this Borough Street philanthropic place where I'd been 
doing the cooking. This woman}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7765216\charrsid14891508 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
s job was vacant so I was asked, as I wanted to do sewing, would I like to go up there. And so I went up to West Hampstead - er - temporary - I said I didn't want to stop there too long - and I didn't. I packed that up and went
 to er - oh after a few months and went to Waverley Hotel as a linen keeper. It was a change. I went to Waverley Hotel as single handed linen keeper and it was while I was there that I was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid16328850 Married}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508  to Bob.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Do you remember how much you were paid by this philanthropic organi}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7765216\charrsid14891508 z}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 ation?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
No, because I couldn't tell you - it wasn't much - because - and the approved school I think came under the same because - er - yes, sleeping in and that
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 What hours did you work at the approved school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Er - oh 
I think it was more or less the school hours. But oh there were some boys there. When I read about approved schools and boys - from approved schools I say yes, I - I had my dose of them. Oh they were terrors. Not all. Oh no. But the majority of them were.
 
They were proper little ruffians. Still, steal, they'd steal it out of your mouth much as out of your pocket. I remember going down - it was my duty on that Saturday to go and dish out the boy's dinners - Nurse Shelley - Nurse Shelley that was the other o
n
e that was with me - Nurse - Shelley did one week and I did the other - er - helping to wish our the boys dinners - give out the dinners - er - I think - I don't know if it was an other days or whether it was only on Saturdays but I know it was on a Satur
d
ay morning when this happened. Um - and one of the boys who was a good lad - I don't know why he was there, actually - no, I don't know why that boy was there - it wasn't through misbehaviour actually - I think it was playing trust - yes, I think that boy
 had been playing }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7765216\charrsid14891508 tru}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 st when he was in school - 'cos w}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7765216\charrsid14891508 
e had one boy that had played t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 r}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7765216\charrsid14891508 u}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 
ant and we had another one who - er - the mother had been left with him the husband had been killed in the war and - er - she was living with another man and so they want
ed this boy not to be living there under those conditions and so they put him - couldn't put him anywhere else but into an approved school. Oh good lor'. And he was a nice chap and - that little fellow - Billy Owen I remember his name was - er - he wasn't
 
there very long though - as soon as they could - he got of the age that he could be apprenticed he was apprenticed to a tailor in West Hampstead - he lived in - lived away from the school because they thought that the - er - I think the idea was that the 
environment of it - er - could send a good boy off his rocker.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid8795008 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 He would probably have been better off left with his mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5453887 HB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6820256\charrsid14891508 Yes, really. Yes, or - or with some relations - they would - they could have taken him. He was a nice little lad. But som
e of these boys - they were holy terrors. But I tell, I - I'm supposed to be giving out this dinner - dishing out these bowls of soup - there was another big boy - one of the elder ones - her he was doing from his bowl - from his pan - and I was doing fro
m
 mine. And then my word - this kid got behind me - er - and got a - half-crown out of that overall pocket I never knew - from that day to this. But in my pocket was half-a-crown. I knew it was there when I went down into the room - I'd got a white overall
 
on - got a handkerchief in one pocket and a half-a-crown in the other. And dishing out the soup there - giving it to the boys - giving it to the boys to put on the tables - when I put my hand into my pocket - I know jolly well I put half-a-crown into my p
o
cket when I came into the room 'cos I put my hand in there Good heavens above. By this time all the boys had finished putting their soup out and had gone out onto the yard - and I remember so well I went to the window - Mr Lemon. Yes. One of your boys tak
en half-a-crown out of my overall pocket.
\par }}